This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Universal Product Number Act of 1999''.
UNIVERSAL PRODUCT NUMBERS ON CLAIMS FORMS FOR REIMBURSEMENT UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.
Accommodation of UPNs on Medicare Claims Forms.--Not later than February 1, 2001, all claims forms developed or used by the Secretary of Health and Human Services for reimbursement under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et seq.)
shall accommodate the use of universal product numbers for a UPN covered item.
Requirement for Payment of Claims.--Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``use of universal product numbers ``Sec.
In General.--No payment shall be made under this title for any claim for reimbursement for any UPN covered item unless the claim contains the universal product number of the UPN covered item.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) UPN covered item.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `UPN covered item' means-- ``(i) a covered item as that term is defined in section 1834(a)(13); ``(ii) an item described in paragraph (8) or (9) of section 1861(s); ``(iii) an item described in paragraph (5) of section 1861(s); and ``(iv) any other item for which payment is made under this title that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Exclusion.--The term `UPN covered item' does not include a customized item for which payment is made under this title.
Universal product number.--The term `universal product number' means a number that is-- ``(A) affixed by the manufacturer to each individual UPN covered item that uniquely identifies the item at each packaging level; and ``(B) based on commercially acceptable identification standards such as, but not limited to, standards established by the Uniform Code Council- International Article Numbering System or the Health Industry Business Communication Council.''.
Development and Implementation of Procedures.-- (1) Information included in upn.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with manufacturers and entities with appropriate expertise, shall determine the relevant descriptive information appropriate for inclusion in a universal product number for a UPN covered item.
Review of procedure.--From the information obtained by the use of universal product numbers on claims for reimbursement under the medicare program, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with interested parties, shall periodically review the UPN covered items billed under the Health Care Financing Administration Common Procedure Coding System and adjust such coding system to ensure that functionally equivalent UPN covered items are billed and reimbursed under the same codes.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to claims for reimbursement submitted on and after February 1, 2002.
STUDY AND REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct a study on the results of the implementation of the provisions in subsections (a) and (c) of section 2 and the amendment to the Social Security Act in subsection (b) of that section.
Reports.-- (1) Progress report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit a report to Congress that contains a detailed description of the progress of the matters studied pursuant to subsection (a).
Implementation.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 3 years, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit a report to Congress that contains a detailed description of the results of the study conducted pursuant to subsection (a), together with the Secretary's recommendations regarding the use of universal product numbers and the use of data obtained from the use of such numbers.
In this Act: (1) UPN covered item.--The term ``UPN covered item'' has the meaning given such term in section 1897(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (as added by section 2(b)).
Universal product number.--The term ``universal product number'' has the meaning given such term in section 1897(b)(2) of the Social Security Act (as added by section 2(b)).
The are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions in subsections (a) and (c) of section 2, section 3, and section 1897 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 2(b)).