CONSTRUCTIVE SALES TREATMENT FOR APPRECIATED FINANCIAL POSITIONS.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CONSTRUCTIVE SALES TREATMENT FOR APPRECIATED FINANCIAL POSITIONS.
In General.--If there is a constructive sale of an appreciated financial position-- ``(1) the taxpayer shall recognize gain as if such position were sold for its fair market value on the date of such constructive sale (and any gain shall be taken into account for the taxable year which includes such date), and ``(2) for purposes of applying this title for periods after the constructive sale-- ``(A) proper adjustment shall be made in the amount of any gain or loss subsequently realized with respect to such position for any gain taken into account by reason of paragraph (1), and ``(B) the holding period of such position shall be determined as if such position were originally acquired on the date of such constructive sale.
Appreciated Financial Position.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `appreciated financial position' means any position with respect to any stock, debt instrument, or partnership interest if there would be gain were such position sold.
Position.--The term `position' means an interest, including a futures or forward contract, short sale, or option.
Treatment of limited-term interests.--Except as provided in regulations, the term position shall not include any interest that has a term of 3 years of less.
Positions as to which gain or loss is otherwise recognized during the taxable year.--The term position does not include any position that-- ``(A) is sold or disposed of during the taxable year in a transaction in which gain or loss is recognized, or ``(B) is marked to market under section 475, section 1256, or any other provision.
Constructive Sale.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--A taxpayer shall be treated as having made a constructive sale of an appreciated financial position of the taxpayer (or a related person) enters into any of the following transactions and the transaction has not been closed or terminated within 1 year of the date it was entered into-- ``(A) making a short sale of substantially identical property, ``(B) entering into an offsetting notional principal contract with respect to substantially identical property, ``(C) entering into a futures or forward contract to deliver substantially identical property, ``(D) in the case of an appreciated financial position that is a short sale or a contract described in subparagraph (B) or (C) with respect to any property, acquiring substantially identical property, or ``(E) to the extent provided in regulations having prospective effect, entering into 1 or more other transactions (or acquiring 1 or more positions) that have substantially the same effect as a transaction described in any of the preceding subparagraphs.
A constructive sale shall be deemed to occur on the date that is 1 year after the date on which the transaction described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) is entered into.
Related person.--A person is related to another person with respect to a transaction if-- ``(A) the relationship is described in section 267 or 707(b), and ``(B) such transaction is entered into with a view toward avoiding the purposes of this section.
Special rule for debt instruments.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), positions in interest rates shall be treated as positions in property which are substantially identical to debt instruments.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Forward contract.--The term `forward contract' includes a fully or partially prepaid forward contract.
Offsetting notional principal contract.--The term `offsetting notional principal contract' means, with respect to any property, an agreement to pay the investment yield (including appreciation) on such property for a specified period in exchange for the right to be reimbursed for any decline in the value of such property and for other consideration.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Treatment of subsequent sale of position.--If-- ``(A) a taxpayer (or a related person) enters into a transaction described in subsection (c)(1) with respect to any appreciated financial position, ``(B) such position is subsequently sold or otherwise disposed of, and ``(C) at the time of such sale or disposition, the transaction described in subsection (c)(1) remains open with respect to the taxpayer or any related person, solely for purposes of determining whether the taxpayer has entered into a constructive sale of any other appreciated financial position held by the taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be treated as entering into such transaction immediately after such sale or other disposition.
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.--For purposes of this section, an interest in a trust which is actively traded (within the meaning of section 1092(d)(1)) shall be treated as stock.
Multiple positions in property.--If there is a constructive sale of a portion of any property held by the taxpayer, the determination of the specific property which is deemed sold shall be made in the same manner as if the constructive sale were an actual sale; except that property treated as sold by reason of a prior constructive sale that remains open shall be disregarded.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part IV of subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Constructive sales treatment for appreciated financial positions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to constructive sales after the date of the enactment of this Act.