This Act may be cited as the ``Medical Laboratory Personnel Shortage Act of 2003''.
RESPONSE TO SHORTAGE OF MEDICAL LABORATORY PERSONNEL; PROGRAMS OF HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION.
Scholarship and Loan Repayment Programs.--Section 737 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 293a)) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(e) Scholarship and Loan Repayment Program for Medical Technologists, Medical Laboratory Technicians, and Other Medical Laboratory Personnel.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a program of scholarships and loan repayment for the purpose of alleviating the shortage of medical laboratory personnel.
The scholarship and loan repayment program shall include a period of obligated service for recipients in a designated health professional shortage area, or other area where there is a shortage of medical laboratory personnel.
The Secretary may model the program after the scholarship and loan repayment programs under sections 338A and 338B.
Eligible entities.--Schools of allied health, and health care institution-based programs training medical laboratory personnel, are eligible to receive awards under paragraph (1).
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated $11,193,000 in fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2008.
Such authorization is in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for such purpose.''.
Other Programs Under Title VII.-- (1) Allied health and other disciplines.-- (A) Preference in making awards; public service announcements.--Section 755 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 294e)) is amended by adding at the end the following subsections: ``(c) Preference in Making Awards.--In making awards of grants and contracts under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give preference to making awards to assist entities in meeting the costs associated with expanding or establishing programs that will increase the number of individuals trained as medical laboratory personnel.
Public Service Announcements.--The Secretary shall develop and issue public service announcements that advertise and promote medical laboratory personnel careers, highlight the advantages and rewards of medical laboratory personnel careers, and encourage individuals to enter medical laboratory personnel careers.''.
Authorization of appropriations.--Section 757 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 294g(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(d) Allied Health and Other Disciplines.--For the purpose of carrying out section 755, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2008.
Such authorization is in addition to the authorizations of appropriations under subsection (a) that are available for such purpose.''.
Other title vii programs.--Section 740 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 293d) is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following subsection: ``(d) Medical Laboratory Personnel.--For the purpose of increasing the number of individuals trained as medical laboratory personnel through making awards of grants or contracts under sections 737 through 739 for appropriate schools of allied health, there are authorized to be appropriated, in addition to authorizations of appropriations under subsections (a) through (c) that are available for such purpose, the following: ``(1) For awards under section 738 to serve as members of the faculty of such schools, $332,500 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2008.
For awards under section 739 to such schools, $8,200,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2008.''.
Definition of medical laboratory personnel.--Section 799B of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 295p) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(12) The term `medical laboratory personnel' means allied health professionals (as defined in paragraph (5)) who are medical technologists, cytotechnologists, histotechnologists, phlebotomists, or medical laboratory technicians, or who are in other fields that, within the meaning of section 353(a) (relating to the certification of clinical laboratories), examine materials derived from the human body for the purpose of providing information for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of any disease or impairment of, or the assessment of the health of, human beings.''.
RESPONSE TO SHORTAGE OF MEDICAL LABORATORY PERSONNEL; PROGRAMS OF CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
Title XV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300k et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 1509 the following section: ``SEC.
SHORTAGE OF TECHNOLOGISTS FOR LABORATORY ANALYSIS REGARDING SCREENING FOR CERVICAL CANCER.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and in collaboration with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall make grants to appropriate public and nonprofit private entities to provide training to increase the number of cytotechnologists who are available with respect to screening women for cervical cancer.
Funding.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), for the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2005 through 2008.
Limitation.--The authorization of appropriations established in paragraph (1) is not effective for a fiscal year unless the amount appropriated under section 1510(a) for the fiscal year is equal to or greater than $173,928,000.''.
RESPONSE TO SHORTAGE OF MEDICAL LABORATORY PERSONNEL; PROGRAMS OF NATIONAL HEART, LUNG, AND BLOOD INSTITUTE.
Section 422(c)(3)(C) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285b-4(c)(3)(C)) is amended by inserting after ``allied health professionals'' the following: ``, with emphasis given in the training of such professionals to the training of medical laboratory personnel (as defined in section 799B) in medical laboratory disciplines with respect to which there are needs for increased numbers of personnel''.