This Act may be cited as the ``Community Job Training and Investment Act of 1993''.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Adult.--The term ``adult'' means an individual who has attained the age of 22.
Community-based organization.--The term ``community- based organization'' means a private, nonprofit organization, including a private, nonprofit Native American organization, that-- (A) has a board of directors composed of individuals with experience in representing or serving individuals who are economically disadvantaged or have substantial barriers to employment; (B) has a history of demonstrated effectiveness in providing employment and job training services to such individuals; and (C) has an institutional capacity to protect the investment of public funds consistent with sound management principles.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
Youth.--The term ``youth'' means an individual who has attained the age of 14 but not 22.
TITLE I--GRANTS TO COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS Subtitle A--Capacity Building Grants SEC.
The Secretary of Labor shall provide grants to community-based organizations for the purpose of improving the capacity of such organizations to provide employment and job training services.
In General.--The Secretary may not make a grant under section 101 to a community-based organization unless the organization submits to the Secretary an application in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Additional Requirement.--In addition to the requirements described in subsection (a), the Secretary may not make a grant under section 101 to a community-based organization unless such organization includes in the application submitted under subsection (a) a description of a plan to improve program and staff development which will increase the capacity of the organization to plan, manage, assess, and evaluate employment and job training services carried out-- (1) from amounts received from a grant provided under section 101; (2) under the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et sequentes); (3) under the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act (20 United States Code 2301 et sequentes); (4) under the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training Program authorized under part F of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 681 et sequentes); and (5) under other Federal and State programs that have as their objective the improvement of employment opportunities for individuals who are economically disadvantaged or have substantial barriers to employment.
The Secretary may not make a grant under section 101 to a community-based organization unless the organization agrees that it will use all amounts received from such grant to improve the capacity of such organization to provide employment and job training services.
In awarding grants under section 101, the Secretary shall give priority to those community-based organizations that-- (1) represent national networks of affiliates; and (2) have a history of providing technical assistance and training to affiliates and other local service providers.
Subtitle B--Disadvantaged Youth and Adult Grants SEC.
The Secretary of Labor shall provide grants to community-based organizations for the purpose of providing attitudinal, motivational, and skills training to eligible youths and adults described in section 112.
ELIGIBLE YOUTHS AND ADULTS.
A youth or adult shall be eligible to receive training under section 111 if the youth or adult, as the case may be-- (1) is economically disadvantaged, as such term is defined in section 4(8) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1503); or (2) has a substantial barrier to employment, as determined by the Secretary.
The Secretary may not make a grant under section 111 to a community-based organization unless the organization submits to the Secretary an application in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary may not make a grant under section 111 to a community-based organization unless the organization agrees that it will use all amounts received from such grant to provide attitudinal, motivational, and skills training to eligible youths and adults described in section 112.
To the extent practicable, such attitudinal, motivational, and skills training shall be provided in coordination with employment and job training services provided under other Federal programs, including programs under-- (1) the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et seq.
); and (2) the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act (20 United States Code 2301 et sequentes).
Administrative Costs.--A community-based organization may use not more than 20 percent of amounts received from a grant under section 111 for administrative costs associated with providing attitudinal, motivational, and skills training described in subsection (a).
TITLE II--NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS SEC.
The Secretary shall establish a National Advisory Committee on Community-Based Organizations (in this title referred to as the ``Committee'').
The Committee shall-- (1) study the role of community-based organizations in providing employment and job training services in the United States, with special emphasis on such organizations providing such services under the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 et sequentes); and (2) conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of the employment and job training services provided to disadvantaged youths and adults by community-based organizations from amounts received from grants provided under section 111.
Not later than June 30, 1994, the Committee shall submit to the Congress a report containing a summary of the study and evaluation conducted under section 202.
TITLE III--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS SEC.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 and 1995.
Of the amounts appropriated for each fiscal year-- (1) 24 percent of such amount shall be made available to carry out subtitle A of title I; (2) 70 percent of such amount shall be made available to carry out subtitle B of title I; (3) 5 percent of such amount shall be made available for administrative costs of the Secretary associated with providing grants under title I; and (4) 1 percent of such amount shall be made available for administrative costs of the Commission under title II.