This Act may be cited as the ``Deadly Driver Reduction and Burton H. Greene Memorial Act''.
MINIMUM SENTENCE FOR A PERSON WHO OPERATES A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE ALCOHOL-IMPAIRED.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National minimum sentence for a person who operates a motor vehicle while alcohol-impaired ``(a) Withholding of Apportionments for Noncompliance.-- ``(1) Fiscal year 2001.--The Secretary shall withhold 5 percent of the amount required to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 104(b)(3), and 104(b)(5)(B) on October 1, 2000, if the State does not meet the requirement of paragraph (3) on such date.
Thereafter.--The Secretary shall withhold 10 percent (including any amounts withheld under paragraph (1)) of the amount required to be apportioned to any State under each of sections 104(b)(1), 104(b)(3), and 104(b)(5)(B) on October 1, 2001, and on October 1 of each fiscal year thereafter, if the State does not meet the requirement of paragraph (3) on such date.
Requirement.--A State meets the requirement of this paragraph if the State has enacted and is enforcing a law which provides for a minimum sentence consistent with the following: ``(A) In the case of the first conviction of a person of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, revocation of the person's driver's license for 6 months.
In the case of the second conviction of a person of operating a motor vehicle while alcohol- impaired, revocation of the person's driver's license for 1 year.
In the case of the third or subsequent conviction of a person of operating a motor vehicle while alcohol-impaired, permanent revocation of the person's driver's license.
A revocation pursuant to this paragraph shall not be subject to any exception or condition, including an exception or condition to avoid hardship to any individual.
Period of Availability; Effect of Compliance and Noncompliance.-- ``(1) Period of availability of withheld funds.-- ``(A) Funds withheld on or before september 30, 2002.--Any funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment to any State on or before September 30, 2002, shall remain available until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year for which such funds are authorized to be appropriated.
Funds withheld after september 30, 2002.--No funds withheld under this section from apportionment to any State after September 30, 2002, shall be available for apportionment to such State.
Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.-- If, before the last day of the period for which funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment are to remain available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State meets the requirement of subsection (a)(3), the Secretary shall, on the first day on which the State meets such requirement, apportion to the State the funds withheld under subsection (a) that remain available for apportionment to the State.
Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.--Any funds apportioned pursuant to paragraph (2) shall remain available for expenditure until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year in which such funds are so apportioned.
Sums not obligated at the end of such period shall lapse or, in the case of funds apportioned under section 104(b)(5)(B), shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118.
Effect of noncompliance.--If, at the end of the period for which funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment are available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State does not meet the requirement of subsection (a)(3), such funds shall lapse or, in the case of funds withheld from apportionment under section 104(b)(5)(B), such funds shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``162.
National minimum sentence for a person who operates a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.