This Act may be cited as the ``Science Integrity Act''.
In General.--Not later than January 1, 1999, the head of each Federal department or agency which issues or may issue regulations supported by scientific data shall issue regulations under this section establishing procedures to ensure that the acquisition, interpretation, incorporation, and application of all such scientific data is subject to peer review by at least 2 but not more than 5 individuals from the list created pursuant to subsection (b).
List of Peer Reviewers.--The head of each Federal department or agency which issues or may issue regulations supported by scientific data shall create, using the Federal Register, scientific and commercial journals, the National Academy of Sciences, and other similar resources, a list of individuals who are qualified and willing to perform peer review functions for the department or agency.
Such list shall include only individuals who-- (1) by virtue of advanced education, training, or avocational, academic, commercial, research, or other experience, are competent to review the appropriateness of any scientific methodology supporting regulations that the department or agency may issue, the validity of any conclusions drawn from the supporting data, and the competency of the research or preparation of the scientific data; and (2) are not otherwise employed by or under contract with the department or agency.
Selection of Peer Reviewers.--The head of each department or agency shall select individuals from the list created pursuant to subsection (b) to peer review each proposed regulation of the department or agency that is supported by scientific data.
No individual shall be selected who-- (1) has actively participated in advocating or opposing the issuance of the proposed regulation; (2) has a direct financial interest in the proposed regulation; or (3) is employed by or related to any person having a direct financial interest in the proposed regulation.
Provision of Scientific Data to Peer Reviewers.--Peer reviewers selected under subsection (c) shall be provided with all scientific data used in support of the proposed regulation, and any other related data requested by the peer reviewer that is reasonably available to the department or agency.
Expenses.--Peer reviewers selected under subsection (c) shall be reimbursed by the department or agency for expenses directly incurred in performing the peer review, but shall not otherwise be compensated for performing the peer review.
Availability for Public Comment.--Upon receipt of all peer review reports for a proposed regulation, the head of a department or agency shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of the availability of those reports, and the scientific data reviewed therein, for public comment.
The department or agency shall make such reports and scientific data readily available upon request and shall receive public comment thereon for a period of 60 days after the publication of notice in the Federal Register.
Review by Office of Regulations Integrity.--Within 30 days after the completion of a public comment period described in subsection (f), the head of a department or agency shall transmit to the Office of Regulations Integrity established under section 3-- (1) each peer review report; (2) all scientific data used in support of the proposed regulation or requested by a peer reviewer; (3) the response of the head of the department or agency to points of disagreement, if any, among the peer reviewers; and (4) all public comments received.
The proposed regulation may not be issued in final form until 30 days after the transmittal under this subsection.
Any recommendations of the Office of Regulations Integrity in response to a transmittal under this subsection shall be provided to the department or agency, the President, and the Congress.
Final Issuance.--The publication of a final regulation peer reviewed under this section shall include a summary of the related peer review reports and any points of disagreement among the peer reviewers, and the response of the head of the department or agency to the peer review reports.
Emergency Exception.--Regulations issued under subsection (a) shall include provisions that permit the issuance of regulations supported by scientific data in emergency circumstances without peer review, on the condition that peer review be completed within 90 days after such issuance.
OFFICE OF REGULATIONS INTEGRITY.
Establishment.--There is established an Office of Regulations Integrity (in this section referred to as the ``Office'').
Duties.--The duties of the Office shall be-- (1) to review regulations issued by each department or agency under section 2(a), and if the Office determines that such regulations do not represent the expert opinions of a majority of the scientists who will be carrying out peer reviews under section 2, or that such regulations are inadequate or inappropriate in any respect, to notify the department or agency, the President, and the Congress; (2) to transmit to the President and the Congress an annual report on the performance of each department or agency in complying with its regulations issued under section 2(a); and (3) to review regulations issued by a department or agency with supporting scientific data, if the Office has reason to believe the regulations were issued, or the scientific data was acquired, interpreted, incorporated, or applied, in a manner significantly inconsistent with the regulations issued by the department or agency under section 2(a), and if the Office finds the issuance, acquisition, interpretation, incorporation, or application to be inconsistent with the regulations issued by the department or agency under section 2(a), to notify the department or agency, the President, and the Congress.
Access to Information.--The Office shall be provided access by a department or agency to information required for carrying out a review under subsection (b).
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The Office shall have a Director, who shall be appointed by the President, subject to confirmation by the Senate, for a term of 1 year.
Qualifications.--The Director shall be a person with a scientific background, in good standing in the scientific community.
Basic pay.--The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule, under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The professional staff of the Office shall be persons with scientific backgrounds, in good standing in the scientific community.
Administrative Support.--The Office of Management and Budget shall provide such administrative support as the Office established under this section requires, but the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall have no responsibilities with respect to carrying out the duties of the Office under this section.
DEFINITION OF PEER REVIEW.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``peer review'' means identifying technical or scientific deficiencies of a proposal, assessing whether the methodology and analysis supporting a proposal conform to the standards of the academic and scientific community, and determining whether a proposal is supported by sufficient credible evidence.