That (a) subtitle B of title VII of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1673 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 739 the following new section: ``SEC.
PRIVATE REMEDY FOR INJURY RESULTING FROM DUMPING.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) The term `court' means any District Court of the United States.
The term `dumped merchandise' means the class or kind of merchandise sold at less than foreign market value.
The term `eligible party' means any person described in subparagraph (C), (D), (E), (F), or (G) of section 771(9) (including any member or a person described in such subparagraph (E), (F), or (G)).
The term `foreign market value' has the same meaning given such term in section 773.
Cause of Action.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible party that suffers economic loss by reason of the importation and sale of dumped merchandise may bring an action for damages in the court against any of the following: ``(A) Any manufacturer of the dumped merchandise.
Any exporter of the dumped merchandise to the United States.
Any importer of the dumped merchandise into the United States, if the importer is an affiliate or subsidiary of a manufacturer or exporter referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B).
Jurisdiction over foreign persons.--For purposes of actions brought under this section, the court has jurisdiction over any foreign person that is described in paragraph (1)(A), (B), or (C).
Process.--Process may be served on a defendant in any action commenced under this section in any place within the United States where the defendant may be found or transacts business.
Economic Loss.-- ``(1) Applicable period; presumption of loss.--If an action is brought under subsection (b), and there has been a petition filed under section 732, the administering authority and the Commission shall include in their investigations the period covered by the private action.
There shall be a presumption of economic loss if a petition filed under section 732 on behalf of an eligible party resulted in affirmative determinations under subsections (a) and (b) of section 735 regarding a class or kind of merchandise.
No presumption of loss.--If there have been no affirmative determinations under subsections (a) and (b) of section 735, there shall be no presumption of economic loss.
Limitation on award.--Under no circumstances shall the court award damages for a period subject to the potential assessment of antidumping duties.
Evaluation of loss.--In evaluating the economic loss sustained by the eligible party, the court shall consider all information, including potential lost sales, worker layoffs, plant closures, or financial losses, submitted by the eligible party and by parties described in subsection (b)(1)(A), (B), or (C).
The court may consider, but may not require, an econometric analysis or any other scientific study estimating the actual effects of the dumped merchandise on the eligible party.
Damages.-- ``(1) In general.--In any action brought under subsection (b), the eligible party, upon a finding of liability on the part of the defendant, is entitled to recover-- ``(A) actual damages for the economic loss (including injury to business or property) sustained by the eligible party; and ``(B) the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's fees.
Calculation of damages.--In calculating damages for purposes of this section, the court-- ``(A) shall give regard to injury to the eligible party resulting from the importation into the United States and sale of dumped merchandise and of other merchandise, if any, produced by the defendant and that consists in part of merchandise that, if entered or withdrawn from warehouse separately, would be dumped merchandise; and ``(B) may give such regard to the affirmative finding under subsection (b) of section 735 regarding the dumped merchandise as it considers appropriate.
Time for Bringing Action.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an action may not be brought under this section unless commenced within 2 years after the date on which the cause of action accrues.
Tolling of limitation.--The running of the 2-year limitation in paragraph (1) shall be suspended while any administrative or judicial review of an affirmative determination under subsection (a) or (b) of section 735 is pending and until a decision upon that review is rendered.''.
The table of contents for such title VII is amended by adding after the entry for section 739 the following: ``Sec.
Private remedy for injury resulting from dumping.