This Act may be cited as the ``Tire Pile Improvement and Remediation Effectiveness Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Solid Waste Disposal Act does not provide for the current stabilization and removal of tire piles.
There are currently 3,000,000,000 scrap tires located in tire piles in the United States, and 250,000,000 tires are added to tire piles each year.
Tires, once burning, are difficult to extinguish because tires contain oil (providing fuel), and the interstitial spaces between the tires trap air (providing a source of oxygen).
Tire pile fires can burn at 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit and put a column of black smoke tens of thousands of feet in the air.
Burning tires may produce oil as a byproduct of combustion, and it is estimated that one tire can produce one quart of light fraction oil, an extremely toxic form of oil containing toxic substances such as benzene, toluene, and xylene, which are listed as hazardous air pollutants under the Clean Air Act.
At any site where there is a pile of millions of tires, there is a potential for a large amount of oil and other pollutants to be released, presenting a profound threat to public health and the environment.
In the past such piles have caught fire, causing extensive damage to property and the environment.
Tire piles containing more than 5,000,000 tires pose an immediate potential threat to public health and the environment and should be stabilized and removed with all practicable speed.
STABILIZATION AND REMOVAL OF SCRAP TIRE PILES.
Section 2004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6914) is amended-- (1) by striking out the heading and designation for both the section and subsection (a) of the section and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``SEC.
Grants for Discarded Tire Disposal.--(1)''; (2) by striking out ``(b) Authorization.--'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(2)''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Grants for Tire Pile Stabilization and Removal.-- ``(1) Grants.--The Administrator shall make available grants to States for purposes of constructing fire lanes in, and removing, tire piles containing 1,000,000 or more tires.
Priority.-- ``(A) Fire lane construction in piles containing 5,000,000 or more tires.--In awarding grants under this subsection, the Administrator shall give first priority to grants for the construction of fire lanes in tire piles that contain 5,000,000 or more tires and that meet the following criteria: ``(i) The tire pile is located within 10 miles of a community water system, as defined by section 1401 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300f).
The tire pile is located near an area or building, such as a senior retirement community or school, populated by persons who are more sensitive to environmental contaminants.
The tire pile is on or adjacent to a facility listed on the National Priorities List under this Act.
Fire lane construction in piles containing between 1,000,000 and 5,000,000 tires.--In awarding grants under this subsection, the Administrator shall give second priority to grants for the construction of fire lanes in tire piles that contain 1,000,000 or more tires but less than 5,000,000 tires and that meet the criteria listed under subparagraph (A).
Compliance with guidelines.--Fire lanes constructed using a grant under this subsection shall be in compliance with the guidelines of the National Fire Prevention Association.
Supplement to existing state programs.--A grant provided under this subsection shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, any State funding provided for tire pile stabilization and removal through a State tire program existing on the date of the enactment of this subsection.
Application.--A grant may not be awarded under this subsection unless an application is submitted to, and approved by, the Administrator.
Such an application shall be submitted in such form and manner, and contain such information, as the Administrator by regulation prescribes.
Regulations.--The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to administer grants under this subsection.
Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 to provide grants under this subsection.