SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES TO FAIR ACT OF 1998.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Activities Inventory Reform Act Amendments of 2000''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Federal Activities Inventory Reform Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-270; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2382; 31 United States Code 501 note).
ANNUAL LISTS OF GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES.
Lists To Include Inherently Governmental Activities.-- Subsection (a) of section 2 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the following: ``and those activities performed by Federal Government sources for the executive agency that, in that official's judgment, are inherently governmental functions''.
Descriptive and Explanatory Matters To Be Included.--Such subsection is further amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (5); (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraphs (3) and (4): ``(3) A description of the activity, including-- ``(A) a narrative description of the activity; ``(B) the product or service code, if any, that would be assigned to the activity under the Federal Procurement Data System if the activity were performed in the private sector; and ``(C) the Standard Industrial Classification code, if any, that would be assigned to the activity if the activity were performed in the private sector.
The organization within the executive agency that is performing the activity, or for which the activity is performed, and the location of that organization.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(6) The identity of any provision of law or other authority that, except for subsection (f), would expressly or impliedly exempt the executive agency from the requirements of this section or of Office of Management and Budget Circular A- 76 with respect to any activity that is not an inherently governmental activity, together with a discussion of the rationale for that exemption.''.
Deadlines for Publication of Lists and Changes.--Subsection (c) of such section is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``promptly'' and inserting ``, not later than 30 working days after receiving the list,''; and (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting after ``(B)'' the following: ``not later than 30 working days after the date of the final decision to make the change,''.
NOTIFICATION OF AFFECTED EMPLOYEES.
Section 2 is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Notification of Affected Employees.--At the same time that the Director of the Office of Management and Budget publishes a notice of the availability of a list of an executive agency under subsection (c)(1), the head of the executive agency shall notify each employee of the executive agency employed in an activity listed as not being an inherently governmental function that the activity may be converted to performance by a private sector source.''.
Use of Competitive Procedures.-- (1) Requirement.--The second sentence of section 2(d) is amended by striking ``use a competitive process'' and all that follows and inserting ``select the source using competitive procedures applicable to the executive agency's procurements.''
Competitive procedures defined.--Section 5 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Competitive procedures.--The term `competitive procedures' has the meaning given that term in section 2302(2) of title 10, United States Code, and section 309(b) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 259(b)).''.
Cost Comparisons.--Section 2(e) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Cost Comparisons.-- ``(1) Realistic and fair cost comparisons.--Before determining to contract with a private sector source for the performance of an executive agency activity on the basis of a comparison of the costs of procuring services from such a source with the cost of performing that activity by the executive agency, the head of the executive agency shall ensure that-- ``(A) the cost comparison was conducted in accordance with-- ``(i) Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76; and ``(ii) any provision of law that is applicable to the cost comparison, including (if applicable) title IX of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 541 et sequentes) relating to architectural and engineering services (including surveying and mapping services); ``(B) all costs have been considered, including the costs of quality assurance, technical monitoring of the performance of such activity, liability insurance, employee retirement and disability benefits, and all other overhead costs; and ``(C) the costs considered are realistic and fair.
Exemption.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the performance of an activity that is not an inherently governmental function may be converted to performance by a private sector source without a cost comparison if the activity is performed by fewer than 10 full-time employees of the United States (or the equivalent in part-time employees or in a combination of full-time and part-time employees).''.
INAPPLICABILITY OF EXEMPTIONS IN OTHER LAWS.
Section 2 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Exemptions Inapplicable.--The head of each executive agency shall carry out this Act notwithstanding any other provision of law that expressly or impliedly exempts that executive agency from developing an inventory of activities that are not inherently governmental functions and are performed by the executive agency or by Federal Government sources for the executive agency.
The head of the executive agency shall include in the annual list prepared under subsection (a) a notation of each such exemption that, except for the preceding sentence, would otherwise apply to the executive agency or any such function.''.
PERFORMANCE FOR OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS.
Limitations.--Section 2, as amended by section 5, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Limitations on Performance for Other Governmental Organizations.-- ``(1) Federal agencies.--An activity that is not an inherently governmental function may not be performed for an executive agency by another Federal Government source under section 1535 of title 31, United States Code, unless, within three years before the order for that activity is placed with the other Federal Government source under that section, performance of that activity by the executive agency has been justified pursuant to a competition carried out under Office of Management and Budget Circular A-76.
State and local governments.--The head of an executive agency may not take any action under section 6505 of title 31, United State Code, to perform for the benefit of an agency of a State or a political subdivision of a State an activity that is not an inherently governmental function unless the head of the executive agency has first-- ``(A) solicited offers for the performance of that activity in accordance with section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416) and section 8(e) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(e)); and ``(B) determined on the basis of the response to the solicitation that no responsible private sector source is available to meet the needs of the executive agency for the performance of that activity for the executive agency.''.
State Defined.--Section 5, as amended by section 4(a)(2) of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) State.--The term `State', includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the United States Virgin Islands.''.
CHALLENGES TO THE LIST.
Matters Subject to Challenge.--Section 3(a) is amended by striking ``or an inclusion of a particular activity on,'' and inserting ``an inclusion of a particular activity on, or the classification of any activity on''.
Revision of Deadlines.--Section 3 is amended-- (1) in subsection (c), by striking ``30 days'' and inserting ``90 working days''; (2) in subsection (d), by striking ``28 days'' and inserting ``28 working days''; and (3) in subsection (e)(2), by striking ``10 days'' and inserting ``10 working days''.
Publication of Resolution of Challenges.--Section 3 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Publication of Resolution of Challenges.--Not later than 30 working days after the head of an executive agency makes a decision on an appeal under subsection (e), the head of the executive agency shall publish in the Federal Register the following: ``(1) Final list.--A final version of the list that was challenged.
Schedule for review of list.--A schedule for the review to be conducted of such list under section 2(d), together with a description of the intended review.''.
Working Days Defined.--Section 5, as amended by section 6(b) of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Working day.--The term `working day', in the administration of sections 2 and 3 with respect to a list of an executive agency, means a day on which the headquarters of the executive agency is open for the conduct of the executive agency's business.''.
PROHIBITION ON CONVERSION TO PERFORMANCE BY FEDERAL PRISON INDUSTRIES.
Section 4 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Prohibited Conversion.--The performance of an activity of an executive agency that is not an inherently government function may not be converted to performance by a government corporation provided for under chapter 307 of title 18, United States Code.''.
INHERENTLY GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION NOT TO INCLUDE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
Section 5(2)(C) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) the conduct of research and development.''.
PRIVATE SECTOR SOURCE DEFINED.
Section 5, as amended by section 7(d) of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) Private sector source.--The term `private sector source' means a person lawfully engaged in business for profit in the United States.''.
REPORT ON PORTABILITY OF FEDERAL PENSION BENEFITS.
Requirement.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall submit to Congress a report on the portability of Federal pension benefits.
The report shall contain-- (1) an evaluation of current Federal law, policies, and procedures relating to the conversion by Federal Government employees of their Federal pension benefits to private sector pension plans upon the transition of such employees from Federal Government employment to private sector employment; (2) a discussion of any impediments to the conversion of Federal pension benefits as described in paragraph (1); (3) an analysis of the scoring, under the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, of the conversion of Federal pension benefits as so described; and (4) recommendations of the Director for any legislation required to permit the ready conversion of Federal pension benefits as so described.
Consultation.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall consult with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management and other appropriate interested parties in preparing the report required by subsection (a).