This Act may be cited as the ``Developmental Disability Endowment Act''.
STATE DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ENDOWMENT PROGRAMS (a) In General.--Subchapter F of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt organizations) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--STATE DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ENDOWMENT PROGRAMS ``Sec.
State developmental disabilities endowment programs.
STATE DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES ENDOWMENT PROGRAMS.
General rule.--A qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such program shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable organizations).
Qualified State Developmental Disabilities Endowment Program.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program' means a program established and maintained by a State or agency or instrumentality thereof-- ``(A) under which a person may make contributions to an account which is established for the purpose of providing qualified services to the designated beneficiary of the account, and ``(B) which meets the other requirements of this subsection.
Cash contributions.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program unless it provides that contributions may only be made in cash.
Refunds.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program unless it imposes a more than de minimis penalty on any refund of earnings from the account which are not-- ``(A) used for qualified services with respect to the designated beneficiary, or ``(B) made on account of the death or disability of the designated beneficiary.
Separate accounting.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program unless it provides separate accounting for each designated beneficiary.
No investment direction.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program unless it provides that any contributor to, or designated beneficiary under, such program may not directly or indirectly direct the investment of any contributions to the program (or any earnings thereon).
No pledging of interest as security.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program if it allows any interest in the program or any portion thereof to be used as security for a loan.
Prohibition on excess contributions.--A program shall not be treated as a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program unless it provides adequate safeguards to prevent contributions on behalf of a designated beneficiary in excess of those necessary to provide for the qualified services with respect to the beneficiary.
Tax Treatment of Designated Beneficiaries and Contributors.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no amount shall be includible in gross income of-- ``(A) a designated beneficiary under a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program, or ``(B) a contributor to such program on behalf of a designated beneficiary, with respect to any distribution or earnings under such program.
Gift tax treatment of contributions.--For purposes of chapters 12 and 13-- ``(A) In general.--Any contribution to a qualified developmental disabilities endowment program on behalf of any designated beneficiary-- ``(i) shall be treated as a completed gift to such beneficiary which is not a future interest in property, and ``(ii) shall not be treated as a qualified transfer under section 2503(e).
Treatment of excess contributions.--If the aggregate amount of contributions described in subparagraph (A) during the calendar year by a donor exceeds the limitation for such year under section 2503(b), such aggregate amount shall, at the election of the donor, be taken into account for purposes of such section ratably over the 5-year period beginning with such calendar year.
Distributions.-- ``(A) In general.--Any distribution under a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program shall be includible in the gross income of the distributee in the manner as provided under section 72 to the extent not excluded from gross income under any other provision of this chapter.
In-kind distributions.--Any benefit furnished to a designated beneficiary under a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program shall be treated as a distribution to the beneficiary.
Change in beneficiaries.-- ``(i) Rollovers.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to that portion of any distribution which, within 60 days of such distribution, is transferred to the credit of another designated beneficiary under a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program.
Change in designated beneficiaries.--Any change in the designated beneficiary of an interest in a qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program shall not be treated as a distribution for purposes of subparagraph (A).
Operating rules.--For purposes of applying section 72-- ``(i) to the extent provided by the Secretary, all qualified State developmental disabilities endowment programs of which an individual is a designated beneficiary shall be treated as one program, ``(ii) all distributions during a taxable year shall be treated as one distribution, and ``(iii) the value of the contract, income on the contract, and investment in the contract shall be computed as of the close of the calendar year in which the taxable year begins.
Estate tax treatment.-- ``(A) In general.--No amount shall be includible in the gross estate of any individual for purposes of chapter 11 by reason of an interest in a qualified developmental disabilities endowment program.
Amounts includible in estate of designated beneficiary in certain cases.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to amounts distributed on account of the death of a beneficiary.
Amounts includible in estate of donor making excess contributions.--In the case of a donor who makes the election described in paragraph (2)(B) and who dies before the close of the 5-year period referred to in such paragraph, notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the gross estate of the donor shall include the portion of such contributions properly allocable to periods after the date of death of the donor.
Other gift tax rules.--For purposes of chapters 12 and 13, in no event shall a distribution from a qualified developmental disabilities endowment program be treated as a taxable gift.
Reports.--Each officer or employee having control of the qualified developmental disabilities endowment program or their designee shall make such reports regarding such program to the Secretary and to designated beneficiaries with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by the Secretary.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Designated beneficiary.--The term `designated beneficiary' means-- ``(A) the individual designated at the commencement of participation in the qualified State developmental disabilities endowment program as the beneficiary of amounts paid (or to be paid) to the program, ``(B) in the case of a change in beneficiaries described in subsection (c)(3)(C), the individual who is the new beneficiary, and ``(C) any individual not described in subparagraph (A) or (B) who is designated as a beneficiary under the qualified developmental disabilities endowment program.
Qualified services.--The term `qualified services' means the services designated under the qualified developmental disabilities endowment program.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding after the item relating to part VIII the following new item: ``Part IX.
State developmental disabilities trust funds.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.