Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Solid Waste Compact Act of 1993''.
AMENDMENT TO THE RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND RECOVERY ACT.
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 United States Code 6903) is amended by inserting at the end of section 6903 the following: ``(40) Compact--The term `compact' means a compact entered into by two or more States pursuant to this act.
Compact Commission--The term `compact commission' means the regional commission, committee, or board established in a compact to administer such compact.
Compact Region--The term `compact region' means the area consisting of all States that are members of the compact.
Solid Waste Disposal--The term `solid waste disposal' means the recycling, incinerating, landfilling, or burning of solid waste pursuant to the requirements established by the Environmental Protection Agency, or any State environmental agency in which a compact is physically located.
Non-Sited Compact Region--The term `non-sited compact region' means any compact region that is not a sited compact region.
Regional Disposal Facility--The term `regional disposal facility' means a non-Federal municipal or solid waste disposal facility in operation January 1, 1993, or subsequently established and operated under a compact.
Solid Waste--The term `solid waste' pertains to any nonhazardous waste generated by a municipality, industry, or community.
State--The term `State' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.''.
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 United States Code 6904) is amended by striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``(a) State Responsibilities.--Each State shall be responsible for providing, either by itself or in cooperation with other states, a plan to adequately dispose of all solid waste that is generated within their state.
Within 12 months of the enactment of the Solid Waste Compact Act of 1993 each State shall submit their plan to the United States Environmental Protection agency for approval.
Regional Compacts for Solid Waste Disposal.--(1) In General.-- ``(A) Federal policy.--It is the policy of the Federal Government that the responsibilities of the States under section (a) for the disposal of solid waste can be most safely and effectively managed on a regional basis.
Interstate compacts.--To carry out the policy set forth in paragraph (A) the States may enter into such compacts as may be necessary to provide for the establishment and operation of regional disposal facilities for solid waste.
Applicability to Federal Activities.-- ``(A) Effect of compacts on federal law.--Nothing contained in this Act or any compact may be construed to confer any new authority on any compact commission or State-- ``(i) to regulate the packaging, generation, treatment, storage, disposal, or transportation of solid waste in a manner incompatible with the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency or inconsistent with the Department of Transportation; ``(ii) to regulate health, safety, or environmental hazards from source or byproduct material.
Federal authority.--Except as expressly provided in this Act, nothing contained in this act or any compact may be construed to limit the applicability of any Federal law or to diminish or to otherwise impair the jurisdiction of any action taken pursuant to any compact.
State authority preserved.--Except as expressly provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act expands, diminishes, or otherwise affects State law.
Restricted Use of Regional Solid Waste Disposal Facilities.-- Any authority in a compact to restrict the use of regional solid waste disposal facilities under the compact to the disposal of solid waste generated within the compact region shall not take effect before each of the following occurrs: ``(1) January 1, 1995; and ``(2) the Congress by law consents to the compact.
Congressional Review.--Each compact shall: Provide, That every 5 years after the compact has taken effect the Congress may by law withdraw its consent.
Alternative Solid Waste Disposal Methods.-- ``(1) Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of the Solid Waste Compact Act of 1993, the Environmental Protection Agency shall, in consultation with the States and other interested persons, identify potential alternative management programs for the control of solid waste, and establish and publish technical guidance regarding the implementation of such programs.
Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of the Solid Waste Compact Act of 1993, the Environmental Protection Agency shall, in consultation with the States and other interested persons, identify and publish all relevant technical information regarding the technologies pursuant to subsection (1) that a State or compact must provide to the Agency in order to pursue such programs, together with the requirements that such facilities must meet, in the judgment of the Agency, if pursued as an alternative to traditional solid waste management.