This Act may be cited as the ``Women Veterans Health Improvements Act of 1993''.
HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR WOMEN.
Ensuring Provision of Services.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that each health-care facility under the direct jurisdiction of the Secretary is able, through services made available either by individuals appointed to positions in the Veterans Health Administration or under contracts or other agreements made under section 7409, 8111, or 8153 of title 38, United States Code, or title II of Public Law 102-585, to provide in a timely and appropriate manner the health care services authorized in section 106 of Public Law 102- 585 to any veteran described in section 1710(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, who is eligible for such services.
Routine Health Care Services.--The Secretary shall ensure that each health-care facility under the direct jurisdiction of the Secretary that serves a catchment area in which the number of women veterans described in section 1710(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, makes it cost effective to do so shall provide routine health- care services described in subsection (a) directly (rather than by contract or other agreement).
The Secretary shall ensure that each such facility is provided appropriate equipment, facilities, and staff to carry out the preceding sentence and to ensure that the quality of care provided under the preceding sentence is in accordance with professional standards.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 302 of the Veterans' Health Care Amendments of 1983 (Public Law 98-160; 97 United States Statutes at Large 1004; 38 United States Code 1701 note) is repealed.
Performance of Mammograms.--Mammograms may not be performed at a Department of Veterans' Affairs facility unless that facility is accredited for that purpose by a private nonprofit organization designated by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
The organization designated by the Secretary under this subsection shall meet the standards for accrediting bodies established under section 354(c) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b(e)).
Quality Standards.--During the 120-day period beginning on the date on which the Secretary of Health and Human Services prescribes quality standards under section 354(f) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b(f)), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall prescribe quality assurance and quality control standards relating to the performance and interpretation of mammograms and use of mammogram equipment and facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs consistent with the requirements of section 354(f)(1) (42 United States Code 263b(f)(1)) of the Public Health Service Act.
Inspection of Department Equipment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, to ensure compliance with the standards prescribed under subsection (b), shall provide for periodic inspection of the equipment and facilities used by and in Department of Veterans Affairs health care facilities for the performance of mammograms.
Application of Standards to Contract Providers.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that mammograms performed for the Department of Veterans Affairs under contract with any non-Federal facility or provider conform to the quality standards prescribed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 354 of the Public Health Service Act.
Report.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the Secretary's implementation of this section.
The report shall be submitted not later than 120 days after the date on which the Secretary prescribes the standards required under subsection (b).
Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``mammogram'' shall have the meaning given such term in section 354(a)(5) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b(a)).
Section 1720D(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``December 31, 1995'' in paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof ``December 31, 1996''; (2) by striking out paragraph (2); and (3) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2) and striking out ``December 31, 1994'' in that paragraph and inserting in lieu thereof ``December 31, 1995''.
Section 102(b) of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4946; 38 United States Code 1720D note) is repealed.
COORDINATORS OF WOMEN'S SERVICES.
Full-Time Status.--Section 108 of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4948; 38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``The Secretary''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Each official who serves in the position of coordinator of women's services under subsection (a) shall serve in such position on a full-time basis.''.
Empowerment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall take appropriate actions to ensure that the coordinator of women's services at each facility of the Veterans Health Administration is able to carry out the responsibilities of a coordinator in ensuring that women veterans receive quality medical care and, to the extent practicable, have equal access to Veterans Administration facilities.
Identification of Deficiencies.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct a survey of each medical center under the jurisdiction of the Secretary to identify deficiencies relating to patient privacy afforded to women patients in the clinical areas at each such center which may interfere with appropriate treatment of such patients.
Correction of Deficiencies.--The Secretary shall ensure that plans to correct the deficiencies identified in the survey conducted under subsection (a) are developed and are incorporated into the Department's construction planning processes and given a high priority.
Reports to Congress.--The Secretary shall compile an annual inventory, by medical center, of deficiencies identified under subsection (a) and of plans to correct such deficiencies.
The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives, not later than October 1, 1994, and not later than October 1 each year thereafter through 1996 a report on such deficiencies.
The Secretary shall include in such report the inventory compiled by the Secretary, the proposed corrective plans, and the status of such plans.