This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Food Act of 1997''.
It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to establish a single agency, the Food Safety Administration, to regulate food safety and labeling and to conduct food safety inspections to ensure, with reasonable certainty, that no harm will result from the consumption of food by preventing food-borne illnesses due to microbial, natural, or chemical hazards in food; and (2) to transfer to the Food Safety Administration the food safety, labeling, and inspection functions currently performed by other Federal agencies.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the Food Safety Administration established under section 4.
Food safety laws.--The term ``food safety laws'' means-- (A) the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601 et sequentes); (B) the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 United States Code 451 et sequentes); (C) the Egg Products Inspection Act (21 United States Code 1031 et sequentes); (D) the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 301 et sequentes), with regard to food safety, labeling, and inspection under that Act; (E) the food safety responsibilities under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 United States Code 136 et sequentes); and (F) such other laws and portions of laws regarding food safety, labeling, and inspection that the President considers appropriate to consolidate under the administration of the Administration.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INDEPENDENT FOOD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION.
Establishment of Administration.--There is established in the executive branch an agency to be known as the ``Food Safety Administration''.
The Administration shall be an independent establishment, as defined in section 104 of title 5, United States Code.
Responsibilities of Administration.--The Administration shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the food safety laws.
CONSOLIDATION OF SEPARATE FOOD SAFETY AND INSPECTION SERVICES AND AGENCIES.
Termination.--As soon as possible after the effective date of this Act, the President shall terminate the Federal agencies specified in subsection (b) to the extent that the activities of such agencies relate to the administration or enforcement of the food safety laws.
Covered Agencies.--The Federal agencies referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) The Food Safety and Inspection Service of the Department of Agriculture.
The Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition of the Food and Drug Administration.
The Center for Veterinary Medicine of the Food and Drug Administration.
The National Marine Fisheries Service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the Department of Commerce.
The Office of Pesticide Programs under the Assistant Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for Prevention, Pesticides, and Toxic Substances.
Such other offices, services, or agencies as the President may designate to further the purposes of this Act.
Transfer of Assets and Funds.--Consistent with section 1531 of title 31, United States Code, the personnel, assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds of a Federal agency terminated in whole or in part under subsection (a) that are used in connection with the administration or enforcement of the food safety laws shall be transferred to the Administration upon the termination of the Federal agency.
Unexpended funds transferred pursuant to this subsection shall be used by the Administration only for the purposes for which the funds were originally authorized and appropriated.
References.--After the termination of a Federal agency under subsection (a), any reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, document, or other material to that Federal agency or the head of that agency in connection with the administration or enforcement of the food safety laws shall be deemed to be a reference to the Administration.
Savings Provisions.--The termination of a Federal agency under subsection (a) shall not affect-- (1) an order, determination, rule, regulation, permit, agreement, grant, contract, certificate, license, registration, privilege, or other administrative action issued, made, granted, or otherwise in effect with respect to that agency before the termination date regarding functions transferred to the Administration under this Act; and (2) any suit commenced before the termination of that agency, any other proceeding (including a notice of proposed rulemaking), or any application for any license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending before that agency with respect to functions transferred to the Administration under this Act.
LIMITATION ON AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
For the first fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the amount authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act shall not exceed the amount appropriated for fiscal year 1998 for the Federal agencies to be terminated under section 5(a) to administer the food safety laws.
This Act shall take effect on the earlier of-- (1) the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) such date during that 180-day period as the President may direct in an Executive order.