This Act may be cited as the ``Hart Mountain Transfer Act of 1998''.
TRANSFERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OVER PARCELS OF LAND ADMINISTERED BY THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT AND THE UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE.
Transfer From the Bureau of Land Management to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.-- (1) In general.--Administrative jurisdiction over the parcels of land identified for transfer to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service on the map entitled ``Hart Mountain Jurisdictional Transfer'', dated February 26, 1998, comprising approximately 12,100 acres of land in Lake Country, Oregon, located adjacent to or within the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge, is transferred from the Bureau of Land Management to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Inclusion in refuge.--The parcels of land described in paragraph (1) shall be included in the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the parcels of land described in paragraph (1)-- (A) are withdrawn from-- (i) surface entry under the public land laws; (ii) leasing under the mineral leasing laws and Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes); and (iii) location under the mining laws; and (B) shall be treated as parcels of land subject to the provisions of Executive Order No.
7523 of December 21, 1936, as amended by Executive Order No.
7895 of May 23, 1938, and Presidential Proclamation No.
2416 of July 25, 1940, that withdrew parcels of land for the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge.
Management.--The land described in paragraph (1) shall be included in the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge and managed in accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668dd et sequentes), and other applicable law, as expressed in management plans and agreements between the Bureau of Land Management and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service for the Hart Mountain Refuge.
Continued Management of Guano Creek Wilderness Study Area by the Bureau of Land Management.-- (1) In general.--The parcels of land identified for cooperative management on the map entitled ``Hart Mountain Jurisdictional Transfer'', dated February 26, 1998, comprising approximately 10,900 acres of land in Lake County, Oregon, located south of the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge, shall be retained under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.
Management.--The parcels of land described in paragraph (1) that are within the Guano Creek Wilderness Study Area as of the date of enactment of this Act shall be managed to maintain the values for which the Wilderness Study Area was designated, in accordance with current and future management plans and agreements, including the agreement known as the ``Shirk Ranch Agreement'' and any amendments to that agreement.
Transfer From the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to the Bureau of Land Management.-- (1) In general.--Administrative jurisdiction over the parcels of land identified for transfer to the Bureau of Land Management on the map entitled ``Hart Mountain Jurisdictional Transfer'', dated February 26, 1998, comprising approximately 7,700 acres of land in Lake County, Oregon, located adjacent to or within the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge, is transferred from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to the Bureau of Land Management.
Removal from refuge.--The parcels of land described in paragraph (1) are removed from the Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge.
Revocation of withdrawal.--The provisions of Executive Order No.
7523 of December 21, 1936, as amended by Executive Order No.
7895 of May 23, 1938, and Presidential Proclamation No.
2416 of July 25, 1940, that withdrew the parcels of land for the refuge, shall be of no effect with respect to the parcels of land described in paragraph (1).
Status.--The parcels of land described in paragraph (1)-- (A) are designated as public land; and (B) shall be open to-- (i) surface entry under the public land laws; (ii) leasing under the mineral leasing laws and the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001 et sequentes); and (iii) location and entry under the mining laws.
Management.--The land described in paragraph (1) shall be managed in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) and other applicable law, and the agreement known as the ``Shirk Ranch Agreement'' and any amendments to that agreement.
Map.--A copy of the map described in subsections (a), (b), and (c) and such additional legal descriptions as are applicable shall be kept on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Regional Director of Region 1 of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the local District Office of the Bureau of Land Management, the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.