This Act may be cited as the ``Women in the Armed Forces Commemorative Coins Act''.
WOMEN IN MILITARY SERVICE COMMEMORATIVE COINS.
The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue coins in accordance with this Act to commemorate the women who have served in the Armed Forces of the United States.
Denominations.--The Secretary shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) Five dollar gold coins.--Not more than 50,000 five dollar gold coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) be composed of 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
One dollar silver coins.--Not more than 500,000 one dollar silver coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) be composed of 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under existing law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins authorized under this Act shall, in accordance with subsection (b), be symbolic of women's service in the Armed Forces of the United States.
Designations and inscriptions.--Each coin authorized under this Act shall bear a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year the coin is issued, and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection of Design.--The design for each coin authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation and the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required by section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality for the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue the coins minted under this Act beginning on November 1, 1993.
Termination of Authority.--Coins may not be minted under this Act after the date that is 1 year after the date on which the Secretary commences the issuing of coins under this section.
Promotion Consultation.-- (1) In general.--In consultation with the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, the Secretary shall determine the role such Foundation shall have in the promotion, advertising, or marketing of the coins authorized under this Act.
Contract.--The Secretary shall enter into a contract involving the promotion, advertising, or marketing of such coins with the Foundation if the Secretary decides such a contract would be beneficial in the sale of the coins.
In General.--The Secretary shall sell coins minted under this Act at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make any bulk sales of the coins minted under this Act at a reasonable discount to reflect the lower costs of such sales.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sale prices with respect to such prepaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $40 per coin for the 5 dollar coins and $11 per coin for the one dollar coins.
No Net Cost to Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Government.
In General.--Surcharges received from the sale of coins minted under this Act shall be transferred by the Secretary to the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, and used to create, to endow, and to dedicate the Women in the Armed Forces Memorial.
Use of Funds if not Used for Memorial.--Of the amounts received by the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, any amount in excess of the amount spent by the Foundation for the uses described in subsection (a) shall be transferred to the Secretary for deposit in the account provided for in section 8(b)(1) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide standards for placement of commemorative works on certain Federal lands in the District of Columbia and its environs, and for other purposes'' and approved November 14, 1986 (40 United States Code 1008).
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an annual audit of any books, records, documents, and other data belonging to the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under subsection (a).
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act relating to the minting or selling of the coins authorized by this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
-(-a-) -D-e-p-o-s-i-t-s-.----A-l-l -a-m-o-u-n-t-s -r-e-c-e-i-v-e-d -f-r-o-m -t-h-e -s-a-l-e -o-f -c-o-i-n-s -i-s-s-u-e-d -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -A-c-t -s-h-a-l-l -b-e -d-e-p-o-s-i-t-e-d -i-n -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d-.
-(-b-) -P-a-y-m-e-n-t-s-.----T-h-e -S-e-c-r-e-t-a-r-y -s-h-a-l-l -p-a-y -t-h-e -a-m-o-u-n-t-s -a-u-t-h-o-r-i-z-e-d -u-n-d-e-r -s-e-c-t-i-o-n -9 -f-r-o-m -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d-.
-(-c-) -E-x-p-e-n-d-i-t-u-r-e-s-.----T-h-e -S-e-c-r-e-t-a-r-y -s-h-a-l-l -c-h-a-r-g-e -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d -w-i-t-h -a-l-l -e-x-p-e-n-d-i-t-u-r-e-s -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -A-c-t-.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, relating to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.