This Act may be cited as the ``Hypersonic Research Airplane Authorization Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The timely development in the United States of a single-stage-to-orbit, air-breathing aerospace plane is expected to result in a major reduction of the cost of payload delivery into space, and could therefore provide the United States aerospace industry with a major competitive boost in international markets in the twenty-first century.
There are significant strategic advantages associated with having access to a hypersonic aerospace plane.
The recently restructured National Aerospace Plane Program, under which the decision to design and construct an X- 30 aircraft has been indefinitely deferred, has lost sight of the initial goal of the Program, which was the timely development of a single-stage-to-orbit hypersonic research airplane with an air-breathing engine and the capability to take off and land from a runway.
To provide the proper focus for the National Aerospace Plane Program and to obtain sufficient data for the timely development of a single-stage-to-orbit hypersonic aircraft, the Program must include the development, in the near future, of a hypersonic research airplane which will push the limits of the flight envelope using existing technology.
The timely deployment of a hypersonic research airplane will decrease the overall technical uncertainty, size, and cost of eventually building a single-stage-to-orbit airplane.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``National Aerospace Plane'' means an airplane which-- (A) utilizes single-stage-to-orbit technology; (B) relies on air-breathing propulsion to achieve orbital speeds; (C) utilizes technology with the potential to reduce substantially the cost of delivery of payloads to orbit; and (D) can take off and land on a runway.
The term ``hypersonic research airplane'' means an airplane which-- (A) utilizes air-breathing propulsion and carries no payload except for a pilot and necessary instrumentation; (B) is a precursor of the National Aerospace Plane and is instrumented to collect hypersonic aerodynamic and combustion data in the speed regime beyond Mach 8; and (C) extends flight envelope boundaries by flying at speeds that push the limits of technology developed as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
The term ``single-stage-to-orbit'' means a technology which enables an aircraft to fly into orbit from a runway without expendable booster rockets.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Defense.
The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The term ``development'' means design, construction, and initial testing.
DEVELOPMENT OF A HYPERSONIC RESEARCH AIRPLANE.
Submission of Plan.--Within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary and the Administrator shall jointly submit to the Congress a plan for the National Aerospace Plane Program.
In developing the plan, the Secretary and the Administrator shall consider existing independent proposals which meet the purposes of the plan.
The plan shall-- (1) contain specific plans for the development of a hypersonic research airplane that costs not more than $5,000,000,000, and the first flight of which is within 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) have the objective of achieving single-stage-to-orbit with the airplane referred to in paragraph (1) or with a research aircraft that is the follow-on to such an airplane.
Participation by Other Entities.--The Secretary and the Administrator may enter into arrangements with Federal agencies, States, universities, nonprofit entities, industry, international sources, or other persons, or with consortia thereof, for participation in the research, development, design, construction, and operation of the hypersonic research airplane referred to in subsection (a)(1) and the National Aerospace Plane, except that any such arrangement may not jeopardize the strategic advantage to the United States to be gained from the National Aerospace Plane Program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary and the Administrator a total of $5,000,000,000 for fiscal years 1995 through 2000 to carry out the plan referred to in subsection (a).
No funds appropriated pursuant to this subsection may be obligated until 60 days after the submission of the plan under subsection (a)(1).