NATIONAL GUARD COUNTERDRUG SCHOOLS.
Authority To Operate.--Under such regulations as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe, the Chief of the National Guard Bureau may establish and operate not more than five schools (to be known generally as ``National Guard counterdrug schools'') for the provision by the National Guard of training in drug interdiction and counter-drug activities, and drug demand reduction activities, to the personnel of the following: (1) Federal agencies.
State and local law enforcement agencies.
Community-based organizations engaged in such activities.
Other non-Federal governmental and private entities and organizations engaged in such activities.
Counterdrug Schools Specified.--The National Guard counterdrug schools operated under the authority in subsection (a) are as follows: (1) The National Interagency Civil-Military Institute (NICI), San Luis Obispo, California.
The Multi-Jurisdictional Counterdrug Task Force Training (MCTFT), St. Petersburg, Florida.
The Midwest Counterdrug Training Center (MCTC), to be established in Johnston, Iowa.
The Regional Counterdrug Training Academy (RCTA), Meridian, Mississippi.
The Northeast Regional Counterdrug Training Center (NCTC), Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania.
Use of National Guard Personnel.--(1) To the extent provided for in the State drug interdiction and counter-drug activities plan of a State in which a National Guard counterdrug school is located, personnel of the National Guard of that State who are ordered to perform full-time National Guard duty authorized under section 112(b) of that title 32, United States Code, may provide training referred to in subsection (a) at that school.
In this subsection, the term ``State drug interdiction and counter-drug activities plan'', in the case of a State, means the current plan submitted by the Governor of the State to the Secretary of Defense under section 112 of title 32, United States Code.
Annual Reports on Activities.--(1) Not later than February 1, 2002, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on the activities of the National Guard counterdrug schools.
Each report under paragraph (1) shall set forth the following: (A) The amount made available for each National Guard counterdrug school during the fiscal year ending in the year preceding the year in which such report is submitted.
A description of the activities of each National Guard counterdrug school during the year preceding the year in which such report is submitted.
The report under paragraph (1) in 2002 shall set forth, in addition to the matters described in paragraph (2), a description of the activities relating to the establishment of the Midwest Counterdrug Training Center in Johnston, Iowa.
Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for the National Guard for fiscal year 2002, $25,000,000 for purposes of the National Guard counterdrug schools in that fiscal year.
The amount authorized to be appropriated by paragraph (1) is in addition to any other amount authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for the National Guard for fiscal year 2002.
Availability of Funds.--(1) Of the amount authorized to be appropriated by subsection (e)(1)-- (A) $4,000,000 shall be available for the National Interagency Civil-Military Institute, San Luis Obispo, California; (B) $8,000,000 shall be available for the Multi- Jurisdictional Counterdrug Task Force Training, St. Petersburg, Florida; (C) $3,000,000 shall be available for the Midwest Counterdrug Training Center, Johnston, Iowa; (D) $5,000,000 shall be available for the Regional Counterdrug Training Academy, Meridian, Mississippi; and (E) $5,000,000 shall be available for the Northeast Regional Counterdrug Training Center, Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania.
Amounts available under paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.
Funding for Fiscal Years After Fiscal Year 2002.--(1) The budget of the President that is submitted to Congress under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, for any fiscal year after fiscal year 2002 shall set forth as a separate budget item the amount requested for such fiscal year for the National Guard counterdrug schools.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (A) the amount authorized to appropriated for the National Guard counterdrug schools for any fiscal year after fiscal year 2002 should not be less than the amount authorized to be appropriated for those schools for fiscal year 2002 by subsection (e)(1), in constant fiscal year 2002 dollars; and (B) the amount made available to each National Guard counterdrug school for any fiscal year after fiscal year 2002 should not be less than the amount made available for such school for fiscal year 2002 by subsection (f)(1), in constant fiscal year 2002 dollars, except that the amount made available for the Midwest Counterdrug Training School should not be less than $5,000,000, in constant fiscal year 2002 dollars.