This Act may be cited as the ``Great Falls Preservation and Redevelopment Act of 1993''.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``District'' means the Great Falls Historic District established under section 4; and (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The purpose of this Act is to preserve and interpret the educational and inspirational benefit of the unique and distinguished contribution to our national heritage of certain historic and cultural lands, waterways, and edifices of the Great Falls Historic District.
Such purpose shall be carried out with an emphasis on harnessing this unique urban environment for its educational and recreational value, and enhancing economic and cultural redevelopment within the District.
GREAT FALLS HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Establishment.--There is established in the city of Paterson in the county of Passaic in the State of New Jersey the Great Falls Historic District.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the District shall be the boundaries as specified for the Great Falls Historic District listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the District through cooperative agreements in accordance with this Act.
Grants; Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--In expending sums made available pursuant to this Act, the Secretary may make grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements with, nonprofit entities for-- (A) the purchase of property or easements; (B) emergency stabilization; and (C) the establishment of a coordinated fund.
Purpose.--Grants and cooperative agreements entered into under this subsection shall be used to carry out this Act, including the following activities: (A) An evaluation of-- (i) the condition of historic and architectural resources existing on the date of enactment of this Act; and (ii) the environmental and flood hazard conditions within the District.
Recommendations for-- (i) rehabilitating, reconstructing, and adaptively reusing such historic and architectural resources; (ii) preserving viewsheds, focal points, and streetscapes; (iii) establishing gateways to the District; (iv) establishing and maintaining parks and public spaces; (v) restoring, improving, and developing raceways and adjacent areas; (vi) developing public parking areas; (vii) improving pedestrian and vehicular circulation within the District; (viii) improving security within the District, with an emphasis on preserving historically significant structures from arson; and (ix) establishing a visitor's center.
Restoration, Maintenance, and Interpretation.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the owners of properties within the District of historical or cultural significance as determined by the Secretary, pursuant to which the Secretary may mark, interpret, improve, restore, and provide technical assistance with respect to the preservation and interpretation of such properties.
Requirements.--Each agreement entered into pursuant to paragraph (1) shall contain provisions ensuring that-- (A) the Secretary shall have the right of access at reasonable times to public portions of the property for interpretive and other purposes; and (B) no changes or alterations shall be made in the property except by mutual agreement.
Cooperative Agreements With State.--In administering the District, the Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the State of New Jersey, or any political subdivision thereof, for rendering, on a reimbursable basis, rescue, firefighting, and law enforcement services, cooperative assistance by nearby law enforcement and fire preventive agencies, and for other appropriate purposes.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.