This Act may be cited as the ``Saint Helena Island National Scenic Area Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SAINT HELENA ISLAND NATIONAL SCENIC AREA.
Purpose.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve and protect for present and future generations the outstanding resources and values of Saint Helena Island in Lake Michigan, Michigan, and (2) to provide for the conservation, protection, and enhancement of primitive recreation opportunities, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetation, and historical and cultural resources of such island.
Establishment.--For the purposes described in subsection (a), there shall be established the Saint Helena Island National Scenic Area (hereinafter referred to in this Act as the ``scenic area'').
Effective Upon Conveyance.--Subsection (b) shall be effective upon conveyance of satisfactory title to the United States of the whole of Saint Helena Island, except that portion to be conveyed to the Great Lakes Lighthouse Keepers Association pursuant to section 1001 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 3948).
Saint Helena Island.--The scenic area shall comprise all of Saint Helena Island, in Lake Michigan, Michigan, and all associated rocks, pinnacles, islands, and islets within one-eighth mile of the shore of Saint Helena Island.
Boundaries of Hiawatha National Forest Extended.--Upon establishment of the scenic area, the boundaries of the Hiawatha National Forest shall be extended to include all of the lands within the scenic area.
All such extended boundaries shall be deemed boundaries in existence as of January 1, 1965, for the purposes of section 8 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-9).
Payments to Local Governments.--Solely for purposes of payments to local governments pursuant to section 6902 of title 31, United States Code, lands acquired by the United States under this Act shall be treated as entitlement lands.
Administration.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of Agriculture (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall administer the scenic area in accordance with the laws, rules, and regulations applicable to the National Forest System in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
Special Management Requirements.--Within 3 years of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a management plan for the scenic area as an amendment to the Land and Resources Management Plan for the Hiawatha National Forest.
Such an amendment shall conform to the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this Act shall require the Secretary to revise the Land and Resource Management Plan for the Hiawatha National Forest pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974.
In developing a plan for management of the scenic area, the Secretary shall address the following special management considerations: (1) Public access.--Alternative means for providing public access from the mainland to the scenic area shall be considered, including any available existing services and facilities, concessionaires, special use permits, or other means of making public access available for the purposes of this Act.
Roads.--After the date of enactment of this Act, no new permanent roads shall be constructed within the scenic area.
Vegetation management.--No timber harvest shall be allowed within the scenic area, except as may be necessary in the control of fire, insects, and diseases, and to provide for public safety and trail access.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Secretary may engage in vegetation manipulation practices for maintenance of wildlife habitat and visual quality.
Trees cut for these purposes may be utilized, salvaged, or removed from the scenic area as authorized by the Secretary.
Motorized travel.--Motorized travel shall not be permitted within the scenic area, except on the waters of Lake Michigan, and as necessary for administrative use in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
Fire.--Wildfires shall be suppressed in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Act, using such means as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Insects and disease.--Insect and disease outbreaks may be controlled in the scenic area to maintain scenic quality, prevent tree mortality, or to reduce hazards to visitors.
Dockage.--The Secretary shall provide through concession, permit, or other means docking facilities consistent with the management plan developed pursuant to this section.
Safety.--The Secretary shall take reasonable actions to provide for public health and safety and for the protection of the scenic area in the event of fire or infestation of insects or disease.
Consultation.--In preparing the comprehensive management plan, the Secretary shall consult with appropriate State and local government officials, provide for full public participation, and consider the views of all interested parties, organizations, and individuals.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Michigan with respect to fish and wildlife in the scenic area.
Subject to valid existing rights, the lands within the scenic area are hereby withdrawn from location, entry, and patent under the United States mining laws and from disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral leasing, including all laws pertaining to geothermal leasing.
Also subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall not allow any mineral development on federally owned land within the scenic area, except that common varieties of mineral materials, such as stone and gravel, may be utilized only as authorized by the Secretary to the extent necessary for construction and maintenance of roads and facilities within the scenic area.
Acquisition of Lands Within the Scenic Area.--The Secretary shall acquire by purchase from willing sellers, gift, or exchange, lands, waters, structures, or interests therein, including scenic or other easements, within the boundaries of the scenic area to further the purposes of this Act.
Acquisition of Other Lands.--The Secretary may acquire by purchase from willing sellers, gift, or exchange, lands or structures on the mainland to the extent necessary for access to and administrative facilities for the scenic area.
Acquisition of Lands.--There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the acquisition of land, interests in land, or structures within the scenic area and on the mainland as needed for access and administrative facilities.
Other Purposes.--In addition to the amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for development to carry out the other purposes of this Act.