This Act may be cited as the ``Native American Agricultural Research, Development and Export Enhancement Act of 2000''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Clause 3 of section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution recognizes the special relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.
Beginning in 1970, with the inauguration by the Nixon Administration of the Indian self-determination era, each successive President has reaffirmed the special government-to- government relationship between Indian tribes and the United States.
In 1994, President Clinton issued an executive memorandum to the heads of all Federal departments and agencies that obligated all such departments and agencies, particularly those that have an impact on economic development, to evaluate the potential impacts of their actions on Indian tribes.
The United States has an obligation to guard and preserve the agricultural and related renewable resources of Indian tribes in order to foster strong tribal governments, Indian self-determination, and economic self-sufficiency among Indian tribes.
Despite the availability of abundant natural resources on Indian lands and a rich cultural legacy that accords great value to self-determination, self-reliance, and independence, Native Americans suffer higher rates of unemployment, poverty, poor health, substandard housing, and associated social ills than those of any other group in the United States.
Reservation-based Indians tend to be the most rural of any minority group.
They tend to be geographically isolated, resource limited, and the least likely of any farm group to receive payment or loans from the United States.
Indian land represents close to 55,000,000 acres, or about 2 percent of the United States land base, with nearly 47,000,000 of these acres consisting of range and cropland.
Indian agriculture constitutes the second largest revenue generator and employer in Indian country and is not limited to farming and ranching, but often includes such products as forestry, bison, wild rice and fruits, cotton, tobacco and other Native-made or grown products.
Because of the lack of Federal intra-agency and inter- agency coordination in agriculture programs and policies, the development of Indian agriculture and related tribal business and economic development potential has been hindered.
It is estimated that about 20 percent of reservation grazing land and about 70 percent of cropland is leased to non- Indian producers.
American Indians today use their lands and natural resources for agriculture and agribusiness to provide food and other staples for consumption, improving their economic self- sufficiency, agriculture income and reservation employment.
Although there are many programs within Department of Agriculture for which tribal and individual Indian producers are eligible, Indian producers have not fully benefited from these programs because of insufficient coordination within the Department of Agriculture.
The United States has an obligation to assist Indian tribes with the creation of appropriate economic and political conditions with respect to Indian lands to-- (A) encourage investment from outside sources that do not originate with the tribes; and (B) facilitate economic ventures with outside entities that are not tribal entities.
The economic success and material well-being of Native American communities depends on the combined efforts of the Federal Government, tribal governments, the private sector, and individuals.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) promote the coordination of existing agricultural and related programs within the Department of Agriculture to provide the maximum benefit to Indian tribes and their members; (2) encourage intertribal, regional, and international trade and business development in order to assist in increasing productivity and the standard of living of members of Indian tribes and improving the economic self-sufficiency of the Indian tribes; (3) through improving the administration of Federal program, improve the access of Indian tribes to capital, specialty markets, export promotions, and marketing assistance that non-Indian agriculture producers currently have access to; (4) improve the development and coordination of Indian agriculture and related value-added industries to promote self- sustaining Native economies and communities; and (5) promote economic self-sufficiency and political self- determination for Indian tribes and members of Indian tribes.
In this Act: (1) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means an Indian tribe, a tribal organization, a tribal enterprise, a tribal marketing cooperative, or any other Indian-owned business.
Indian.--The term ``Indian'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(d)).
Indian goods and services.--The term ``Indian goods and services'' means-- (A) goods produced or originated by an eligible entity; or (B) services provided by eligible entities.
Indian-owned business.--The term ``Indian-owned business'' means an entity organized for the conduct of trade or commerce with respect to which at least 50 percent of the property interest of the entity is owned by Indians or Indian tribes (or a combination thereof).
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Tribal enterprise.--The term ``tribal enterprise'' means a commercial activity or business managed or controlled by an Indian tribe.
Tribal organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(l)).
NATIVE AMERICAN RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND EXPORT OFFICE (a) In General.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Agriculture a Native American Agricultural Research, Development and Export Office (referred to this Act as the ``Office'').
Director.--The Office shall be headed by a Director of the Native American Agricultural Research, Development and Export Office (referred to in this Act as ``Director'') to be appointed by the Secretary.
The Director shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed that for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Duties of the Secretary.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director, shall ensure the coordination of all programs that provide assistance to Native American communities within the following 7 mission areas of the Department of Agriculture: (A) Farm and foreign agricultural services.
Food, nutrition, and consumer services.
Marketing and regulatory programs.
Natural resources and environment.
Research, education and economics.
Activities.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall ensure the coordination of, or, as appropriate, carry out-- (A) activities to promote Indian agricultural programs, including the development of domestic and international trade programs; (B) activities to facilitate water and waste programs, housing, utility and other infrastructure development with respect to Native American communities; (C) activities to provide assistance to Indian tribal college programs; (D) activities to implement rural economic development programs for Native American communities; and (E) activities to promote food and nutrition services for Native American communities.
Interagency coordination.--In carrying out Department of Agriculture programs, the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall coordinate with other Federal agencies, including the Department of Energy, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Justice, the Department of Commerce, or any other Federal agency responsible for administering related Indian programs.
Assistance.--In conjunction with the activities described in paragraph (2), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall provide-- (A) financial assistance, technical assistance, and administrative services to eligible entities to assist those entities in-- (i) identifying and taking advantage of business development opportunities; and (ii) complying with appropriate laws and regulatory practices; and (B) such other assistance as the Secretary, in consultation with the Director, determines to be necessary for the development of business opportunities for eligible entities to enhance the economies of Indian tribes.
Priorities.--In carrying out the duties and activities described in paragraphs (3) and (4), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall give priority to activities that-- (A) provide the greatest degree of economic benefits to Indians; and (B) foster long-term stable economies of Indian tribes.
NATIVE AMERICAN TRADE AND EXPORT PROMOTION.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director, shall establish and implement a Native American export and trade promotion program (referred to in this section as the ``program'').
Coordination of Federal Programs and Services.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary, acting through the Director and in cooperation with the heads of appropriate Federal agencies, shall ensure the coordination of Federal programs and services that are designed to-- (1) develop the economies of Indian tribes; and (2) stimulate the demand for Indian goods and services that are available from eligible entities.
Activities.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall ensure the coordination of, or, as appropriate, carry out-- (1) Federal programs that are designed to provide technical or financial assistance to eligible entities; (2) activities to develop promotional materials for eligible entities; (3) activities for the financing of appropriate trade missions; (4) activities for the marketing of related Indian goods and services; (5) activities for the participation of appropriate Federal agencies or eligible entities in international trade fairs; and (6) any other activity related to the development of markets for Indian goods and services.
Technical Assistance.--In conjunction with the activities described in subsection (c), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall provide technical assistance and administrative services to eligible entities to assist those entities in-- (1) identifying appropriate markets for Indian goods and services; (2) entering the markets referred to in paragraph (1); (3) complying with foreign or domestic laws and practices with respect to financial institutions concerning the export and import of Indian goods and services; and (4) entering into financial arrangements to provide for the export and trade of Indian agricultural and related products.
Priorities.--In carrying out the duties and activities described in subsections (b) and (c), the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall give priority to activities that-- (1) provide the greatest degree of economic benefits to Indians; and (2) foster long-term stable international markets for Indian goods and services.