REVISION OF FEASIBILITY AND SUITABILITY STUDIES OF EXISTING NATIONAL HISTORIC TRAILS.
Section 5 of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Revision of Feasibility and Suitability Studies of Existing National Historic Trails.-- ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Route.--The term `route' includes a trail segment commonly known as a cutoff.
Shared route.--The term `shared route' means a route that was a segment of more than one historic trail, including a route shared with an existing national historic trail.
Requirements for revision.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior shall revise the feasibility and suitability studies for certain national trails for consideration of possible additions to the trails.
Study requirements and objectives.--The study requirements and objectives specified in subsection (b) shall apply to a study required by this subsection.
Completion and submission of study.--A study listed in this subsection shall be completed and submitted to Congress not later than 3 complete fiscal years from the date funds are made available for the study.
Oregon national historic trail.-- ``(A) Study required.--The Secretary of the Interior shall undertake a study of the routes of the Oregon Trail listed in subparagraph (B) and generally depicted on the map entitled `Western Emigrant Trails 1830/1870' and dated 1991/1993, and of such other routes of the Oregon Trail that the Secretary considers appropriate, to determine the feasibility and suitability of designation of one or more of the routes as components of the Oregon National Historic Trail.
Covered routes.--The routes to be studied under subparagraph (A) shall include the following: ``(i) Whitman Mission route.
North Alternate Oregon Trail.
North Side alternate route.
Cutoff to Barlow road.
Pony express national historic trail.--The Secretary of the Interior shall undertake a study of the approximately 20-mile southern alternative route of the Pony Express Trail from Wathena, Kansas, to Troy, Kansas, and such other routes of the Pony Express Trail that the Secretary considers appropriate, to determine the feasibility and suitability of designation of one or more of the routes as components of the Pony Express National Historic Trail.
California national historic trail.-- ``(A) Study required.--The Secretary of the Interior shall undertake a study of the Missouri Valley, central, and western routes of the California Trail listed in subparagraph (B) and generally depicted on the map entitled `Western Emigrant Trails 1830/1870' and dated 1991/1993, and of such other and shared Missouri Valley, central, and western routes that the Secretary considers appropriate, to determine the feasibility and suitability of designation of one or more of the routes as components of the California National Historic Trail.
Covered routes.--The routes to be studied under subparagraph (A) shall include the following: ``(i) Missouri valley routes.-- ``(I) Blue Mills-Independence Road.
Fort Leavenworth-Blue River route.
Old Wyoming-Nebraska City cutoff.
Gum Springs-Fort Leavenworth route.
Fort Leavenworth-Kansas River route.
Nebraska City cutoff routes.
Central routes.-- ``(I) Cherokee Trail, including splits.
Weber Canyon route of Hastings cutoff.
Western routes.-- ``(I) Bidwell-Bartleson route.
Placer County Road to Auburn.
Mormon pioneer national historic trail.-- ``(A) Study required.--The Secretary of the Interior shall undertake a study of the routes of the Mormon Pioneer Trail listed in subparagraph (B) and generally depicted in the map entitled `Western Emigrant Trails 1830/1870' and dated 1991/1993, and of such other routes of the Mormon Pioneer Trail that the Secretary considers appropriate, to determine the feasibility and suitability of designation of one or more of the routes as components of the Mormon Pioneer National Historic Trail.
Covered routes.--The routes to be studied under subparagraph (A) shall include the following: ``(i) 1846 Subsequent routes A and B (Lucas and Clarke Counties, Iowa).
1856-57 Handcart route (Iowa City to Council Bluffs).
1847 Alternative Elkhorn and Loup River Crossings in Nebraska.
Fort Leavenworth Road; Ox Bow route and alternates in Kansas and Missouri (Oregon and California Trail routes used by Mormon emigrants).
1850 Golden Pass Road in Utah.
Shared california and oregon trail routes.-- ``(A) Study required.--The Secretary of the Interior shall undertake a study of the shared routes of the California Trail and Oregon Trail listed in subparagraph (B) and generally depicted on the map entitled `Western Emigrant Trails 1830/1870' and dated 1991/1993, and of such other shared routes that the Secretary considers appropriate, to determine the feasibility and suitability of designation of one or more of the routes as shared components of the California National Historic Trail and the Oregon National Historic Trail.
Covered routes.--The routes to be studied under subparagraph (A) shall include the following: ``(i) St. Joe Road.
Old Fort Kearny Road (Oxbow Trail).
Raft River to Applegate.