This Act may be cited as the ``Financial Security Accounts for Individuals with Disabilities Act of 2007''.
FINANCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNTS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.
In General.--Subchapter F of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt organizations) is amended by inserting after part VIII the following new part: ``PART IX--SAVINGS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES ``Sec.
Financial security accounts for individuals with disabilities.
FINANCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNTS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.
General Rule.--A financial security account for an individual with a disability shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such account shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable organizations).
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Financial security account for an individual with a disability.--The term `financial security account for an individual with a disability' means a trust created or organized in the United States (and designated as a financial security account for an individual with a disability at the time created or organized) exclusively for the purpose of paying qualified disability expenses of an individual who is disabled and who is the designated beneficiary of the trust, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted-- ``(i) unless it is in cash, and ``(ii) except in the case of rollover contributions described in subsection (c)(4), if such contribution would result in aggregate contributions for the taxable year and all preceding taxable years exceeding $500,000.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)), a parent or guardian of the designated beneficiary, a designee of a parent or guardian of the designated beneficiary, the designated beneficiary, or another person, who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust shall not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Qualified disability expenses.--The term `qualified disability expenses' means, with respect to an individual with a disability, amounts paid or incurred, not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, for-- ``(A) education, medical and dental care, community based support services, employment training and support, moving, and assistive technology, ``(B) after the designated beneficiary has attained the age of 18, housing and transportation, and ``(C) funeral and burial services and property.
Individual with a disability.--An individual is an individual with a disability if such individual is receiving supplemental security income benefits under title XVI of the Social Security Act or an individual otherwise eligible to receive such benefits notwithstanding the income and assets tests required for eligibility for such benefits.
Rules relating to estate and gift tax.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (4), and (5) of section 529(c) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of a financial security account for an individual with a disability shall be included in gross income by the payee or distributee, as the case may be, for the taxable year in which received in the manner as provided in section 72.
Distributions for benefit of designated beneficiary.-- ``(A) In general.--No amount shall be includible in gross income under paragraph (1) if the qualified disability expenses of the designated beneficiary during the taxable year are not less than the aggregate distributions during the taxable year.
Distributions in excess of expenses.--If such aggregate distributions exceed such expenses during the taxable year, the amount otherwise includible in gross income under paragraph (1) shall be reduced by the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be includible in gross income under paragraph (1) (without regard to this subparagraph) as the qualified disability expenses bear to such aggregate distributions.
Disallowance of excluded amounts as deduction, credit, or exclusion.--No deduction, credit, or exclusion shall be allowed to the taxpayer under any other section of this chapter for any qualified disability expenses to the extent taken into account in determining the amount of the exclusion under this paragraph.
Additional tax for distributions not used for benefit of designated beneficiary.-- ``(A) In general.--The tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year on any taxpayer who receives a payment or distribution from a financial security account for an individual with a disability shall be increased by 10 percent of the amount thereof which is includible in gross income under paragraph (1).
Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if the payment or distribution is made to a beneficiary (or to the estate of the designated beneficiary) on or after the death of the designated beneficiary.
Contributions returned before certain date.-- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution made during a taxable year if-- ``(i) such distribution is made before the first day of the sixth month of the taxable year following the taxable year, and ``(ii) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in clause (ii) shall be included in gross income for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Rollovers.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed from a financial security account for an individual with a disability to the extent that the amount received is paid, not later than the 60th day after the date of such payment or distribution, into another financial security account for an individual with a disability for the benefit of the same beneficiary.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any payment or distribution if it applied to any prior payment or distribution during the 12-month period ending on the date of the payment or distribution.
Change in beneficiary.--Any change in the beneficiary of a financial security account for an individual with a disability shall not be treated as a distribution for purposes of paragraph (1) if the new beneficiary is disabled and is a member of the family (as defined in section 529(e)(2)) of the old beneficiary.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 408(e) shall apply to any financial security account for an individual with a disability.
Community Property Laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if-- ``(1) the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and ``(2) the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute an account described in subsection (c)(1).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of a financial security account for an individual with a disability shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the beneficiary of the account with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required.
Coordination With Means-Tested Programs.--Amounts held by, or paid or distributed from, a financial security account for an individual with a disability shall not be treated as income or assets, and shall not be taken into account in determining eligibility for, or the amount or extent of, benefits provided by any program funded in whole or in part with Federal funds.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Penalty for failure to meet minimum distribution requirement.--Subsection (c) of section 4974 of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) any financial security account for an individual with a disability (as defined in section 530A(b)).''.
Tax on prohibited transactions.-- (A) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 4975(e) of such Code (defining plan) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H), by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (F), and by adding after subparagraph (F) the following: ``(G) a financial security account for an individual with a disability described in section 530A, or''.
Exemption.--Subsection (d) of section 4975 of such Code (relating to exemptions) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (22), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (23) and inserting ``; or'', and by inserting after paragraph (23) the following: ``(24) in the case of a financial security account for an individual with a disability, any transaction to provide housing or other services by a family member to or for the designated beneficiary of the trust to the extent that such transaction does not exceed the fair market value of the housing or service (as the case may be) provided.''.
Special rule.--Subsection (c) of section 4975 of such Code (relating to tax on prohibited transactions) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Special rule for financial security account for individuals with disabilities.--An individual for whose benefit a financial security account for an individual with a disability is established and any contributor to such account shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if section 530A(d) applies with respect to such transaction.''.
Rollovers from qualified tuition programs and education savings accounts.-- (A) Qualified tuition programs.--Paragraph (3) of section 529(c) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Contributions to financial security account for an individual with a disability.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to that portion of any distribution which, within 60 days of such distribution, is contributed to a financial security account for an individual with a disability for the benefit of the designated beneficiary.''.
Education savings account.--Subsection (d) of section 530 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Contributions to financial security account for an individual with a disability.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed from a Coverdell education savings account to the extent that the amount received is paid, not later than the 60th day after the date of such payment or distribution, into a financial security account for an individual with a disability for the benefit of the same beneficiary.''.
Reports.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (E) and inserting ``and'', and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) section 530A(g) (relating to financial security accounts for individuals with disabilities).''.
Exclusion from income.--Subsection (b) of section 1612 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382a) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (22), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (23) and inserting ``; or'', and by inserting after paragraph (23) the following: ``(24) any contribution to a financial security account for an individual with a disability.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to part VIII the following new item: ``Part IX.
Savings for Individuals With Disabilities.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2006.