This Act may be cited as the ``Regional Skills Training Alliances Act of 1999''.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
TITLE I--SKILL GRANTS SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall provide grants to eligible entities described in subsection (b) to assist such entities to improve the job skills necessary for employment in specific industries.
Eligible Entities Described.-- (1) In general.--An eligible entity described in this subsection is a consortium that-- (A) shall consist of representatives from not less than 10 businesses (or a non-profit organization that represents not less than 10 businesses); and (B) may consist of representatives from one or more of the following: (i) Labor organizations.
State and local government.
Majority of representatives.--A majority of the representatives comprising the consortium shall be representatives described in paragraph (1)(A).
Additional requirement.--To the maximum extent practicable, each business, organization, or government that forms an eligible entity under paragraph (1) shall be located in the same geographic region of the United States.
Priority for Small Businesses.--In providing grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity if a majority of representatives forming the entity represent small- business concerns, as described in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(a)).
Maximum Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant provided to an eligible entity under subsection (a) may not exceed $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
Certain States With Multiple Consortia.--In a State in which two or more eligible entities seek grants under section 101 for a fiscal year, as determined by the Governor of the State, the Governor may solicit proposals from the entities concerning the activities to be carried out under the grants.
If the Governor solicits such proposals, based on the proposals received, the Governor shall submit an application on behalf of 1 or more of the entities to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
The provisions of this title relating to eligible entities shall apply to each of the entities for which the Governor applies.
Other States.--In a State in which only one eligible entity seeks a grant under section 101 for a fiscal year, as determined by the Governor of the State, or in which the Governor does not solicit proposals as described in subsection (a), the Secretary may not provide a grant under section 101 to the eligible entity unless such entity submits to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
In General.--The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 101 to an eligible entity unless such entity agrees to use amounts received from such grant to improve the job skills necessary for employment by businesses in the industry with respect to which such entity was established.
Conduct of Program.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the program described in subsection (a), the eligible entity may provide for-- (A) an assessment of training and job skill needs for the industry; (B) development of a sequence of skill standards that are benchmarked to advanced industry practices; (C) development of curriculum and training methods; (D) purchase, lease, or receipt of donations of training equipment; (E) identification of training providers; (F) development of apprenticeship programs; (G) development of training programs for dislocated workers; (H) development of the membership of the entity; (I) provision of training programs for workers; and (J) development of training plans for businesses.
Additional requirement.--In carrying out the program described in subsection (a), the eligible entity shall provide for development and tracking of performance outcome measures for the program and the training providers involved in the program.
Administrative Costs.--The eligible entity may use not more than 10 percent of the amount of a grant to pay for administrative costs associated with the program described in subsection (a).
REQUIREMENT OF MATCHING FUNDS.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 101 to an eligible entity unless such entity agrees that-- (1) it will make available non-Federal contributions toward the costs of carrying out activities under section 103 in an amount that is not less than $2 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under a grant under section 101; and (2) of such non-Federal contributions, not less than $1 of each such $2 shall be from businesses participating in the eligible entity.
LIMIT ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
The Secretary may use not more than 5 percent of the funds made available to carry out this title to pay for Federal administrative costs associated with making grants under this title.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000, 2001, and 2002.
TITLE II--PLANNING GRANTS SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall provide grants to States to enable the States to assist businesses, organizations, and agencies described in section 101(b) in conducting planning to form consortia described in such section.
Maximum Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant provided to a State under subsection (a) may not exceed $500,000 for any fiscal year.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 201 to a State unless such State submits to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
REQUIREMENT OF MATCHING FUNDS.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 201 to a State unless such State agrees that it will make available non-Federal contributions toward the costs of carrying out activities under this title in an amount that is not less than $1 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under a grant under section 201.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.