This Act may be cited as the ``Public Interest Lawyer Assistance and Relief Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The ability to repay financial obligations incurred in obtaining a legal education has become a deterrent to law school graduates accepting public interest employment.
The increasing level of educational debt leads recent law school graduates to accept positions with private firms offering high salaries rather than with lower paying public interest organizations.
This has led to a decrease in the number of attorneys available to serve public needs in government, non-profit, and special interest capacities.
The establishment of a Federal loan repayment assistance program for attorneys entering public interest jobs will increase access to legal services in these areas by helping recent law school graduates to meet their educational financial obligations.
Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall carry out a program of assuming the obligation to repay, pursuant to subsection (c), a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B or D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (excluding loans made under sections 428B and 428C of such Act or comparable loans made under part D of such title) for any borrower who enters into an agreement with the Secretary to complete 3 years of service as a lawyer employed in a public interest position.
Award basis; deferment.-- (A) Award basis.--Loan repayment under this section shall be on a first-come, first-serve basis and subject to the availability of appropriations, and to any limitations imposed by the Secretary under section 5.
The Secretary shall, on the basis of an application that complies with subsection (d)(1), select from among eligible applicants the borrowers with which to enter into the agreements described in paragraph (1).
Deferment.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for the deferment of repayment of loans made, insured, or guaranteed under part B or D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (excluding loans made under sections 428B and 428C of such Act or comparable loans made under part D of such title) for borrowers who enter into such agreements and provide evidence in accordance with such regulations of employment in a position qualifying for repayment of such loans under paragraph (1).
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
Loan Repayment.-- (1) Eligible amount.--Except as provided by the Secretary pursuant to section 5, the amount the Secretary may repay on behalf of any individual under this section shall not exceed the greater of-- (A) the sum of the principal amounts outstanding of the individual's qualifying loans at the beginning of the first year of service described in subsection (a)(1); or (B) a total of more than $20,000.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the refunding of any repayment of a loan made under part B or D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Interest.--If a portion of a loan is repaid by the Secretary under this section for any year, the proportionate amount of interest on such loan which accrues for such year shall be repaid by the Secretary.
Repayment to Eligible Lenders.--Except as provided by the Secretary pursuant to section 5, the Secretary shall pay to each eligible lender or holder for each year an amount equal to one-third of the aggregate amount of loans which are subject to repayment pursuant to subsection (b)(1).
Application for Repayment.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible individual desiring loan repayment under this section shall submit a complete and accurate application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Eligible positions.--An individual shall be treated as serving as a lawyer employed in a public interest position under this section after completing a year of service as a practising attorney in a position in-- (A) local, State, or Federal government; (B) an organization that is exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or (C) a judicial clerkship.
Treatment of Consolidation Loans.--A loan amount for a consolidation loan made under section 428C of the Higher Education Act of 1965, or a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made under part D of title IV of such Act, may be a qualified loan amount for the purpose of this section only to the extent that such loan amount was used by a borrower who otherwise meets the requirements of this section to repay-- (1) a loan made under section 428 or 428H of such Act; or (2) a Federal Direct Stafford Loan, or a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, made under part D of title IV of such Act.
Prevention of Double Benefits.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes).
The Secretary shall create or designate an administering body within the Department of Education to-- (1) establish and determine eligibility criteria under this Act; (2) alter the limits on the amount of loan repayment assistance participants may receive during their period of participation under section 3; (3) alter the limits on the amount of time a law school graduate may participate in the loan assistance repayment program under section 3; (4) accept funding and gifts on behalf of the program; (5) raise funds on behalf of the program; and (6) disburse funds or designate another entity to do so on behalf of the program.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2003 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.