MORTGAGE PROTECTION LIFE INSURANCE.
In General.--Chapter 19 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER V--SUPPLEMENTAL MORTGAGE PROTECTION LIFE INSURANCE FOR CERTAIN VETERANS ``Sec.
Purchase of insurance ``(a) The Secretary may, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5), purchase from one or more life insurance companies a policy or policies of mortgage protection life insurance on a group basis to provide the benefits specified in this subchapter.
A veteran (other than a veteran eligible for insurance under section 2106 of this title) who establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the veteran is unable to obtain commercial life insurance because of a service-connected disability shall, upon application made in such form as the Secretary shall prescribe, be granted insurance under this subchapter.
Amount of insurance ``(a) The initial amount of insurance provided to a veteran under this subchapter may not exceed the lowest of the following amounts: ``(1) $40,000.
The amount of the loan outstanding on a dwelling (and necessary land therefor) owned or occupied by the veteran as a home on the date insurance under this subchapter is placed in effect.
In the case of a veteran who purchases or constructs a dwelling (including necessary land therefor) to be occupied by the veteran as a home on or after the effective date of this section, the amount of the original loan on that dwelling (and land).
The amount of such insurance shall be reduced according to the amortization schedule of the loan and at no time shall exceed the amount of the outstanding loan with interest.
Premiums ``(a) The premiums charged a veteran for insurance under this subchapter shall be paid at such times and in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Those premiums shall be based on such mortality data as the Secretary considers appropriate to cover only the mortality cost of insuring veterans with service-connected disabilities who are unable to obtain commercial mortgage protection life insurance.
The Secretary shall deduct the premiums charged a veteran for insurance under this subchapter from any compensation or other cash benefits payable to the veteran by the Secretary and shall pay such premiums to the insurer or insurers for such insurance.
A veteran insured under this subchapter who is not eligible for cash benefits from the Secretary may pay the amount of such premiums directly to the insurer or insurers.
Payment of insurance ``An amount of insurance in force under this subchapter on the date of death of a veteran insured under this subchapter shall be paid only to the holder of the mortgage loan, the payment of which such insurance was granted, for credit on the loan indebtedness, and the liability of the insurer under such insurance shall be satisfied when such payment is made.
If the Secretary is the holder of the mortgage loan, the insurance proceeds shall be credited to the loan indebtedness and, as appropriate, deposited in the direct loan or loan guaranty revolving fund established by section 3723 or 3724 of this title, respectively.
Insurance policy provisions ``(a) Each policy purchased under section 1991 of this title shall provide, in terms approved by the Secretary, for the following: ``(1) Reinsurance, to the extent and in a manner to be determined by the Secretary to be in the best interest of the veterans or the Government, with such other insurers which meet qualifying criteria established by the Secretary as may elect to participate in such reinsurance.
That at any time the Secretary determines such action to be in the best interest of veterans or the Government, the Secretary may (A) discontinue the entire policy, or (B) at the Secretary's option, exclude from coverage under the policy loans made after a date fixed by the Secretary for that purpose.
Any insurance previously issued to a veteran under such policy may not be canceled by the insurer solely because of termination of the policy by the Secretary with respect to new loans.
If the entire policy is discontinued, the Secretary shall have the right to require the transfer, to the extent and in a manner to be determined by the Secretary, to any new company or companies with which the Secretary has negotiated a new policy or policies, the amounts, as determined by the existing insurer or insurers with the concurrence of the Secretary, of any policy or contingency reserves with respect to insurance previously in force.
Issuance to each veteran insured under this subchapter of a uniform type of certificate setting forth the benefits to which the veteran is entitled under the insurance.
Any other provisions which are reasonably necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.
(1) Any such policy shall also provide that the insurer under the policy shall provide to the Secretary an accounting not later than 90 days after the end of each policy year which shall set forth, in a form approved by the Secretary, the following: ``(A) The amount of premiums paid by veterans accrued under the contract or agreement from its date of issue to the end of such contract year.
The total of all mortality and other claim charges incurred for that period.
The amount of the insurer's expense and risk charges, if any, for that period.
If the amount under paragraph (1)(A) is greater than the sum of the amounts under paragraph (1)(B) and (1)(C), the amount of the difference shall be held by the insurer as a contingency reserve to be used by that insurer for charges under the contract or agreement only.
The contingency reserve shall bear interest at a rate to be determined in advance of each contract year by the insurer, which rate shall be approved by the Secretary if consistent with the rates generally used by the insurer for similar funds held under other plans of group life insurance.
If the Secretary determines that such contingency reserve has attained an amount estimated by the Secretary to make satisfactory provision for adverse fluctuations in future charges under the contract, the Secretary shall require the insurer to adjust the premium rates and contributions so as to prevent any further substantial accretions to the contingency reserve.
If the contract or agreement is discontinued and if after all charges have been made there is any positive balance remaining in the contingency reserve, the insurer shall pay such balance to the Secretary.
Any such payment shall be credited to the appropriation `Compensation and Pensions, Department of Veterans Affairs,'.
The insurer shall be allowed to make any such payment in equal monthly installments over a period of not more than two years.
With respect to insurance contracted for under this subchapter, the Secretary may adopt such regulations relating to eligibility of the veteran for insurance, the maximum amount of insurance, the maximum duration of insurance, and other pertinent factors not specifically provided for in this subchapter, as in the Secretary's judgment are in the best interest of veterans or the Government.
Insurance contracted for under this subchapter shall take effect as to any veteran on a date determined by the Secretary.
The amount of the insurance at any time shall be the amount necessary to pay the mortgage indebtedness in full, except as otherwise limited by the policy.
Termination of insurance ``(a) Insurance contracted for under this subchapter shall terminate upon whichever of the following first occurs: ``(1) Satisfaction of the veteran's indebtedness under the loan upon which the insurance is based.
The veteran's 70th birthday.
Termination of the veteran's ownership of the property securing the loan.
Discontinuance of payment of premiums by the veteran.
Discontinuance of the entire contract or agreement.
Termination of insurance under this subchapter shall not affect the guaranty or insurance of the loan by the Secretary under any other provision of this chapter.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Subchapter V--Supplemental Mortgage Protection Life Insurance for Certain Veterans ``Sec.