This Act may be cited as the ``Quality Teacher Recruitment and Retention Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Over the next 10 years, a large percentage of teachers will retire, leaving American classrooms, particularly urban and rural classrooms, facing a serious teacher shortage.
The Nation will need 2,000,000 new teachers over the next 10 years.
Unfortunately, in the past this need has been met by admitting some unqualified teachers to the classroom.
There is also a chronic shortage of fully certified special education teachers, averaging about 27,000 per year.
While the demand is ever present, institutes of higher education are graduating fewer teachers qualified in special education.
Moreover, the burdensome paperwork and legal requirements are factors which lead special education teachers to leave the profession.
More special education teachers move into the general education realm than vice versa.
High quality teachers are the first vital step in ensuring students receive a high quality education.
Potentially valuable teacher candidates are often lured into different careers by higher compensation.
High-quality prospective teachers need to be identified and recruited by presenting to them a career that is respected by their peers, is financially and intellectually rewarding, and contains sufficient opportunities for advancement.
Teacher loan forgiveness gives high-poverty schools an effective incentive for recruiting and retaining much-needed high quality teachers.
Loan forgiveness for high-need teachers, including special education teachers, can be a critical link in increasing the supply of these essential educators.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage individuals to enter and continue in the teaching profession in order to ensure that high quality teachers are recruited and retained in areas where they are most needed so students attending school in such areas receive a quality education.
EXPANDED LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FOR TEACHERS.
Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall carry out a program of assuming the obligation to repay, pursuant to subsection (c), a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 or part D of such title (excluding loans made under sections 428B and 428C of such Act or comparable loans made under part D of such title) for any borrower who-- (A) is a new teacher; (B)(i) is employed, for 3 consecutive complete school years, as a full-time teacher in a school that qualifies under section 465(a)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087ee(a)(2)(A)) for loan cancellation for a recipient of a loan under part E of title IV of such Act who teaches in such schools; or (ii) is employed, for 3 consecutive complete school years, as a full-time special education teacher, or as a full-time teacher of special needs children; (C) satisfies the requirements of subsection (d); and (D) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower seeks forgiveness.
Award basis; priority.-- (A) Award basis.--Subject to subparagraph (B), loan repayment under this section shall be on a first-come, first-serve basis and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority in providing loan repayment under this section for a fiscal year to student borrowers who received loan repayment under this section for the preceding fiscal year.
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
Loan Repayment.-- (1) Eligible amount.--The amount the Secretary may repay on behalf of any individual under this section shall not exceed-- (A) the sum of the principal amounts outstanding (not to exceed $5,000) of the individual's qualifying loans at the end of 3 consecutive complete school years of service described in subsection (a)(1)(B); (B) an additional portion of such sum (not to exceed $7,500) at the end of each of the next 2 consecutive complete school years of such service; and (C) a total of not more than $20,000.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the refunding of any repayment of a loan made under part B or D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Interest.--If a portion of a loan is repaid by the Secretary under this section for any year, the proportionate amount of interest on such loan which accrues for such year shall be repaid by the Secretary.
Repayment to Eligible Lenders.--The Secretary shall pay to each eligible lender or holder for each fiscal year an amount equal to the aggregate amount of loans which are subject to repayment pursuant to this section for such year.
Application for Repayment.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible individual desiring loan repayment under this section shall submit a complete and accurate application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Years of service.--An eligible individual may apply for loan repayment under this section after completing the required number of years of qualifying employment.
Fully qualified teachers in public elementary or secondary schools.--An application for loan repayment under this section shall include such information as is necessary to demonstrate that the applicant-- (A) if teaching in a public elementary, middle, or secondary school (other than as a teacher in a public charter school), has obtained State certification as a teacher (including certification obtained through alternative routes to certification) or passed the State teacher licensing exam and holds a license to teach in such State; and (B) if teaching in-- (i) a public elementary school, holds a bachelor's degree and demonstrates knowledge and teaching skills in each of the subject areas in which he or she provides instruction; or (ii) a public middle or secondary school, holds a bachelor's degree and demonstrates a high level of competency in all subject areas in which he or she teaches through-- (I) a high level of performance on a rigorous State or local academic subject areas test; or (II) completion of an academic major in each of the subject areas in which he or she provides instruction.
Teachers in nonprofit private elementary or secondary schools or charter schools.--In the case of an applicant who is teaching in a nonprofit private elementary or secondary school, or in a public charter school, an application for loan repayment under this section shall include such information as is necessary to demonstrate that the applicant has knowledge and teaching skills in each of the subject areas in which he or she provides instruction, as certified by the chief administrative officer of the school.
Treatment of Consolidation Loans.--A loan amount for a consolidation loan made under section 428C of the Higher Education Act of 1965, or a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan made under part D of title IV of such Act, may be a qualified loan amount for the purpose of this section only to the extent that such loan amount was used by a borrower who otherwise meets the requirements of this section to repay-- (1) a loan made under section 428 or 428H of such Act; or (2) a Federal Direct Stafford Loan, or a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, made under part D of title IV of such Act.
Additional Eligibility Provisions.-- (1) Continued eligibility.--Any teacher who performs service in a school that-- (A) meets the requirements of subsection (a)(1)(B) in any year during such service; and (B) in a subsequent year fails to meet the requirements of such subsection, may continue to teach in such school and shall be eligible for loan forgiveness pursuant to subsection (a).
Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes).
Definition of new teacher.--The term ``new teacher'' means an individual who has not previously been employed as a teacher in an elementary or secondary school prior to August 1, 2001, excluding employment while engaged in student teaching service or comparable activity that is part of a preservice education program.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2002 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.