This Act may be cited as the ``United Nations Security Council Sanctions Enforcement Act''.
COUNTRIES VIOLATING UNITED NATIONS SANCTIONS.
Determination.-- (1) Imposition of sanctions.--If the President determines that the government of any foreign country is materially violating United Nations sanctions, the President shall impose the sanctions described in subsection (b) with respect to that country so long as such violation continues, except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) and subsection (d).
Publication of determination.--Any determination under this subsection shall be published in the Federal Register.
Sanctions.--The sanctions to be imposed with respect to a country pursuant to subsection (a) are as follows: (1) Foreign assistance.--The United States Government shall terminate assistance to that country under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, except for assistance involving the provision of food and other humanitarian assistance.
Military assistance.--The United States Government shall terminate all foreign military financing for that country under the Arms Export Control Act.
Arms sales.--The United States Government shall terminate-- (A) sales to that country under the Arms Export Control Act of any defense article, defense service, or design and construction service, and (B) licenses for the export to that country of any item on the United States Munitions List.
Multilateral assistance.--The United States Government shall oppose the extension by any international financial institution of any loan or other financial or technical assistance to that country, except for assistance directed specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of the people of that country.
Financial assistance.--The United States Government shall deny to that country any credit, credit guarantee, or other financial assistance by any department, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, except that this paragraph does not apply to-- (A) food or other humanitarian assistance, or (B) any transaction subject to the reporting requirements of title V of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to congressional oversight of intelligence activities).
Commercial credit.--The United States Government shall prohibit any United States depository institution (as defined in section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act) from making any loan or providing any credit to the government of that country, except for loans or credits for the purpose of purchasing food or other humanitarian items.
Exports.--The United States Government shall prohibit exports to that country of such goods and technology as the President may specify, except that-- (A) section 6(g) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 applies with respect to export controls pursuant to this paragraph, and (B) any prohibition under this paragraph shall not apply with respect to any transaction subject to the reporting requirements of title V of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to congressional oversight of intelligence activities).
Imports.--The United States Government shall prohibit the entry into the customs territory of the United States of such articles as the President may specify that are growth, product, or manufacture of that country.
Consultation With and Actions by Foreign Government.-- (1) Consultations.--If the President makes a determination described in subsection (a) with respect to the government of a foreign country, the Congress urges the President to initiate consultations immediately with that government to encourage it to comply with the United Nations sanctions with respect to which that determination was made.
Actions by a foreign government.--In order to pursue such consultations, the President may delay imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section for up to 30 days.
Following these consultations, the President shall impose sanctions unless the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government has taken specific and effective actions to comply with the United Nations sanctions with respect to which the President made the determination under subsection (a).
If the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government is in the process of taking such actions, the President may delay the imposition of sanctions for up to an additional 30 days.
Report to congress.--Not later than 30 days after making a determination with respect to the government of a foreign country under subsection (a), the President shall submit to the Congress a report on the status of consultations pursuant to this subsection and on the basis for any determination under paragraph (2) of this subsection that such government has taken specific corrective actions.
Waiver.--A sanction which is required to be imposed against a country under subsection (b) shall not apply if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that the application of that sanction against such country would have a serious adverse effect on vital United States interests.
The President shall transmit with such certification a statement setting forth the specific reasons for the President's determination.
PERSONS VIOLATING UNITED NATIONS SANCTIONS.
Determination.-- (1) Imposition of sanctions.--If the President determines that a person is materially violating United Nations sanctions, the President shall impose the sanctions described in subsection (c) on each sanctioned person for a period of 2 years, except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(2) and subsection (e).
Publication of determination.--Any determination under this subsection shall be published in the Federal Register.
Advisory Opinions.--Upon the request of any person, the President may issue a written advisory opinion to that person as to whether a proposed activity by that person would subject that person to sanctions under this section.
Any person who relies in good faith on such an advisory opinion which states that the proposed activity would not subject a person to such sanctions, and any person who thereafter engages in such activity, shall not be made subject to such sanctions solely on account of such activity.
Sanctions.-- (1) In general.--The sanctions to be imposed pursuant to subsection (a) are as follows: (A) The United States Government shall not procure, or enter into any contract for the procurement of, any goods or services from a sanctioned person.
The United States Government shall not issue any license for any export by or to a sanctioned person.
The United States Government shall prohibit the entry into the customs territory of the United States of all articles that are growth, product, or manufacture of a sanctioned person.
Exceptions.--The President shall not be required to apply or maintain sanctions under this section with respect to the following: (A) Procurement or importation of defense articles or defense services-- (i) if the procurement or importation is under an existing contract or subcontract, including the exercise of options for production quantities to satisfy requirements essential to the national security of the United States; (ii) if the President determines that the sanctioned person is a sole source supplier of such articles or services, that such articles or services are essential, and that alternative sources are not readily or reasonably available; or (iii) if the President determines that such articles or services are essential to the national security under defense coproduction agreements.
Procurement or importation of spare parts or component parts (but not finished products) which are essential to United States products or production.
Procurement of routine servicing and maintenance of products, to the extent that alternative sources are not readily or reasonably available.
Procurement of, or importation of articles containing, information and technology essential to United States products or production.
Procurement, exports, or imports of products or services provided under contracts entered into before the date on which the President's determination is published in the Federal Register pursuant to subsection (a)(2).
Procurement, exports, or imports of food or other humanitarian items.
Consultation With and Actions by Foreign Government of Jurisdiction.-- (1) Consultations.--If the President makes a determination described in subsection (a) with respect to a foreign person, the Congress urges the President to initiate consultations immediately with the government with primary jurisdiction over that foreign person with respect to the imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section.
Actions by government of jurisdiction.--In order to pursue such consultations with that government, the President may delay imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section for up to 90 days.
Following these consultations, the President shall impose sanctions unless the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government has taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the foreign person in the violations described in subsection (a).
If the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government is in the process of taking such actions, the President may delay the imposition of sanctions for up to an additional 90 days.
Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days after making a determination under subsection (a), the President shall submit to the Congress a report on the status of consultations with the appropriate government under this subsection and on the basis for any determination under paragraph (2) of this subsection that such government has taken specific corrective actions.
Waiver.-- (1) Criterion for waiver.--After the end of the 12-month period beginning on the date on which a sanction is imposed on a sanctioned person under this section, the President may waive the application of that sanction with respect to that person if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that the continued imposition of that sanction with respect to that person would have a serious adverse effect on vital United States interests.
Notification of and report to congress.--If the President decides to exercise the waiver authority provided in paragraph (1), the President shall so notify the Congress not less than 30 days before the waiver takes effect.
Such notification shall include a report fully articulating the rationale and circumstances which led the President to exercise the waiver authority.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Sanctioned person.--The term ``sanctioned person'' means-- (A) the person with respect to which the President makes the determination described in section 3(a); (B) any successor entity to that person; (C) any person that is a parent or subsidiary of that person if that parent or subsidiary materially and with requisite knowledge assisted in the activities which were the basis of that determination; and (D) any person that is an affiliate of that person if that affiliate materially and with requisite knowledge assisted in the activities which were the basis of that determination and if that affiliate is controlled in fact by that person.
United nations sanctions.--The term ``United Nations sanctions'' means measures that members of the United Nations have been called upon to apply by the United Nations Security Council, acting under article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations, in order to enforce decisions of the Security Council.
Violating united nations sanctions.--The term ``violating United Nations sanctions''-- (A) in the case of the government of a foreign country, means failing to apply measures called for by the United Nations Security Council; and (B) in the case of person, means engaging in activities that are prohibited under United Nations sanctions, without regard to whether the foreign government with primary jurisdiction over those activities has applied the measures called for by the United Nations Security Council.
This Act applies with respect to violations of United Nations sanctions that occur on or after the date of enactment of this Act.