This Act may be cited as the ``National Forest Fire Fuels Reduction Act''.
ACTIONS TO ADDRESS FIRE HAZARDS DUE TO INSECT AND DISEASE INFESTATION AND TREE OVERCROWDING IN NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Forest health conditions within National Forest System lands are deteriorating and immediate action to cut timber on these lands is in the public interest.
Pending litigation prevents timely action to reduce the risk of wildfire in National Forest System lands.
Existing administrative and legal processes cannot address the fire danger in time to enable the Secretary of Agriculture to take action to reduce the danger.
Immediate action to address the fire danger in an environmentally responsive manner is supported by the States and local governments, local industry users, and some environmental groups.
The Forest Service and State and local fire officials are encouraged to take actions as necessary to create a defensible fuel zone within State owned lands adjacent to National Forest System lands.
Fire and Insect Risk Reduction in Existing Timber Sale Analysis Areas.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary is authorized to cut additional timber within or outside the existing cutting units for National Forest System timber sales and within the analysis areas for these sales as is necessary to reduce insect and disease infestation or fire hazard.
Criteria.--In implementing additional timber harvests within the timber sale analysis areas referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall use, in order of priority, the following criteria: (A) Areas within \1/4\ mile of private properties where private property owners have taken or are taking actions to cut timber on their lands.
Stands that are a fire hazard or insect and disease infested, and are near private lands or in proximity to communities.
Areas that have the highest intensity or concentration of insect or disease infestation that will move to other areas.
Stands that are a fire hazard or insect and disease infested, and are near areas of high resource value where retaining green trees is important, such as wildlife habitats, sensitive landscapes, forest growth, recreation areas, and developments.
Stands that are a high fire hazard or insect and disease infested, and are within skidding distance of existing roads.
Concentrations of insect or disease infested trees or areas that are high fire hazards due to accumulated forest debris.
Stands with the highest density that are most susceptible to insect or disease attack and are in close proximity to infested trees.
Use of Forest Fire Fuels Reduction Sale Funds.--To conduct timber sales under this section, the Secretary may use forest timber sale funds otherwise available to the Secretary.
Sales in Preparation.-- Any timber sale in preparation on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
Use of Available Authorities.--The Secretary shall make use of all available authority, including the employment of private contractors and the use of expedited fire contracting procedures, to prepare and advertise timber sales under this section.
Exemptions.--The preparation, solicitation, and award of forest fire fuels reduction timber sales shall be exempt from the requirements of the Competition in Contracting Act (41 United States Code 253 et sequentes) and the implementing regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulation issued pursuant to section 25(c) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 421(c)) and any departmental acquisition regulations and the notice and publication requirements in section 18 of such Act (41 United States Code 416) and 8(e) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(e)) and the implementing regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulations and any departmental acquisition regulations.
Cost Considerations.--Forest fire fuels reduction timber sales undertaken pursuant to this section shall not be precluded because the costs of such activities are likely to exceed the revenues derived from such activities.
Effect of Forest Fire Fuels Reduction Timber Sales.--The Secretary shall not substitute forest fires fuels reduction timber sales conducted for planned non-forest fire fuels reduction timber sales.
Reforestation of Forest Fire Fuels Reduction Timber Sale Parcels.--The Secretary shall plan and implement reforestation of each parcel of land harvested under a forest fire fuels reduction timber sale conducted as expeditiously as possible after completion of the harvest on the parcel, but in no case later than any applicable restocking period required by law or regulation.
Effect on Judicial Decisions.--The Secretary may conduct forest fire fuels reduction timber sales notwithstanding any decision, restraining order, or injunction issued by a United States court before the date of the enactment of this section.
Direction To Complete Timber Sales on Lands.--Notwithstanding any other law (including a law under the authority of which any judicial order may be outstanding on or after the date of enactment of this Act), the Secretary shall expeditiously prepare, offer, and award timber sale contracts on Federal lands described in the ``Record of Decision for Amendments to Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management Planning Documents Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl'', signed by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture on April 13, 1994.
The Secretary may conduct timber sales under this subsection notwithstanding any decision, restraining order, or injunction issued by a United States court before the date of the enactment of this section.
The issuance of any regulation pursuant to section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533(d)) to ease or reduce restrictions on non-Federal lands within the range of the northern spotted owl shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)(C)), given the analysis included in the Final Supplemental Impact Statement on the Management of the Habitat for Late Succession and Old Growth Forest Related Species Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl, prepared by the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior in 1994, which is, or may be, incorporated by reference in the administrative record of any such regulation.
The issuance of any such regulation pursuant to section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1533(d)) shall not require the preparation of an environmental impact statement under section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)(C)).
Administrative Review.--Forest fire fuels reduction timber sales and any decision of the Secretary concerned in connection with such sales, shall not be subject to administrative review.
Judicial Review.-- (1) Place and time of filing.--A forest fire fuels reduction timber sale to be conducted, and a timber sale shall be subject to judicial review only in the United States district court for the district in which the affected Federal lands are located.
Any challenge to such sale must be filed in such district court within 15 days after the date of initial advertisement of the challenged sale.
The Secretary may not agree to, and a court may not grant, a waiver of the requirements of this paragraph.
Effect of filing on agency action.--For 45 days after the date of the filing of a challenge to a forest fire fuels reduction timber sale, the Secretary shall take no action to award the challenged sale.
Prohibition on restraining orders, preliminary in- junctions, and relief pending review.--No restraining order, preliminary injunction, or injunction pending appeal shall be issued by any court of the United States with respect to any decision to prepare, advertise, offer, award, or operate a forest fire fuels reduction timber sale or any decision to prepare, advertise, offer, award, or operate a timber sale pursuant to this section.
Section 705 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to any challenge to such a sale.
Standard of review.--The courts shall have authority to enjoin permanently, order modification of, or void an individual forest fire fuels reduction timber sale if it is determined by a review of the record that the decision to prepare, advertise, offer, award, or operate such sale was arbitrary and capricious or otherwise not in accordance with applicable law (other than those laws specified in subsection (f) or (p)).
Time for decision.--Civil actions filed under this subsection shall be assigned for hearing at the earliest possible date.
The court shall render its final decision relative to any challenge within 45 days from the date such challenge is brought, unless the court determines that a longer period of time is required to satisfy the requirement of the United States Constitution.
In order to reach a decision within 45 days, the district court may assign all or part of any such case or cases to one or more Special Masters, for prompt review and recommendations to the court.
Procedures.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the court may set rules governing the procedures of any proceeding brought under this subsection which set page limits on briefs and time limits on filing briefs and motions and other actions which are shorter than the limits specified in the Federal rules of civil or appellate procedure.
Appeal.--Any appeal from the final decision of a district court in an action brought pursuant to this subsection shall be filed not later than 30 days after the date of decision.
Exclusion of Certain Federal Lands.-- (1) Exclusion.--The Secretary may not select, authorize, or undertake any forest fire fuels reduction timber sale on any excluded lands described in paragraph (2).
Description of excluded lands.--The lands referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows: (A) Any area on Federal lands included in the National Wilderness Preservation System.
Any roadless area on Federal lands recommended by the Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management for wilderness designation in its most recent land management plan in effect as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Any area on Federal lands on which timber harvesting for any purpose is prohibited by statute.
Rule Making.--The Secretary is not required to issue formal rules under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, to implement this section or carry out the authorities provided by this section.
Effect on Other Laws.--The documents and procedures required by this section for the preparation, advertisement, offering, awarding, and operation of any forest fire fuels reduction timber sale shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of the following applicable Federal laws (and regulations implementing such laws): (1) The Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1600 et sequentes).
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976(43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et seq.).
The National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 United States Code 472a et sequentes).
The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 (16 United States Code 528 et sequentes).
Any compact, executive agreement, convention, treaty, and international agreement, and implementing legislation related thereto.
Threatened or Endangered Species.--No sale unit shall be released or completed under this subsection if any threatened or endangered bird species is known to be nesting within the acreage that is the subject of the sale unit.
Roadless Character.--The actions authorized by this section shall not affect the determination of any area's wilderness capability, wilderness suitability, or roadless character.
Reporting.--The Secretary shall report to Congress on the implementation of this section on or by November 30, 2002 and every 6 months thereafter.