This Act may be cited as the ``The Incentives for Nuclear Nonproliferation in India and China Act of 1999''.
CONDITIONS FOR SUSPENSION OF SANCTIONS.
Suspension of Sanctions With Respect to China.-- (1) Authority to suspend sanctions.--Subject to section 3 of this Act, in addition to the requirements set forth in section 902(a) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991 (22 United States Code 2151 note), for lifting the sanctions imposed on the People's Republic of China under that section, the President may suspend, for periods of 1 year each, any of the sanctions imposed under that section only if that country has met the requirements of paragraph (2) and the President certifies to the Congress that the People's Republic of China is making progress in achieving the goals set forth in paragraph (3).
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: (A) Becoming a participant in, and controlling missile equipment and technology in accordance with the criteria and standards set forth in, the Missile Technology Control Regime.
Refraining from exporting any nuclear weapons or technology or any biological or chemical weapons.
Becoming a member of the Nuclear Suppliers' Group.
Goals.--The goals referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: (A) Providing for comprehensive cultural and educational exchange between among India and the People's Republic of China.
Developing and institutionalizing a framework for talks to end disputes between India and the People's Republic of China.
Reinforcing actions to increase trade relations between India and the People's Republic of China.
Suspension of Sanctions With Respect to India.-- (1) Authority to suspend sanctions.--The President may suspend, for periods of 1 year each, any of the sanctions imposed under section 102(b) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2799-1(b)(A) on India if India has met the requirements of paragraph (2) and the President certifies to the Congress that India is making progress in achieving the goals set forth in paragraph (3).
The authority under this paragraph to suspend sanctions shall take effect upon the expiration of the suspension by the President, under section 902 of the India- Pakistan Relief Act of 1998, of sanctions with respect to India.
Requirements.--The requirements referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: (A) Signing the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Reducing the development of nuclear weapons by-- (i) freezing stockpiles of nuclear weapons; (ii) halting production of fissile material (highly enriched uranium and plutonium processed for use in weapons) and participating in talks to conclude the Fissile Material Cut- off Treaty; and (iii) agreeing not to place nuclear warheads and weapons of mass destruction on missile systems, and agreeing not to have nuclear warheads on alert status or deploy or test ballistic missiles.
Refraining from exporting any nuclear weapons or technology.
Becoming a member of the Nuclear Suppliers' Group.
Goals.--The goals referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: (A) Signing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation on Nuclear Weapons.
Cooperating fully with the United States on activities to fight international terrorism and narcotics trafficking.
Providing for comprehensive cultural and educational exchange between India and the People's Republic of China.
Developing and institutionalizing a framework for talks to end disputes between India and the People's Republic of China.
Reinforcing actions to increase trade relations between India and the People's Republic of China.
Additional Incentives.--In addition to suspending sanctions under subsection (a), the President may take the following actions with respect to India if that country has met the requirements of subsection (b)(2): (1) Taking actions to encourage United States businesses to increase investment in that country as long as economic reforms undertaken in that country continue, including-- (A) encouraging the Export-Import Bank of the United States to offer financing at low interest rates to United States businesses seeking to make investments in that country; (B) providing political risk insurance through the Overseas Private Investment Corporation for United States businesses seeking to invest in that country; and (C) making assistance available through the Trade and Development Agency to United States businesses seeking to invest in that country.
Supporting financial assistance to that country by international financial institutions.
Authorizing the transfer of technology to that country for civilian uses that will provide United States businesses access to markets in India to provide the necessary knowledge, processes, materials, and equipment to further economic development in that country.
Nothing in this paragraph authorizes the transfer of technology that would assist in the development of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons, or the transfer of missile or other military technology that would contribute to regional instability.
REMOVAL OF NATIONAL INTEREST WAIVER.
Upon the enactment of this Act, the President may not waive or terminate any of the sanctions imposed on the People's Republic of China under section 902(a) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991 on the basis of the national interest of the United States as set forth in section 902(b)(2) of that Act.
With Respect to China.--If the President certifies to the Congress that the People's Republic of China has met the requirements of section 2(a)(2) and has achieved the goals set forth in section 2(a)(3), then the President may terminate the sanctions imposed on that country under section 902(a) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, fiscal Years 1990 and 1991.
With Respect to India.--If the President certifies to the Congress that India has signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation on Nuclear Weapons, has met the rquirements of section 2(b)(2), and has achieved the goals set forth in section 2(b)(3), then the President may terminate the sanctions imposed on that country under section 102(b) of the Arms Export Control Act.
Reinstatement of Sanctions.--If at any time after sanctions are suspended or terminated under this Act with respect to People's Republic of China or India, that country ceases to meet the criteria under this Act for such suspension or termination, then the President shall reinstate the sanctions waived or terminated, as the case may be, with respect to that country.