PERMANENT EXTENSION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.
In General.--Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by striking subsection (h).
Conforming Amendment.--Section 45C(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after June 30, 1998.
MODIFICATIONS OF CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED RESEARCH EXPENSES.
Fixed-Base Percentage.--Subparagraph (A) of section 41(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining fixed-base percentage) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the fixed-base percentage is the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the taxpayer for taxable years beginning in the base period is of the aggregate gross receipts of the taxpayer for such taxable years.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the base period for any taxable year is any period of 4 consecutive taxable years elected by the taxpayer from the 10 immediately preceding taxable years.''
Start-Up Companies.-- (1) Fixed-base percentage.-- (A) In general.--Clause (i) of section 41(c)(3)(B) of such Code (relating to start-up companies) is amended to read as follows: ``(i) Taxpayers to which subparagraph applies.--The fixed-base percentage shall be determined under this subparagraph if the taxpayer did not have both gross receipts and qualified research expenses in each of the 10 taxable years described in subparagraph (A).''
Maximum percentage not to apply.--Section 41(c)(3)(C) of such Code (relating to maximum fixed- base percentage) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``This subparagraph shall not apply to a taxpayer to which subparagraph (B) applies.''
Conforming amendments.--Section 41(c)(3)(B)(ii) of such Code is amended-- (i) by striking ``1st 5 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993'' and inserting ``1st 5 taxable years in the 10-year period described in subparagraph (A)'', and (ii) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subclause (V), by striking ``, and'' at the end of subclause (VI), and by striking subclause (VII).
Repeal of minimum base amount for start-up companies.--Section 41(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to minimum base amount) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``This paragraph shall not apply to a taxpayer to which paragraph (3)(B) applies.''
Repeal of Limitation on Contract Research Expenses.--Section 41(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining contract research expenses) is amended-- (1) by striking ``65 percent of'' in subparagraph (A), and (2) by striking subparagraph (C).
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.
Transition rule.--In the case of a taxpayer's 1st 5 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998, the taxpayer may elect to have section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 applied without regard to the amendments made by subsections (a) and (b).
MODIFICATIONS OF BASIC RESEARCH CREDIT.
Expansion of Credit to Research Done With National Laboratories and Federal Research Centers.--Section 41(e)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) National laboratories and research centers.-- Any organization which is-- ``(i) a national laboratory specified by the Secretary of Energy as being under contract with the Department of Energy, or ``(ii) a federally funded research and development center (within the meaning of section 2367 of title 10, United States Code).''
Basic Research.--Section 41(e)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Specific commercial objective.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), research shall not be treated as having a specific commercial objective if-- ``(i) all results of such research are to be published in such a manner as to be available to the general public prior to their use for a commercial purpose, or ``(ii) such research is done for a consortium of domestic corporations which represent substantially all of the domestic corporations conducting business within the sector to which the research relates.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.