This Act may be referred to as the ``Sweetgrass Hills Protection Act of 1995''.
In General.--For the purpose of conserving, protecting, and enhancing the exceptional scenic, wildlife, water quality, and cultural characteristics of lands along the Sweetgrass Hills in north central Montana, there is hereby established the Sweetgrass Hills Natural Area within the Bureau of Land Management's Sweetgrass Hills Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC) as identified in the West HiLine Resource Management Plan in the State of Montana (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``natural area'').
Area Included.--The natural area shall consist of the lands, waters, and interests therein within the area generally depicted on the map entitled ``Boundary Map, .
'', numbered ________, and Dated __________.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may from time to time make minor revisions in the boundary of the natural area to promote management effectiveness and efficiency in the furtherance of this Act.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the natural area in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the Bureau of Land Management.
In the administration of such natural area, the Secretary may utilize such statutory authority as may be available to him for the conservation of wildlife, natural and cultural resources, and water quality as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Hunting and Fishing.--The Secretary shall permit hunting and fishing on lands and waters within the natural area in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.
The Secretary is directed to acquire lands or interests in lands within the boundaries of the natural area that are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act by donation, purchase with donation or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Lands within the boundaries of the natural area owned by the State of Montana or any political subdivision thereof may only be acquired by donation or exchange.
Withdrawals.--After the enactment of this Act: (1) Lands within the natural area shall not be open to location of mining claims under the mining laws of the United States.
The Secretary shall not issue any lease under the mineral leasing or geothermal leasing laws of the United States for lands within the natural area.
Lands within the natural area shall not be available for disposal of mineral materials under the Act of July 31, 1947, commonly known as the Materials Act of 1947 (30 United States Code 601 and following).
Limitation on Patent Issuance.--(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no patents shall be issued after July 19, 1995, for any location or claim made in the natural area under the mining laws of the United States.
Notwithstanding any statute of limitations or similar restriction otherwise applicable, any party claiming to have been deprived of any property right enactment of paragraph (1) may file in the United States Claims Court a claim against the United States within one year after the date of enactment of this Act seeking compensation for such property right.
The United States Claims Court shall have jurisdiction to render judgement on such claim in accordance with section 1491 of title 28, United States Code.
Prohibition.--No Federal lands may be used in connection with any mining or mining related activities within the Natural Area.
Reclamation.--No mining or mining related activities involving any surface disturbance of lands or waters within such area, including disturbances through subsistence, shall be permitted except in accordance with requirements imposed by the Secretary, including requirements for reasonable reclamation of disturbed lands to a visual and hydrological condition as close as practicable to their premining condition.
Mining Claim Validity Review.--The Secretary shall undertake and complete within three years after the enactment of this Act an expedited program to examine all unpatented mining claims, including those for which a patent application has been filed, within the natural area.
Upon determination by the Secretary that the elements of contest are present, the Secretary shall immediately determine the validity of such claims.
If a claim is determined to be invalid, the Secretary shall declare the claim null and void.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.