This Act may be cited as the ``Debt Emancipation to Enable Democracies (DEED) Act of 1999''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have classified 40 countries as heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC).
According to the Department of the Treasury, as of August 1998, these countries owe the United States a total of $6,752,100,000 in concessional, nonconcessional, and guarantee debt.
83 percent of these countries are classified by the United Nations as being in its lowest category of human development based on life expectancy, literacy, and per capita national income.
Since the early 1980's, these poor countries have had increasing difficulty servicing their debt, resulting in the total amount of money being owed by these countries to external creditors to increasing from an average of $122,000,000,000 for the 1983-1985 period to $221,000,000,000 for the 1993-1995 period.
The debt overhang faced by these countries blocks needed spending for development and discourages productive investment.
Efforts to promote good governance, accountability, transparency, and active participation of civil society in public decision making and discourage corruption are undermined by diversion of resources to debt service and by the micromanagement of economic policy by external actors which is currently part of debt negotiations.
The Jubilee 2000 campaign, an international movement in over 40 countries supported by many prominent religious leaders such as Pope John Paul II, is calling for the cancellation of the external debts of the poorest countries.
In this Act, the term ``eligible country'' means a heavily indebted poor country, as determined by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund for purposes of the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative, and Haiti.
CANCELLATION OF BILATERAL DEBT OWED TO THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT BY HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES.
Cancellation of Debt.-- (1) In general.--The President shall cancel all amounts owed to the United States (or any agency of the United States) by any eligible country as a result of concessional and nonconcessional loans made, guarantees issued, or credits extended under any provision of law.
Requirement to promote democracy.--Paragraph (1) shall apply only to a country the government of which-- (A) was chosen by and permits free and fair elections; (B) promotes civilian control of the military and security forces and has civilian institutions controlling the policy, operation, and spending of all law enforcement and security institutions, as well as the armed forces; (C) promotes the rule of law, equality before the law, and respect for individual and minority rights, including freedom to speak, publish, associate, and organize; and (D) promotes the strengthening of political, legislative, and civil institutions of democracy, as well as autonomous institutions to monitor the conduct of public officials and to combat corruption.
Additional Requirements.-- (1) Cancellation of debt not considered to be assistance.-- A debt cancellation under this section shall not be considered to be assistance for purposes of any provision of law limiting assistance to a country.
Inapplicability of certain prohibitions relating to cancellation of debt.--Debt may be cancelled under this section, notwithstanding section 620(r) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2370(r)).
CONDITIONAL BAN ON PROVIDING APPROPRIATED FUNDS TO THE IMF UNTIL DEBT OWED TO THE IMF BY HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES HAS BEEN CANCELED.
None of the funds appropriated in any Act may be obligated or made available to the International Monetary Fund until the International Monetary Fund-- (1) has canceled all debts owed to the International Monetary Fund by any eligible country; (2) has terminated the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility; and (3) the Secretary of the Treasury has certified to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate that-- (A) the debts referred to in paragraph (1) have been canceled; and (B) the International Monetary Fund has ceased linking loans to any eligible country to the implementation of structural adjustment policies.
ACTIVITIES OF OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION IN HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES CONTINGENT ON USE OF DEBT RELIEF FOR POVERTY REDUCTION.
In General.--Title IV of chapter 2 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2191 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 234A the following: ``SEC.
ACTIVITIES OF CORPORATION IN CERTAIN HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES CONTINGENT ON USE OF DEBT RELIEF FOR POVERTY REDUCTION.
``The Corporation may issue insurance, guaranties, or reinsurance, make loans, acquire any securities, or carry out any other activity under section 234, or enter into risk sharing arrangements authorized by section 234A, for a heavily indebted poor country with respect to which the United States has provided debt cancellation under section 4 of the Debt Emancipation for Emerging Democracies (DEED) Act of 1999, or the International Monetary Fund has provided debt cancellation in accordance with section 5 of such Act, only if the President certifies to the Congress that the government of such country is using funds available to the government because of such debt cancellation for poverty reduction in the country.''.
Effective Date.--Section 234B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as added by subsection (a), applies with respect to a contract or other agreement for insurance, guaranties, or reinsurance, loans, the acquisition of securities, or any other activity authorized under section 234 of that Act, or for risk sharing arrangements authorized by section 234A of that Act, entered into on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Not less than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall provide written notice to each eligible country that it is the policy of the United States-- (1) to cancel debts owed by the country to the United States; (2) to advocate at the International Monetary Fund for the cancellation of the country's debts; (3) that the proceeds of such debt cancellation should be used for poverty reduction; and (4) to deny funding to such country from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation if the country does not use the proceeds of such debt cancellation for poverty reduction.
Private Enforcement.--A citizen of the United States may bring an action in any United States district court seeking compliance by the United States, or any department, agency, or officer of the United States, with any provision of this Act.
Appropriations Limitation.--None of the funds appropriated in any Act may be obligated or made available to the International Monetary Fund while any action brought under subsection (a) is pending.
Effects of Finding of Arbitrary Certification by the Secretary of the Treasury.--If, in an action brought under subsection (a), the court finally finds that the Secretary of the Treasury acted arbitrarily in making a certification required by this Act-- (1) the court shall award the plaintiff $100, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs; and (2) no funds appropriated in any Act may be obligated or made available to the International Monetary Fund until the court subsequently finds that the Secretary has replaced the arbitrarily made certification with a certification that is not made arbitrarily.