SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Renewables and Energy Efficiency Incentives Act of 1993''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TITLE I--INCENTIVES FOR PRODUCTION AND USE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES SEC.
ENERGY-RELATED CREDITS MAY OFFSET 25 PERCENT OF MINIMUM TAX.
In General.--Section 38(c) (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Energy credits may offset 25 percent of minimum tax.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the energy credit-- ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be applied separately with respect to such credit, and ``(ii) for purposes of applying paragraph (1) to such credit-- ``(I) 75 percent of the tentative minimum tax shall be substituted for the tentative minimum tax under subparagraph (A) thereof, and ``(II) the limitation under paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause (I)) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year (other than the energy credit).
Energy credit.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `energy credit' means the portion of the credit under subsection (a) which is attributable to the credits determined under sections 45 and 48(a).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
SMALL WIND TURBINES ELIGIBLE FOR ENERGY CREDIT.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 48(a)(3) (defining energy property) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii), and by inserting after clause (i) the following new clause: ``(ii) equipment which uses wind energy to generate electricity but only if such equipment has a rated capacity of 50 kilowatts or less and is not primarily used in the trade or business of producing electricity for sale to an unrelated person, or''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 1993.
LESSEES ELIGIBLE FOR CREDIT FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCED FROM CERTAIN RENEWABLE RESOURCES.
In General.--Paragraph (3) of section 45(c) (defining qualified facility) is amended by striking ``owned by the taxpayer'' and inserting ``operated by the taxpayer''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
CLARIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF ENERGY CREDIT TO PROPERTY USING SOLAR ENERGY.
In General.--Paragraph (3) of section 48(a) (relating to energy credit) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Equipment shall be treated as satisfying the requirement of subparagraph (A)(i) that it use solar energy if its average annual use of energy from sources other than solar energy does not exceed 50 percent of its total energy input.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 1993.
TITLE II--INCENTIVES TO PROMOTE ENERGY EFFICIENCY SEC.
LARGE ELECTRIC TRUCKS, VANS, AND BUSES ELIGIBLE FOR DEDUCTION FOR CLEAN-FUEL VEHICLES.
In General.--Paragraph (3) of section 179A(c) (defining qualified clean-fuel vehicle property) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to any vehicle described in subclause (I) or (II) of subsection (b)(1)(A)(iii).''
Denial of Credit.--Subsection (c) of section 30 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) Denial of credit for vehicles for which deduction allowable.--The term `qualified electric vehicle' shall not include any vehicle described in subclause (I) or (II) of section 179A(b)(1)(A)(iii).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 1993.
DEDUCTION FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES BY CERTAIN UTILITIES.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by inserting after section 196 the following new section: ``SEC.
ENERGY CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES BY ELECTRIC AND GAS UTILITIES.
General Rule.--In the case of an electric or gas utility, there shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year an amount equal to the energy conservation expenditures paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Energy Conservation Expenditures.--For purposes of this section, the term `energy conservation expenditures' means expenditures for-- ``(1) subsidies provided directly or indirectly to customers for the purchase, installation, or modification of-- ``(A) any device or service primarily designed to reduce consumption of electricity, natural gas, or steam or to improve the management of energy demand, or ``(B) any specially defined energy property (as defined in section 136(c)(2)(A)), ``(2) energy use consulting and audits of commercial, residential, and industrial properties, or ``(3) administrative, promotional, and other costs associated with expenditures described in paragraph (1) or (2).
Such term shall not include any expenditure taken into account in determining the basis of any tangible property which is owned by the taxpayer and which is of a character subject to the allowance for depreciation.
Electric or Gas Utility.--For purposes of this section, the term `electric or gas utility' means any corporation engaged in the furnishing or sale of electric energy, natural gas, or steam if the rates for such furnishing or sale have been established or approved by a State or political subdivision thereof, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or by a public utility or public service commission or other similar body of any State or political subdivision thereof or of the District of Columbia.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 263(a) is amended by striking ``; or'' at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting a comma, by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(H) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed under section 197.''
The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Energy conservation expenditures by electric and gas utilities.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1980.
FULL EXCLUSION FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION SUBSIDIES PROVIDED WITH RESPECT TO NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 136 (relating to energy conservation subsidies provided by public utilities) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Exclusion.--Gross income shall not include the value of any subsidy provided (directly or indirectly) by a public utility to a customer for the purchase or installation of any energy conservation measure.''
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 136(c) (defining energy conservation measure) is amended by striking ``demand--'' and all that follows and inserting ``demand with respect to any property.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to subsidies provided after December 31, 1993.
TITLE III--REVENUE INCREASES SEC.
REDUCTION OF TAX SUBSIDIES FOR ETHANOL FUEL MIXTURES.
Reduction of Credit for Ethanol Blenders.--Subsection (h) of section 40 (relating to alcohol used as fuel) is amended-- (1) by striking ``54 cents'' each place it appears and inserting ``35 cents'', and (2) by striking ``40 cents'' each place it appears and inserting ``21 cents''.
Reduction of Fuel Tax Subsidies.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 4081(c)(1) (relating to gasoline mixed with alcohol at refinery, etc.)
is amended-- (A) by striking ``6.1 cents'' each place it appears and inserting ``8.0 cents'', (B) by striking ``7.342 cents'' each place it appears and inserting ``8.805 cents'', and (C) by striking ``8.422 cents'' each place it appears and inserting ``9.505 cents'' (2) Clause (i) of section 4041(b)(2)(A) (relating to reduction in special fuels tax for qualified methanol and ethanol fuel) is amended by striking ``5.4 cents'' and inserting ``3.5 cents''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 1994.
REPEAL OF EXCLUSION FOR INTEREST ON BONDS ISSUED TO FINANCE ELECTRIC GENERATING FACILITIES FUELED BY COAL, PETROLEUM, OR NUCLEAR POWER.
In General.--Section 149 (relating to bonds must be registered to be tax exempt; other requirements) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Bonds Used To Finance Certain Electric Generating Facilities Not Tax-Exempt.--Nothing in section 103(a) or in any other provision of law shall be construed to provide an exemption from Federal income tax for interest on any bond issued as part of an issue if any portion of such issue is used to provide facilities for the furnishing of electricity if such electricity is generating using nuclear power, coal, crude oil, or any petroleum product.''
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (8) of section 142(a) is amended by inserting ``except as provided in section 149(h),'' before ``facilities''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to bonds issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.
REPEAL OF TAX-EXEMPT STATUS FOR ELECTRIC COOPERATIVES.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 501(c)(12) (relating to list of exempt organizations) is amended by inserting ``(other than electric companies)'' after ``like organizations''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (12) of section 501(c) is amended by striking subparagraph (C) and by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (C).
Subparagraph (C) of section 501(c)(12), as redesignated by paragraph (1), is amended-- (A) by striking ``or electric'' each place it appears, and (B) by striking ``of electricity or''.
Subsection (d) of section 513 is amended by striking ``or electric''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
INCREASED TAXES ON CRUDE OIL.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 4611(c) (relating to rate of tax on petroleum) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(C) the petroleum security rate.''
Rate of Tax.--Paragraph (2) of section 4611(c) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(C) the petroleum security rate is 5 cents a barrel.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 1994.
DEDUCTION FOR PERCENTAGE DEPLETION FOR OIL AND GAS WELLS LIMITED TO ADJUSTED BASIS.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 613A (relating to limitations on percentage depletion in case of oil and gas wells) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) Limitation based on adjusted basis.--The deduction for the taxable year attributable to the application of subsection (c) with respect to any property shall not exceed the adjusted basis of such property at the end of the taxable year (determined without regard to the depletion deduction for such taxable year).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
REPEAL OF EXCEPTION FROM PASSIVE LOSS LIMITATION FOR WORKING INTERESTS IN OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 469 (relating to passive activity losses and credits limited) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (6) as paragraphs (3) through (5), respectively.
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (3) of section 469(c), as redesignated by subsection (a), is amended-- (1) by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' in the heading and inserting ``paragraph (2)'', and (2) by striking ``Paragraphs (2) and (3)'' in the text and inserting ``Paragraph (2)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.