This Act may be cited as the ``Mother's Day Centennial Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress hereby finds as follows: (1) Anna Jarvis, who is considered to be the founder of the modern Mother's Day, was born in Webster, West Virginia on May 1, 1864.
A resident of Grafton, West Virginia, Anna Jarvis dedicated much of her adult life to honoring her mother, Anna Reeves Jarvis, who passed on May 9, 1905.
In 1908, the Matthews Methodist Episcopal Church of Grafton, West Virginia, officially proclaimed the third anniversary of Anna Reeves Jarvis' death to be Mother's Day.
In 1910, West Virginia Governor, William Glasscock, issued the first Mother's Day Proclamation encouraging all West Virginians to attend church and wear white carnations.
On May 8, 1914, the Sixty-Third Congress approved H.J.
263 designating the second Sunday in May to be observed as Mother's Day and encouraging all Americans to display the American flag at their homes as a public expression of the love and reverence for the mothers of our Nation.
On May 9, 1914, President Woodrow Wilson issued a Presidential Proclamation directing government officials to display the American flag on all government buildings and inviting the American people to display the flag at their homes on the second Sunday of May as a public expression of the love and reverence for the mothers of our Nation.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 400,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the 100th anniversary of President Wilson's proclamation designating the second Sunday in May as Mother's Day.
Designation and Inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the year ``2014''; and (3) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee established under section 5135 of title 31, United States Code.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 2014, except that the Secretary may initiate sales of such coins, without issuance, before such date.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins shall be minted under this Act after December 31, 2014.
Sale Price.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge required under section 7(a) for the coins, and the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, and marketing).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders at a Discount.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges which are received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) \1/2\ to the Susan G. Komen for the Cure for the purpose of furthering research funded by the organization.
\1/2\ to the National Osteoporosis Foundation for the purpose of furthering research funded by the Foundation.
Audits.--The Susan G. Komen for the Cure and the National Osteoporosis Foundation shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the respective organizations under subsection (b).