CERTAINTY OF PUNISHMENT FOR YOUNG OFFENDERS.
In General.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes), is amended-- (1) by redesignating part Q as part R; (2) by redesignating section 1701 as section 1801; and (3) by inserting after part P the following: ``PART Q--ALTERNATIVE PUNISHMENTS FOR YOUNG OFFENDERS ``SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance (referred to in this part as the `Director') may make grants under this part to States, for the use by States and units of local government in the States, for the purpose of developing alternative methods of punishment for young offenders to traditional forms of incarceration and probation.
Alternative Methods.--The alternative methods of punishment referred to in subsection (a) should ensure certainty of punishment for young offenders and promote reduced recidivism, crime prevention, and assistance to victims, particularly for young offenders who can be punished more effectively in an environment other than a traditional correctional facility, including-- ``(1) alternative sanctions that create accountability and certainty of punishment for young offenders; ``(2) boot camp prison programs that include education and job training activities such as programs modeled, to the extent practicable, after activities carried out under part B of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (relating to Job Corps) (29 United States Code 1691 et sequentes); ``(3) technical training and support for the implementation and maintenance of State and local restitution programs for young offenders; ``(4) innovative projects, such as projects consisting of education and job training activities for incarcerated young offenders, modeled, to the extent practicable, after activities carried out under part B of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (relating to Job Corps) (29 United States Code 1691 et seq.
); ``(5) correctional options, such as community-based incarceration, weekend incarceration, and electronic monitoring of offenders; ``(6) community service programs that provide work service placement for young offenders at non-profit, private organizations and community organizations; ``(7) demonstration restitution projects that are evaluated for effectiveness; ``(8) innovative methods that address the problems of young offenders convicted of serious substance abuse (including alcohol abuse, and gang-related offenses), including technical assistance and training to counsel and treat such offenders; and ``(9) the provision for adequate and appropriate after care programs for the young offenders, such as substance abuse treatment, education programs, vocational training, job placement counseling, and other support programs upon release.
In General.--(1) To request a grant under this part, the chief executive of a State shall submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Such application shall include assurances that Federal funds received under this part shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this part.
State Office.--The office designated under section 507 of this title-- ``(1) shall prepare the application as required under subsection (a); and ``(2) shall administer grant funds received under this part, including review of spending, processing, progress, financial reporting, technical assistance, grant adjustments, accounting, auditing, and fund disbursement.
1703. REVIEW OF STATE APPLICATIONS.
In General.--The Director, in consultation with the Director of the National Institute of Corrections, shall make a grant under section 1701(a) to carry out the projects described in the application submitted by such applicant under section 1702 upon determining that-- ``(1) the application is consistent with the requirements of this part; and ``(2) before the approval of the application, the Director has made an affirmative finding in writing that the proposed project has been reviewed in accordance with this part.
Approval.--Each application submitted under section 1702 shall be considered approved, in whole or in part, by the Director not later than 45 days after first received unless the Director informs the applicant of specific reasons for disapproval.
Restriction.--Grant funds received under this part shall not be used for land acquisition or construction projects, other than alternative facilities described in section 1701(b).
Disapproval Notice and Reconsideration.--The Director shall not disapprove any application without first affording the applicant reasonable notice and an opportunity for reconsideration.
In General.--(1) To request funds under this part from a State, the chief executive of a unit of local government shall submit an application to the office designated under section 1701(b).
Such application shall be considered approved, in whole or in part, by the State not later than 45 days after such application is first received unless the State informs the applicant in writing of specific reasons for disapproval.
The State shall not disapprove any application submitted to the State without first affording the applicant reasonable notice and an opportunity for reconsideration.
If such application is approved, the unit of local government is eligible to receive such funds.
Distribution to Units of Local Government.--A State that receives funds under section 1701 in a fiscal year shall make such funds available to units of local government with an application that has been submitted and approved by the State within 45 days after the Director has approved the application submitted by the State and has made funds available to the State.
The Director shall have the authority to waive the 45-day requirement in this section upon a finding that the State is unable to satisfy such requirement under State statutes.
ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
State Distribution.--Of the total amount appropriated under this part in any fiscal year-- ``(1) 0.4 percent shall be allocated to each of the participating States; and ``(2) of the total funds remaining after the allocation under paragraph (1), there shall be allocated to each of the participating States an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount of remaining funds described in this paragraph as the number of young offenders of such State bears to the number of young offenders in all the participating States.
Local Distribution.--(1) A State that receives funds under this part in a fiscal year shall distribute to units of local government in such State for the purposes specified under section 1701 that portion of such funds which bears the same ratio to the aggregate amount of such funds as the amount of funds expended by all units of local government for correctional programs in the preceding fiscal year bears to the aggregate amount of funds expended by the State and all units of local government in such State for correctional programs in such preceding fiscal year.
Any funds not distributed to units of local government under paragraph (1) shall be available for expenditure by such State for purposes specified under section 1701.
If the Director determines, on the basis of information available during any fiscal year, that a portion of the funds allocated to a State for such fiscal year will not be used by such State or that a State is not eligible to receive funds under section 1701, the Director shall award such funds to units of local government in such State giving priority to the units of local government that the Director considers to have the greatest need.
General Requirement.--Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), not less than two-thirds of funds received by a State under this part shall be distributed to units of local government unless the State applies for and receives a waiver from the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant made under this part may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of the projects described in the application submitted under section 1702(a) for the fiscal year for which the projects receive assistance under this part.
Consideration.--Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), in awarding grants under this part, the Director shall consider as an important factor whether a State has in effect throughout such State a law or policy which-- ``(1) requires that a juvenile who is in possession of a firearm or other weapon on school property or convicted of a crime involving the use of a firearm or weapon on school property-- ``(A) be suspended from school for a reasonable period of time; and ``(B) lose driving license privileges for a reasonable period of time; ``(2) bans firearms and other weapons in a 100-yard radius of school property, but the State may allow exceptions for school-sponsored activities, as well as other reasonable exceptions.
Definition.--For purposes of this part, `juvenile' means 18 years of age or younger.
In General.--(1) Each State and local unit of government that receives a grant under this part shall submit to the Director an evaluation not later than March 1 of each year in accordance with guidelines issued by the Director and in consultation with the National Institute of Justice.
The Director may waive the requirement specified in paragraph (1) if the Director determines that such evaluation is not warranted in the case of the State or unit of local government involved.
Distribution.--The Director shall make available to the public on a timely basis evaluations received under subsection (a).
Administrative Costs.--A State and local unit of government may use not more than 5 percent of funds it receives under this part to develop an evaluation program under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et seq.
), is amended by striking the matter relating to part Q and inserting the following: ``Part Q--Alternative Punishments for Young Offenders ``Sec.
1703. Review of State applications.
Allocation and distribution of funds.
``Part R--Transition--Effective Date--Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.''.
Definition.--Section 901(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3791(a)), is amended by adding after paragraph (23) the following: ``(24) The term `young offender' means an individual, convicted of a crime, 22 years of age or younger-- ``(A) who has not been convicted of-- ``(i) a crime of sexual assault; or ``(ii) a crime involving the use of a firearm in the commission of the crime; and ``(B) who has no prior convictions for a crime of violence (as defined by section 16 of title 18, United States Code) punishable by a period of 1 or more years of imprisonment.''.
Section 1001(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793) is amended by adding after paragraph (10) the following: ``(11) There are authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the projects under part Q.''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that States should impose mandatory sentences for crimes involving the use of a firearm or other weapon on school property or within a 100-yard radius of school property.
Passed the House of Representatives November 19, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.