This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Education Tax Credit Act''.
CREDIT FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES OF STUDENTS RECEIVING OR ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE FREE OR REDUCED PRICE SCHOOL MEALS.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
EDUCATION EXPENSES OF STUDENTS RECEIVING OR ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE FREE OR REDUCED PRICE SCHOOL MEALS.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year the amount of the qualified education expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year for the education of any individual-- ``(1) with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151(c), and ``(2) who receives (or is eligible to receive) free or reduced price meals under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act or the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 for the period to which such expenses relate.
Limitation.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to the qualified education expenses of any 1 individual shall not exceed $1,500.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified education expenses' means amounts paid for-- ``(i) tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of a student at an eligible educational institution, and ``(ii) fees, tutoring, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services) and other equipment required for courses of instruction at an eligible educational institution.
Meals and lodging expenses not included.-- Such term does not include any amount paid, directly or indirectly, for meals, lodging, or similar personal, living, or family expenses.
In the event an amount paid for tuition or fees includes an amount for meals, lodging, or similar expenses which is not separately stated, the portion of such amount which is attributable to meals, lodging, or similar expenses shall be determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Special rule for home schooling.--In the case of education furnished in the home (as a substitute for public education) which meets the requirements of State law relating to compulsory school attendance, the term `qualified education expenses' means amounts paid for tutoring, books, supplies, computer equipment (including related software and services), and other equipment used in furnishing such education.
Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' means-- ``(A) a secondary school, ``(B) an elementary school, or ``(C) any private, parochial, religious, or home school organized for the purpose of providing elementary or secondary education, or both.
Elementary and secondary schools.--The terms `elementary school' and `secondary school' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Adjustment for Certain Scholarships.--The amounts otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) as qualified education expenses of any individual during any period shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by the sum of the amounts received with respect to such individual for the taxable year as a qualified scholarship which under section 117 is not includable in gross income.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking ``or'' after ``1978,'' and by inserting before the period ``, or enacted by the Children's Education Tax Credit Act''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Education expenses of students receiving or eligible to receive free or reduced price school meals.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.