This Act may be cited as the ``High School Data Transparency Act of 2011''.
DISCLOSURE OF STATISTICS ON EQUALITY IN ATHLETIC PROGRAMS.
Subpart 2 of part E of title IX of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7901 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
DISCLOSURE OF STATISTICS ON EQUALITY IN ATHLETIC PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Secretary shall collect, annually, for the immediately preceding academic year, from each coeducational secondary school that receives Federal financial assistance that has an interscholastic athletic program, the following information: ``(1) The total number of male and female students that attended the school, fully disaggregated and cross-tabulated by gender and race or ethnicity.
A listing of the teams that competed in athletic competition and for each such team the following data: ``(A) The season in which the team competed.
The total number of male and female participants as of the day of the first scheduled contest for the team, fully disaggregated and cross- tabulated by gender and race or ethnicity.
The total expenditures for the team, including the following data: ``(i) The travel expenditures.
The equipment expenditures (including any equipment replacement schedule).
The uniform expenditures (including any uniform replacement schedule).
The expenditures for facilities, including medical facilities, locker rooms, fields, and gymnasiums.
The total number of trainers and medical personnel, and for each trainer or medical personnel an identification of such person's-- ``(I) gender; and ``(II) employment status (including whether such person is assigned to the team full-time or part-time, and whether such person is a head or assistant trainer or medical services provider) and duties other than providing training or medical services.
The expenditures for publicity for competitions.
The total number of coaches, and for each coach an identification of such coach's-- ``(i) gender; and ``(ii) employment status (including whether such coach is assigned to the team full-time or part-time, and whether such coach is a head or assistant coach) and duties other than coaching.
The total number of competitive events (in regular and nontraditional seasons) scheduled, and for each an indication of what day of the week and time the competitive event was scheduled.
Whether such team participated in postseason competition, and the success of such team in any postseason competition.
Disclosure of Information to Students and Public.--A coeducational secondary school described in subsection (a) shall-- ``(1) make available to students and potential students, upon request, and to the public, the information contained in reports by the school under this section by October 15 for the previous school year; and ``(2) ensure that all students at the school are informed of their right to request such information.
Submission; Information Availability.--On an annual basis, each coeducational secondary school described in subsection (a) shall provide the information contained in each report by the school under this section to the Secretary not later than 15 days after the date that the school makes such information available under subsection (b).
Duties of the Secretary.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) ensure that reports under this section are posted on the Department of Education's Web site within a reasonable period of time; and ``(2) not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the High School Data Transparency Act of 2011-- ``(A) notify all secondary schools in all States regarding the availability of information under subsection (b); and ``(B) issue guidance to all schools on how to collect and report the information required under this section.