This Act may be cited as the ``External Regulation of the Department of Energy Act''.
ELIMINATION OF DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AUTHORITY.
Effective October 1, 2001, the Department of Energy shall have no regulatory or enforcement authority with respect to nuclear safety and occupational safety and health responsibilities assumed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under section 3 or by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration under section 4 at any facility owned or operated by the Department.
NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION AUTHORITY.
Nuclear Safety Regulatory and Enforcement Responsibilities.-- Effective October 1, 2001, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall assume the nuclear safety regulatory and enforcement responsibilities of the Department of Energy under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 with regard to facilities owned or operated by the Department.
Licensed Entities.--For the purposes of carrying out at facilities owned or operated by the Department of Energy regulatory and enforcement responsibilities described in subsection (a), the Nuclear Regulatory Commission may regulate, through licensing, certification, or other appropriate means, the Department, the Department's contractors, or both.
Decommissioning.--A contractor operating a facility owned by the Department of Energy shall not be responsible for the costs of decommissioning that facility.
No enforcement action may be taken against such contractor for any violation of Nuclear Regulatory Commission decommissioning requirements, if such violation is the result of a failure of the Department to authorize or fund decommissioning activities.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Department shall, not later than January 1, 2002, enter into a memorandum of understanding establishing decommissioning procedures and requirements for facilities owned or operated by the Department.
Administration.--The responsibilities assumed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under this section shall be administered by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, not by States.
Regulation of Defense Nuclear Facilities.-- (1) Repeal.--Chapter 21 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2286 et sequentes) is repealed.
Dedicated organizational element.--The Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall establish an organizational element dedicated solely to the regulation of defense nuclear facilities within the Department of Energy.
Use of available resources.--In carrying out the responsibilities assumed under this section, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall employ appropriate personnel or other resources available as a result of the repeal made by paragraph (1) of this subsection.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2239(b)) is amended by adding the following paragraph after paragraph (4): ``(5) Any final order or regulation of the Commission establishing standards to govern facilities owned or operated by the Department of Energy that are issued to implement the Commission's responsibilities under the External Regulation of the Department of Energy Act, and any final determination of the Commission relating to whether a facility owned or operated by the Department is in compliance with such standards and all applicable Commission regulations or orders.''.
Employee Protection.--Any Department of Energy contractor operating a facility that is regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under this section shall be subject to section 211 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (41 United States Code 5851) to the same extent as any other employer subject to such section 211.
Conflict of Interest.--Section 170A of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2210a) applies to contracts, agreements, or other arrangements of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission proposed or entered into pursuant to its responsibilities assumed under this section.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH.
OSHA Jurisdiction.--Notwithstanding section 4(b)(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 653(b)(1)) and any other provision of law, effective October 1, 2001, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall assume the regulatory and enforcement responsibilities of the Department of Energy relating to matters covered by the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 with regard to all facilities owned or operated by the Department, except as provided in subsection (b).
Any Department contractor operating such a facility shall, with respect to matters relating to occupational safety and health, be considered to be an employer for purposes of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Regulation of Hazards Containing Radiological and Non- Radiological Component.--If a hazard at a facility owned or operated by the Department presents a risk of occupational exposure and contains both a radiological and non-radiological component, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall, effective October 1, 2001, share regulatory and enforcement responsibilities with respect to the hazard in accordance with the memorandum of understanding entered into pursuant to section 5.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration shall, before January 1, 2001, enter into and transmit to the Congress a memorandum of understanding to govern the exercise of their respective authorities over nuclear safety and occupational safety and health at facilities owned or operated by the Department of Energy.
The Department of Energy's contractor operating a facility owned or operated by the Department shall not be liable for civil penalties under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 or the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 for any actions taken before October 1, 2001, pursuant to the instructions of a Federal agency in preparation for the transfer of regulatory and enforcement responsibilities required by this Act.
The Secretary of Energy shall continue to indemnify facilities owned or operated by the Department in accordance with the provisions of section 170d.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY REPORTING REQUIREMENT.
By April 1, 2001, the Secretary of Energy shall transmit to the Committee on Commerce, the Committee on Science, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, a plan for the termination of the Department's regulatory and enforcement responsibilities for facilities owned or operated by the Department required by this Act.
The report shall include-- (1) a detailed transition plan, drafted in coordination with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, giving the schedule for termination of self-regulation authority as outlined in section 2, including the activities to be coordinated with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; (2) a description of any issues remaining to be resolved with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or other external regulators, and a timetable for resolving such issues before October 1, 2001; and (3) an estimate of-- (A) the annual cost of administering and implementing self-regulation of the nuclear safety and occupational safety and health responsibilities described in sections 3 and 4 at facilities owned or operated by the Department; (B) the number of Federal and contractor employees administering and implementing such self-regulation; and (C) the extent and schedule by which the Department and the staffs at its facilities will be reduced as a result of implementation of this Act.