This Act may be cited as the ``Community and Postal Participation Act of 1998''.
GUIDELINES FOR RELOCATION, CLOSING, OR CONSOLIDATION OF POST OFFICES.
Section 404 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b)(1) Before making a determination under subsection (a)(3) as to the necessity for the relocation, closing, or consolidation of any post office, the Postal Service shall provide adequate notice to persons served by that post office of the intention of the Postal Service to relocate, close, or consolidate that post office not later than 60 days before the proposed date of that relocation, closing, or consolidation.
(A) The notification under paragraph (1) shall be in writing, hand delivered or delivered by mail to persons served by that post office, and published in 1 or more newspapers of general circulation within the zip codes served by that post office.
The notification under paragraph (1) shall include-- ``(i) an identification of the relocation, closing, or consolidation of the post office involved; ``(ii) a summary of the reasons for the relocation, closing, or consolidation; and ``(iii) the proposed date for the relocation, closing, or consolidation.
Any person served by the post office that is the subject of a notification under paragraph (1) may offer an alternative relocation, consolidation, or closing proposal during the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the notice is provided under paragraph (1).
(A) At the end of the period specified in paragraph (3), the Postal Service shall make a determination under subsection (a)(3).
Before making a final determination, the Postal Service shall conduct a hearing, and persons served by the post office that is the subject of a notice under paragraph (1) may present oral or written testimony with respect to the relocation, closing, or consolidation of the post office.
In making a determination as to whether or not to relocate, close, or consolidate a post office, the Postal Service shall consider-- ``(i) the extent to which the post office is part of a core downtown business area; ``(ii) any potential effect of the relocation, closing, or consolidation on the community served by the post office; ``(iii) whether the community served by the post office opposes a relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(iv) any potential effect of the relocation, closing, or consolidation on employees of the Postal Service employed at the post office; ``(v) whether the relocation, closing, or consolidation of the post office is consistent with the policy of the Government under section 101(b) that requires the Postal Service to provide a maximum degree of effective and regular postal services to rural areas, communities, and small towns in which post offices are not self- sustaining; ``(vi) the quantified long-term economic saving to the Postal Service resulting from the relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(vii) whether postal officials engaged in negotiations with persons served by the post office concerning the proposed relocation, closing, or consolidation; ``(viii) whether management of the post office contributed to a desire to relocate; ``(ix)(I) the adequacy of the existing post office; and ``(II) whether all reasonable alternatives to relocation, closing, or consolidation have been explored; and ``(x) any other factor that the Postal Service determines to be necessary for making a determination whether to relocate, close, or consolidate that post office.
(A) Any determination of the Postal Service to relocate, close, or consolidate a post office shall be in writing and shall include the findings of the Postal Service with respect to the considerations required to be made under paragraph (4).
The Postal Service shall respond to all of the alternative proposals described in paragraph (3) in a consolidated report that includes-- ``(i) the determination and findings under subparagraph (A); and ``(ii) each alternative proposal and a response by the Postal Service.
The Postal Service shall make available to the public a copy of the report prepared under subparagraph (B) at the post office that is the subject of the report.
(A) The Postal Service shall take no action to relocate, close, or consolidate a post office until the applicable date described in subparagraph (B).
The applicable date specified in this subparagraph is-- ``(i) if no appeal is made under paragraph (7), the end of the 60-day period specified in that paragraph; or ``(ii) if an appeal is made under paragraph (7), the date on which a determination is made by the Commission under paragraph 7(A), but not later than 120 days after the date on which the appeal is made.
(A) A determination of the Postal Service to relocate, close, or consolidate any post office may be appealed by any person served by that post office to the Postal Rate Commission during the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the report is made available under paragraph (5).
The Commission shall review the determination on the basis of the record before the Postal Service in the making of the determination.
The Commission shall make a determination based on that review not later than 120 days after appeal is made under this paragraph.
The Commission shall set aside any determination, findings, and conclusions of the Postal Service that the Commission finds to be-- ``(i) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law; ``(ii) without observance of procedure required by law; or ``(iii) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record.
The Commission may affirm the determination of the Postal Service that is the subject of an appeal under subparagraph (A) or order that the entire matter that is the subject of that appeal be returned for further consideration, but the Commission may not modify the determination of the Postal Service.
The Commission may suspend the effectiveness of the determination of the Postal Service until the final disposition of the appeal.
The provisions of sections 556 and 557, and chapter 7 of title 5 shall not apply to any review carried out by the Commission under this paragraph.
A determination made by the Commission shall not be subject to judicial review.
In any case in which a community has in effect procedures to address the relocation, closing, or consolidation of buildings in the community, and the public participation requirements of those procedures are more stringent than those provided in this subsection, the Postal Service shall apply those procedures to the relocation, consolidation, or closing of a post office in that community in lieu of applying the procedures established in this subsection.
In making a determination to relocate, close, or consolidate any post office, the Postal Service shall comply with any applicable zoning, planning, or land use laws (including building codes and other related laws of State or local public entities, including any zoning authority with jurisdiction over the area in which the post office is located).
The relocation, closing, or consolidation of any post office under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with section 110 of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470h-2).''.
Section 101(g) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In addition to taking into consideration the matters referred to in the preceding sentence, with respect to the creation of any new postal facility, the Postal Service shall consider the potential effects of that facility on the community to be served by that facility and the service provided by any facility in operation at the time that a determination is made whether to plan or build that facility.