This Act may be cited as the ``Senior Government Officer Benefit Limitation Act of 1993''.
PROHIBITION OF PERSONAL OR POLITICAL USE OF UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AIRCRAFT.
In General.--(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no aircraft which is owned or leased by the United States Government (including military aircraft) may be used for-- (A) any personal, political, or authorized special use travel; or (B) any official travel which is mixed with personal or political activities.
For purposes of this section the term ``authorized special use'' means use of a Government aircraft for the travel of an executive agency officer or employee, where the use of the Government aircraft is required because of bona fide communications or security needs of the agency or exceptional scheduling requirements.
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to use of aircraft by-- (1) the President or his immediate family (subject to reimbursement as provided under law); (2) the Vice President or his immediate family if the full costs, including the costs of operating and maintaining such aircraft, for such travel are reimbursed to the United States Government; or (3) civilian personnel and their dependents in remote locations for space available travel as authorized under section 4744 of title 10, United States Code.
Certain Political Travel.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or regulation, the reimbursement for political travel on Government aircraft during a Presidential election campaign shall be the commercial equivalent rate for applicable charter aircraft for such travel.
Reports on Use.--(1) Each executive agency which maintains or uses Government owned or leased aircraft (including military aircraft) shall-- (A) require each traveler, except immediate family members and the spouse of such a traveler who is a Federal officer or employee, to certify that any travel on such aircraft is necessary for official purposes; and (B) beginning on April 15, 1993, and on the fifteenth day of every third month thereafter, submit a report to the Administrator of the General Services Administration with regard to the preceding 3-month period that-- (i) certifies that the use of such aircraft complied with Office of Management and Budget Circular A-126 as modified by the provisions of this Act; and (ii) identifies each traveler on such aircraft.
After the receipt of each report, the Administrator shall review each certification to ensure that the use of such aircraft complied with Office of Management and Budget Circular A-126 as modified.
The Administrator shall make the information in any such report available to the public.
Legislative Agencies.--Each agency in the legislative branch of the Government (including each office and committee of the Congress) shall submit reports comparable to the reports submitted under subsection (c), with the appropriate administrative office of such agency.
The reports submitted under this subsection shall be made available to the public for inspection.
Limitation.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to any agency may be expended to equip, operate, or maintain any golf course owned or operated by an agency.
Any such golf course shall be operated by concessionaire contract and open to use by the general public.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to-- (1) any golf course located in a remote or isolated area or those for the use of patients or residents at Veterans' Administration Hospitals, United States Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, or the National Institutes of Health; or (2) funds made available from gift funds or representation funds for activities authorized under law.
Use of Funds.--No more than 10 percent of the gross revenues generated from the operations of any golf course to which subsection (a) applies may be retained by the contracting military base to support morale, welfare or recreational purposes of the personnel at such base.
The Secretary of Defense shall submit annual reports to the Congress which identify in detail how the funds retained have been expended.
The Secretary of Defense is authorized to subsidize the golf fees for active and retired enlisted personnel utilizing such contracted courses and give priority access for military personnel.
Effective Date.--The provisions of this section shall take effect no later than June 1, 1993.
No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to any executive agency may be expended to subsidize the costs to equip, operate, or maintain dining rooms or kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of senior Government officers or to purchase or prepare food for consumption by such officers.
This section shall not apply to dining rooms, facilities, or food for-- (1) the exclusive use or consumption of the President of the United States or his immediate family; or (2) use to carry out the official representational functions of the President or for those official activities conducted by executive branch departments or agencies for which representation funds have been authorized and appropriated.
LUXURY VEHICLES FOR TRANSPORTING GOVERNMENT OFFICERS.
Luxury Vehicles.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to any agency or the Congress may be expended to acquire, through lease or purchase, luxury vehicles for the purpose of transporting senior Government officers, except for-- (1) a Government officer as authorized under section 1344 of title 31, United States Code; (2) a Government officer who holds the office of Assistant Secretary or higher; (3) the head of any executive agency and the second highest ranking officer in such agency; (4) officials commissioned by the President or paid at a rate of pay equal to or greater than the rate payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule in the Executive Office of the President; or (5) Members of Congress serving in leadership positions (including any former President pro tempore of the Senate) or elected or appointed officers of the Congress.
Drivers.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), no funds appropriated or otherwise made available to any agency may be expended to employ drivers for the exclusive use of transporting senior Government officers, except the officers described under subsection (a)(1) through (5).
The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the expenditure of funds to employ drivers of multipassenger vehicles, such as vans or buses, which are not luxury vehicles.
Purchase or Lease of Luxury Vehicles.--The General Services Administration, in consultation with the Office of Management and Budget shall prescribe regulations and uniform guidelines for all executive agencies for the purchase or lease of luxury vehicles for or by the United States Government, that shall ensure the least cost to the United States Government.
On October 1, 1993, and on October 1 of each year thereafter, the General Services Administration shall submit a report to the Congress on-- (1) executive agency compliance with such regulations; (2) the number of all vehicles purchased or leased by each executive agency; (3) the costs of executive agency vehicle purchases or leases; (4) the type of each such executive agency vehicle and the purpose for which it is used; and (5) the identification of executive agency Federal officers and employees who used such vehicles.
Legislative Agencies.--Each agency in the legislative branch of the Government (including each office and committee of the Congress) shall submit reports comparable to reports submitted under subsection (c) with the appropriate administrative offices of such agency.
Definition.--For purposes of this section the term ``luxury vehicle'' means a vehicle that is-- (1) a class IV or V sedan (as classified under section 101- 38.101-1 of title 41 of the Code of Federal Regulations as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act) or other large sedan-type vehicle with above standard features; and (2) owned or leased by the United States Government.
Exception.--The provisions of this section shall not apply with regard to emergency vehicles or vehicles equipped for law enforcement purposes.
Regulations.--The Administrator of General Services shall issue regulations subject to the approval of the Office of Management and Budget, to implement the provisions of this section for executive agencies.
Costs and Fees.--Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), no appropriated funds made available to any executive or legislative agency (including any office or committee of the Congress) shall be expended for the costs of membership or other fees for the use of physical fitness facilities, including exercise equipment and classes.
Administrative Leave.--No executive or legislative agency (including any office or committee of the Congress) may grant administrative leave to an employee for the purpose of physical fitness activities, except with regard to an employee described under subsection (c).
Exception.--(1) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to any agency with regard to-- (A) employees in positions which require such employees to meet physical fitness standards as a condition of employment; or (B) benefits provided to employees under a collective bargaining agreement.
Funds for purposes described under subsection (a), may be expended only for the costs of maintaining the physical fitness of such employees.
Definition.--For purposes of this section the term ``physical fitness facility'' means any facility used for physical exercise that provides equipment and services for such use in addition to lockers and showers.
Limitation.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to an executive or legislative agency may be used for the provision of medical services provided by the Public Health Service, the employing agency, any other Federal agency or other medical service provider to a Government officer or employee.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to medical services-- (1) provided by agencies to Government officers or employees in cases of emergency; (2) determined by the head of an agency to be in the best interest of the agency such as occupational health and safety programs, preventive health care, or environmental safety programs; (3) provided to uniformed military personnel and military retirees under law; (4) including medical and dental care provided under section 1074 of title 10, United States Code, and regulations issued pursuant thereto; (5) agency contributions for employee health plans under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, or any other provision of law; or (6) services required under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12101 et sequentes).
Regulations.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Department of Defense, in consultation with the Office of Personnel Management, shall issue regulations for executive agencies that provide additional guidance including uniform fee schedules, as appropriate, to implement this section.
Limitation.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to any executive or legislative agency or Congress may be used for the purchase or distribution of souvenirs.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to those tokens or mementos authorized-- (1) in guidelines to be issued by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget prepared in consultation with the Comptroller General of the United States; or (2) by law or resolution of the Congress.
REDUCTION OF NONCAREER SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE POSITIONS AND SCHEDULE C POSITIONS.
Limitations.--The total number of Senior Executive Service positions in all executive agencies filled by noncareer appointees and the total number of positions in all executive agencies of a confidential or policy-determining character under schedule C of subpart C of part 213 of title 5 of the Code of Federal Regulations, shall each be reduced-- (1) on no later than October 1, 1993, by 5 percent of the respective total numbers of such positions as existed on September 30, 1991; (2) on no later than October 1, 1994, by an additional 5 percent of the respective total numbers of such positions as existed on September 30, 1991; and (3) on no later than October 1, 1995, and thereafter, by an additional 5 percent of the respective total numbers of such positions as existed on September 30, 1991.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 3133 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(f) This section is subject to the limitations of section 9 of the Senior Government Officer Benefit Limitation Act of 1993.''.
Section 3134 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(f) This section is subject to the limitations of section 9 of the Senior Government Officer Benefit Limitation Act of 1993.
The provisions of this subsection shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of this section.
In the administration of this section, the percentages referred to in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) (relating to authority to employ certain appointees) shall each be reduced as necessary to carry out the provisions of this subsection.''.
For purposes of this Act the term-- (1) ``executive agency'' means an Executive agency as such term is defined under section 105 of title 5, United States Code (except for the General Accounting Office) and includes the Executive Office of the President; and (2) ``senior Government officer'' means any person-- (A) employed at a rate of pay specified in or fixed according to subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code; (B) employed in a position in an executive agency, including any independent agency, at a rate of pay payable for level I of the Executive Schedule or employed in the Executive Office of the President at a rate of pay payable for level II of the Executive Schedule; (C) employed in an executive agency in a position that is not referred to under paragraph (1) (other than a position that is subject to pay adjustment under section 1009 of title 37, United States Code) and for which the basic rate of pay, exclusive of any locality- based pay adjustment under section 5304 of title 5, United States Code (or any comparable adjustment pursuant to interim authority of the President), is equal to or greater than the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule; (D) appointed by the President to a position under section 105(a)(2) (A) or (B) of title 3, United States Code, or by the Vice President to a position under section 106(a)(1) (A) or (B) of title 3, United States Code; or (E) who is a Member of Congress, or an elected or appointed officer of the Congress.
In General.--No later than September 30, 1994, and on September 30 of each year thereafter the Office of Management and Budget shall submit a report to the Congress on the compliance of the executive branch of Government with the provisions of this Act.
Senior Position Reductions.--No later than September 30, 1993, and again on September 30, 1994, the Office of Management and Budget shall submit a report to the Congress on the compliance of the executive branch of Government with the provisions of section 8 of this Act.
In the administration of sections 3, 4, 5 and 8, restrictions on expenditures shall not be deemed to apply to gift funds that an agency is otherwise authorized to collect under law.
Except as otherwise provided by this Act, regulations implementing the provisions of this Act shall be promulgated-- (1) by the President, or his designee, with regard to each executive agency; and (2)(A) by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate, or their designee, with regard to each office and committee of the Senate; (B) by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, or his designee, with regard to each office and committee of the House of Representatives; and (C) by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, or their designee, with regard to any joint committee of the Congress, or any agency of the legislative branch of Government.
The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the judicial branch of the Government.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the provisions of this Act shall be effective on and after October 1, 1993.
Exception.--The President, the Office of Management and Budget, and the Office of Personnel Management shall take such necessary actions on and after the date of the enactment of this Act to carry out the provisions of sections 9(a) and 11(b) of this Act.