This Act may be cited as the ``Methane Hydrate Research and Development Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Contract.--The term ``contract'' means a procurement contract within the meaning of 6303 of title 31, United States Code.
Cooperative agreement.--The term ``cooperative agreement'' means a cooperative agreement within the meaning of section 6305 of title 31, United States Code.
Grant.--The term ``grant'' means a grant agreement within the meaning of section 6304 of title 31, United States Code.
Methane hydrate.--The term ``methane hydrate'' means a methane clathrate that-- (A) is in the form of a methane-water ice-like crystalline material; and (B) is stable and occurs naturally in deep-ocean and permafrost areas.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Secretary of defense.--The term ``Secretary of Defense'' means the Secretary of Defense, acting through the Secretary of the Navy.
Secretary of the interior.--The term ``Secretary of the Interior'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Geological Survey.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Science Foundation.
METHANE HYDRATE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
In General.-- (1) Commencement of program.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Director, shall commence a program of methane hydrate research and development.
Designations.--The Secretary, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Director shall designate individuals to implement this Act.
Meetings.--The individuals designated under paragraph (2) shall meet not less frequently than every 120 days to review the progress of the program under paragraph (1) and make recommendations on future activities.
Grants, Contracts, and Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Assistance and coordination.--The Secretary may award grants or contracts to, or enter into cooperative agreements with, universities and industrial enterprises to-- (A) conduct basic and applied research to identify, explore, assess, and develop methane hydrate as a source of energy; (B) assist in developing technologies required for efficient and environmentally sound development of methane hydrate resources; (C) undertake research programs to provide safe means of transport and storage of methane produced from methane hydrates; (D) promote education and training in methane hydrate resources research and resource development; (E) conduct basic and applied research to assess and mitigate the environmental impacts of hydrate degassing, both natural and that associated with commercial development; and (F) develop technologies to reduce the risks of drilling through methane hydrates.
Consultation.--The Secretary may establish an advisory panel consisting of experts from industry, academia, and Federal agencies to advise the Secretary on potential applications of methane hydrate and assist in developing recommendations and priorities for the methane hydrate research and development program carried out under this section.
Limitations.-- (1) Administrative expenses.--Not more than 5 percent of the amount made available to carry out this section for a fiscal year may be used by the Secretary for expenses associated with the administration of the program under subsection (a)(1).
Construction costs.--None of the funds made available to carry out this section may be used for the construction of a new building or the acquisition, expansion, remodeling, or alteration of an existing building (including site grading and improvement and architect fees).
Responsibilities of the Secretary.--In carrying out subsection (b)(1), the Secretary shall-- (1) facilitate and develop partnerships among government, industry, and academia to research, identify, assess, and explore methane hydrate resources; (2) undertake programs to develop basic information necessary for promoting long-term interest in methane hydrate resources as an energy source; (3) ensure that the data and information developed through the program are accessible and widely disseminated as needed and appropriate; (4) promote cooperation among agencies that are developing technologies that may hold promise for methane hydrate resource development; and (5) report annually to Congress on accomplishments under this Act.
AMENDMENT TO THE MINING AND MINERALS POLICY ACT OF 1970.
Section 201 of the Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1901) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively; (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following: ``(6) the term `methane hydrate' means a methane clathrate that-- ``(A) is in the form of a methane-water ice-like crystalline material; and ``(B) is stable and occurs naturally in deep-ocean and permafrost areas.
''; and (3) in paragraph (7) (as redesignated by paragraph (1))-- (A) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``and''; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following: ``(G) methane hydrate; and''.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Passed the Senate July 17, 1998.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.