SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2004''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents Sec.
Enforcement; pier and wharf security costs.
Security at foreign ports.
Federal and State commercial maritime transportation training.
Transportation worker background investigation programs.
Report on cruise ship security.
Maritime transportation security plan grants.
Report on design of maritime security grant programs.
ENFORCEMENT; PIER AND WHARF SECURITY COSTS.
In General.--Chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 70118 (relating to firearms, arrests, and seizure of property), as added by section 801(a) of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2004, as section 70119; (2) by redesignating the first section 70119 (relating to enforcement by State and local officers), as added by section 801(a) of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2004, as section 70120; (3) by redesignating the second section 70119 (relating to civil penalty), as redesignated by section 802(a)(1) of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2004, as section 70123; and (4) by inserting after section 70120 the following: ``Sec.
Enforcement by injunction or withholding of clearance ``(a) Injunction.--The United States district courts shall have jurisdiction to restrain violations of this chapter or of regulations issued hereunder, for cause shown.
Withholding of Clearance.-- ``(1) If any owner, agent, master, officer, or person in charge of a vessel is liable for a penalty or fine under section 70119, or if reasonable cause exists to believe that the owner, agent, master, officer, or person in charge may be subject to a penalty under section 70119, the Secretary may, with respect to such vessel, refuse or revoke any clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (46 United States Code App.
Clearance refused or revoked under this subsection may be granted upon filing of a bond or other surety satisfactory to the Secretary.
Security of piers and wharfs ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall require any uncleared, imported merchandise remaining on the wharf or pier onto which it was unladen for more than 7 calendar days, not including any time the imported merchandise was held in federal custody, to be removed from the wharf or pier and deposited in the public stores or a general order warehouse, where it shall be inspected for determination of contents, and thereafter a permit for its delivery may be granted.
Penalty.--The Secretary may impose an administrative penalty of $5,000 on the consignee for each bill of lading for general order merchandise remaining on a wharf or pier in violation of subsection (a), except that no penalty shall be imposed if the violation was a result of force majeure.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The chapter analysis for chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking the items following the item relating to section 70116 and inserting the following: ``70117.
In rem liability for civil penalties and certain costs ``70118.
Withholding of clearance ``70119.
Firearms, arrests, and seizure of property ``70120.
Enforcement by State and local officers ``70121.
Enforcement by injunction or withholding of clearance ``70122.
Security of piers and wharfs ``70123.
Section 70117(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``section 70120'' and inserting ``section 70123''.
Section 70118(a) of such title is amended by striking ``under section 70120,'' and inserting ``under that section,''.
SECURITY AT FOREIGN PORTS.
In General.--Section 70109 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``The Secretary,'' in subsection (b) and inserting ``The Administrator of the Maritime Administration,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Foreign Assistance Programs.--The Administrator of the Maritime Administration, in coordination with the Secretary of State, shall identify foreign assistance programs that could facilitate implementation of port security antiterrorism measures in foreign countries.
The Administrator and the Secretary shall establish a program to utilize those programs that are capable of implementing port security antiterrorism measures at ports in foreign countries that the Secretary finds, under section 70108, to lack effective antiterrorism measures.''.
Report on Security at Ports in the Caribbean Basin.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives a report on the security of ports in the Caribbean Basin.
The report shall include the following: (1) An assessment of the effectiveness of the measures employed to improve security at ports in the Caribbean Basin and recommendations for any additional measures to improve such security.
An estimate of the number of ports in the Caribbean Basin that will not be secured by July 2004, and an estimate of the financial impact in the United States of any action taken pursuant to section 70110 of title 46, United States Code, that affects trade between such ports and the United States.
An assessment of the additional resources and program changes that are necessary to maximize security at ports in the Caribbean Basin.
FEDERAL AND STATE COMMERCIAL MARITIME TRANSPORTATION TRAINING.
Section 109 of the Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002 (46 United States Code 70101 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) through (f) as subsections (d) through (g), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Federal and State Commercial Maritime Transportation Training.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a curriculum, to be incorporated into the curriculum developed under subsection (a)(1), to educate and instruct Federal and State officials on commercial maritime and intermodal transportation.
The curriculum shall be designed to familiarize those officials with commercial maritime transportation in order to facilitate performance of their commercial maritime and intermodal transportation security responsibilities.
In developing the standards for the curriculum, the Secretary shall consult with each agency in the Department of Homeland Security with maritime security responsibilities to determine areas of educational need.
The Secretary shall also coordinate with the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center in the development of the curriculum and the provision of training opportunities for Federal and State law enforcement officials at appropriate law enforcement training facilities.''.
TRANSPORTATION WORKER BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION PROGRAMS.
Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, after consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure-- (1) making recommendations (including legislative recommendations, if appropriate or necessary) for harmonizing, combining, or coordinating requirements, procedures, and programs for conducting background checks under section 70105 of title 46, United States Code, section 5103a(c) of title 49, United States Code, section 44936 of title 49, United States Code, and other provisions of Federal law or regulations requiring background checks for individuals engaged in transportation or transportation-related activities; (2) setting forth a detailed timeline for implementation of such harmonization, combination, or coordination; (3) setting forth a plan with a detailed timeline for the implementation of the Transportation Worker Identification Credential in seaports; (4) making recommendations for a waiver and appeals process for issuing a transportation security card to an individual found otherwise ineligible for such a card under section 70105(c)(2) and (3) of title 46, United States Code, along with recommendations on the appropriate level of funding for such a process; and (5) making recommendations for how information collected through the Transportation Worker Identification Credential program may be shared with port officials, terminal operators, and other officials responsible for maintaining access control while also protecting workers' privacy.
REPORT ON CRUISE SHIP SECURITY.
In General.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a report on the security of ships and facilities used in the cruise line industry.
Content.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include an assessment of security measures employed by the cruise line industry, including the following: (1) An assessment of the security of cruise ships that originate at ports in foreign countries.
An assessment of the security of ports utilized for cruise ship docking.
The costs incurred by the cruise line industry to carry out the measures required by the Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-295; 116 United States Statutes at Large 2064) and the amendments made by that Act.
The costs of employing canine units and hand-held explosive detection wands at ports, including the costs of screening passengers and baggage with such methods.
An assessment of security measures taken by the Secretary of Homeland Security to increase the security of the cruise line industry and the costs incurred to carry out such security measures.
A description of the need for and the feasibility of deploying explosive detection systems and canine units at ports used by cruise ships and an assessment of the cost of such deployment.
A summary of the fees paid by passengers of cruise ships that are used for inspections and the feasibility of creating a dedicated passenger vessel security fund from such fees.
The recommendations of the Secretary, if any, for measures that should be carried out to improve security of cruise ships that originate at ports in foreign countries.
The recommendations of the Secretary, if any, on the deployment of further measures to improve the security of cruise ships, including explosive detection systems, canine units, and the use of technology to improve baggage screening, and an assessment of the cost of implementing such measures.
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SECURITY PLAN GRANTS.
Section 70107(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--The Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Border and Transportation Security shall establish a grant program for making a fair and equitable allocation of funds to implement Area Maritime Transportation Security Plans and to help fund compliance with Federal security plans among port authorities, facility operators, and State and local agencies required to provide security services.
Grants shall be made on the basis of threat-based risk assessments subject to review and comment by the appropriate Federal Maritime Security Coordinators and the Maritime Administration.
The grant program shall take into account national security priorities, national economic, and strategic defense concerns and shall be coordinated with the Director of the Office of Domestic Preparedness to ensure that the grant process is consistent with other Department of Homeland Security grant programs.''.
REPORT ON DESIGN OF MARITIME SECURITY GRANT PROGRAMS.
Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure on the design of maritime security grant programs that includes recommendations on-- (1) whether the grant programs should be discretionary or formula based and why; (2) requirements for ensuring that Federal funds will not be substituted for grantee funds; (3) targeting requirements to ensure that funding is directed in a manner that reflects a national, risk-based perspective on priority needs, the fiscal capacity of recipients to fund the improvements without grant funds, and an explicit analysis of the impact of minimum funding to small ports that could affect funding available for the most strategic or economically important ports; and (4) matching requirements to ensure that Federal funds provide an incentive to grantees for the investment of their own funds in the improvements financed in part by Federal funds.
Passed the Senate September 21, 2004.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.