This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Veterans Affairs Employment Discrimination Resolution and Adjudication Act''.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
In General.--(1) Chapter 5 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end of subchapter I the following new section: ``Sec.
Equal employment responsibilities ``(a) The Secretary shall provide that the employment discrimination complaint resolution system within the Department be established and administered so as to encourage timely and fair resolution of concerns and complaints.
The Secretary shall take steps to ensure that the system is administered in an objective, fair, and effective manner and in a manner that is perceived by employees and other interested parties as being objective, fair, and effective.
The Secretary shall provide-- ``(1) that employees responsible for counseling functions associated with employment discrimination and for receiving, investigating, and processing complaints of employment discrimination shall be supervised in those functions by, and report to, an Assistant Secretary or a Deputy Assistant Secretary for complaint resolution management; and ``(2) that employees performing employment discrimination complaint resolution functions at a facility of the Department shall not be subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Director of the facility with respect to those functions.
The Secretary shall ensure that all employees of the Department receive adequate education and training for the purposes of this section and section 319 of this title.
The Secretary shall impose appropriate disciplinary measures, as authorized by law, in the case of employees of the Department who engage in unlawful employment discrimination, including retaliation against an employee asserting rights under an equal employment opportunity law.
The number of employees of the Department whose duties include equal employment opportunity counseling functions as well as other, unrelated functions may not exceed 40 full-time equivalent employees.
Any such employee may be assigned equal employment opportunity counseling functions only at Department facilities in remote geographic locations (as determined by the Secretary).
The Secretary may waive the limitation in the preceding sentence in specific cases.
The provisions of this section shall be implemented in a manner consistent with procedures applicable under regulations prescribed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 515 the following new item: ``516.
Reports on Implementation.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to Congress reports on the implementation and operation of the equal employment opportunity system within the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The first such report shall be submitted not later than April 1, 1998, and subsequent reports shall be submitted not later than January 1, 1999, and January 1, 2000.
Each such report shall set forth the actions taken by the Secretary to implement section 516 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), and other actions taken by the Secretary in relation to the equal employment opportunity system within the Department of Veterans Affairs.
DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINT ADJUDICATION AUTHORITY IN THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
In General.--(1) Chapter 3 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication ``(a)(1) There is in the Department an Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication.
There is at the head of the Office a Director.
The Director shall be a career appointee in the Senior Executive Service.
The Director reports directly to the Secretary or the Deputy Secretary concerning matters within the responsibility of the Office.
(1) The Director is responsible for making the final agency decision within the Department on the merits of any employment discrimination complaint filed by an employee, or an applicant for employment, with the Department.
The Director shall make such decisions in an impartial and objective manner.
No person may make any ex parte communication to the Director or to any employee of the Office with respect to a matter on which the Director has responsibility for making a final agency decision.
Whenever the Director has reason to believe that there has been retaliation against an employee by reason of the employee asserting rights under an equal employment opportunity law, the Director shall report the suspected retaliatory action directly to the Secretary or Deputy Secretary, who shall take appropriate action thereon.
(1) The Office shall employ a sufficient number of attorneys and other personnel as are necessary to carry out the functions of the Office.
Attorneys shall be compensated at a level commensurate with attorneys employed by the Office of General Counsel.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Director is furnished sufficient resources in addition to personnel under paragraph (1) to enable the Director to carry out the functions of the Office in a timely manner.
The Secretary shall ensure that any performance appraisal of the Director of the Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication or of any employee of the Office does not take into consideration the record of the Director or employee in deciding cases for or against the Department.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``319.
Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication.''.
Reports on Implementation.--The Director of the Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication of the Department of Veterans Affairs (established by section 319 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a)) shall submit to the Secretary and to Congress reports on the implementation and the operation of that office.
The first such report shall be submitted not later than April 1, 1998, and subsequent reports shall be submitted not later than January 1, 1999, and January 1, 2000.
Sections 516 and 319 of title 38, United States Code, as added by sections 2 and 3 of this Act, shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INDEPENDENT PANEL TO REVIEW EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT PROCEDURES WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a panel to review the equal employment opportunity and sexual harassment practices and procedures within the Department of Veterans Affairs and to make recommendations on improvements to those practices and procedures.
Panel Functions Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity and Sexual Harassment.--The panel shall assess the culture of the Department of Veterans Affairs in relationship to the issues of equal employment opportunity and sexual harassment, determine the effect of that culture on the operation of the Department overall, and provide recommendations as necessary to change that culture.
As part of the review, the panel shall do the following: (1) Determine whether laws relating to equal employment opportunity and sexual harassment, as those laws apply to the Department of Veterans Affairs, and regulations and policy directives of the Department relating to equal employment opportunity and sexual harassment have been consistently and fairly applied throughout the Department and make recommendations to correct any disparities.
Review practices of the Department of Veterans Affairs, relevant studies, and private sector training and reporting concepts as those practices, studies, and concepts pertain to equal employment opportunity, sexual misconduct, and sexual harassment policies and enforcement.
Provide an independent assessment of the Report on the Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint Process Review Task Force of the Department.
Composition.--(1) The panel shall be composed of six members, appointed as follows: (A) Three members shall be appointed jointly by the chairman and ranking minority party member of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives.
Three members shall be appointed jointly by the chairman and ranking minority party member of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate.
The members of the panel shall choose one of the members to chair the panel.
Qualifications.--Members of the panel shall be appointed from among private United States citizens with knowledge and expertise in one or more of the following: (1) Extensive prior military experience, particularly in the area of personnel policy management.
Extensive experience with equal employment opportunity complaint procedures, either within Federal or State government or in the private sector.
Extensive knowledge of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and particularly knowledge of personnel practices within the Department.
Reports.--(1) Not later than six months after the members of the panel are appointed, the panel shall submit an interim report on its findings and conclusions to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives.
Not later than one year after establishment of the panel, the panel shall submit a final report to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives.
The final report shall include an assessment of the equal employment opportunity system and the culture within the Department of Veterans Affairs, with particular emphasis on sexual harassment.
The panel shall include in the report recommendations to improve the culture within the Department.
Pay and Expenses of Members.--(1) Each member of the panel shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the panel.
The members of the panel shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the panel.
Administrative Support.--The Chairman may hire such staff as necessary to accomplish the duties outlined under this title.
Funding.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, upon the request of the panel, make available to the panel such amounts as the panel may require, not to exceed $400,000, to carry out its duties under this title.
Termination of Panel.--The panel shall terminate 60 days after the date on which it submits its final report under subsection (e)(2).
Passed the House of Representatives October 6, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.