This Act may be cited as the ``Jetseta Gage Prevention and Deterrence of Crimes Against Children Act of 2005''.
ASSURED PUNISHMENT FOR VIOLENT CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN.
Special Sentencing Rule.--Subsection (d) of section 3559 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Mandatory Minimum Terms of Imprisonment for Violent Crimes Against Children.--A person who is convicted of a Federal crime of violence against the person of an individual who has not attained the age of 15 years shall, unless a greater mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment is otherwise provided by law and regardless of any maximum term of imprisonment otherwise provided for the offense-- ``(1) if the crime of violence results in the death of a person who has not attained the age of 15 years, be sentenced to death or life in prison; ``(2) if the crime of violence is a kidnaping, sexual assault, or maiming, (or an attempt or conspiracy to commit one of those) or results in serious bodily injury (as defined in section 1365) be imprisoned for life or for any term of years not less than 30; ``(3) if the crime of violence results in bodily injury (as defined in section 1365) to a person who has not attained the age of 12 years, be imprisoned for life or for any term of years not less than 15; ``(4) if a dangerous weapon was used during and in relation to the crime of violence, be imprisoned for life or for any term of years not less than 10; and ``(5) in any other case, be imprisoned for life or for any term of years not less than 2.''.
INCREASED PENALTIES FOR SEXUAL OFFENSES AGAINST CHILDREN.
Sexual Abuse.-- (1) Aggravated sexual abuse of children.--Section 2241(c) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``, imprisoned for any term of years or life, or both.''
and inserting ``and imprisoned for not less than 30 years or for life.''.
Abusive sexual contact with children.--Section 2244 of chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``(a) or (b)'' after ``section 2241''; (ii) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) as paragraphs (3), (4), and (5), respectively; and (iii) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) subsection (c) of section 2241 of this title had the sexual contact been a sexual act, shall be fined under this title and imprisoned for not less than 10 years and not more than 25 years;''; and (B) in subsection (c), by inserting ``(other than subsection (a)(2))'' after ``violates this section''.
Sexual abuse of children resulting in death.--Section 2245 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking ``A person'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--A person''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Offenses Involving Young Children.--A person who, in the course of an offense under this chapter, engages in conduct that results in the death of a person who has not attained the age of 12 years, shall be punished by death or imprisoned for not less than 30 years or for life.''.
Sexual Exploitation and Other Abuse of Children.-- (1) Sexual exploitation of children.--Section 2251(e) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking ``15 years nor more than 30 years'' and inserting ``25 years or for life''; (B) by striking ``not less than 25 years nor more than 50 years, but if such person has 2 or more prior convictions under this chapter, chapter 71, chapter 109A, or chapter 117, or under section 920 of title 10 (article 120 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), or under the laws of any State relating to the sexual exploitation of children, such person shall be fined under this title and imprisoned not less than 35 years nor more than life.''
''; and (C) by striking ``any term of years or for life'' and inserting ``not less than 30 years or for life.''.
Activities relating to material involving the sexual exploitation of children.--Section 2252(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``5 years and not more than 20 years'' and inserting ``25 years or for life''; and (ii) by striking ``not less than 15 years nor more than 40 years.''
''; and (B) in paragraph (2)-- (i) by striking ``or imprisoned for not more than'' and inserting ``and imprisoned for''; (ii) by striking ``, or both''; and (iii) by striking ``10 years nor more than 20 years.''
and inserting ``30 years or for life.''.
Activities relating to material constituting or containing child pornography.--Section 2252A(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``5 years and not more than 20 years'' and inserting ``25 years or for life''; and (ii) by striking ``not less than 15 years nor more than 40 years'' and inserting ``life''; and (B) in paragraph (2)-- (i) by striking ``or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both'' and inserting ``and imprisoned for 10 years''; and (ii) by striking ``10 years nor more than 20 years'' and inserting ``30 years or for life''.
Using misleading domain names to direct children to harmful material on the internet.--Section 2252B(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``or imprisoned not more than 4 years, or both'' and inserting ``imprisoned for 10 years''.
Production of sexually explicit depictions of children.--Section 2260(c) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting the following: ``(1) shall be fined under this title and imprisoned for 25 years; and ``(2) if the person has a prior conviction under this chapter or chapter 109A, shall be fined under this title and imprisoned for life.''.
Conduct Relating to Child Prostitution.--Section 2423 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``5 years and not more than 30 years'' and inserting ``30 years or for life''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both'' and inserting ``and imprisoned for not less than 10 years and not more than 30 years''; (3) in subsection (c), by striking ``or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both'' and inserting ``and imprisoned for not less than 10 years and not more than 30 years''; and (4) in subsection (d), by striking ``, imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both'' and inserting ``and imprisoned for 30 years''.
ENSURING FAIR AND EXPEDITIOUS FEDERAL COLLATERAL REVIEW OF CONVICTIONS FOR KILLING A CHILD.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Christy Ann Fornoff Act''.
Limits on Cases.--Section 2254 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j)(1) A court, justice, or judge shall not have jurisdiction to consider any claim relating to the judgment or sentence in an application described under paragraph (2), unless the applicant shows that the claim qualifies for consideration on the grounds described in subsection (e)(2).
Any such application that is presented to a court, justice, or judge other than a district court shall be transferred to the appropriate district court for consideration or dismissal in conformity with this subsection, except that a court of appeals panel must authorize any second or successive application in conformity with section 2244 before any consideration by the district court.
This subsection applies to an application for a writ of habeas corpus on behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a State court for a crime that involved the killing of a individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
For an application described in paragraph (2), the following requirements shall apply in the district court: ``(A) Any motion by either party for an evidentiary hearing shall be filed and served not later than 90 days after the State files its answer or, if no timely answer is filed, the date on which such answer is due.
Any motion for an evidentiary hearing shall be granted or denied not later than 30 days after the date on which the party opposing such motion files a pleading in opposition to such motion or, if no timely pleading in opposition is filed, the date on which such pleading in opposition is due.
Any evidentiary hearing shall be-- ``(i) convened not less than 60 days after the order granting such hearing; and ``(ii) completed not more than 150 days after the order granting such hearing.
A district court shall enter a final order, granting or denying the application for a writ of habeas corpus, not later than 15 months after the date on which the State files its answer or, if no timely answer is filed, the date on which such answer is due, or not later than 60 days after the case is submitted for decision, whichever is earlier.
If the district court fails to comply with the requirements of this paragraph, the State may petition the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus to enforce the requirements.
The court of appeals shall grant or deny the petition for a writ of mandamus not later than 30 days after such petition is filed with the court.
For an application described in paragraph (2), the following requirements shall apply in the court of appeals: ``(A) A timely filed notice of appeal from an order issuing a writ of habeas corpus shall operate as a stay of that order pending final disposition of the appeal.
The court of appeals shall decide the appeal from an order granting or denying a writ of habeas corpus-- ``(i) not later than 120 days after the date on which the brief of the appellee is filed or, if no timely brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due; or ``(ii) if a cross-appeal is filed, not later than 120 days after the date on which the appellant files a brief in response to the issues presented by the cross- appeal or, if no timely brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due.
(i) Following a decision by a panel of the court of appeals under subparagraph (B), a petition for panel rehearing is not allowed, but rehearing by the court of appeals en banc may be requested.
The court of appeals shall decide whether to grant a petition for rehearing en banc not later than 30 days after the date on which the petition is filed, unless a response is required, in which case the court shall decide whether to grant the petition not later than 30 days after the date on which the response is filed or, if no timely response is filed, the date on which the response is due.
If rehearing en banc is granted, the court of appeals shall make a final determination of the appeal not later than 120 days after the date on which the order granting rehearing en banc is entered.
If the court of appeals fails to comply with the requirements of this paragraph, the State may petition the Supreme Court or a justice thereof for a writ of mandamus to enforce the requirements.
(A) The time limitations under paragraphs (3) and (4) shall apply to an initial application described in paragraph (2), any second or successive application described in paragraph (2), and any redetermination of an application described in paragraph (2) or related appeal following a remand by the court of appeals or the Supreme Court for further proceedings.
In proceedings following remand in the district court, time limits running from the time the State files its answer under paragraph (3) shall run from the date the remand is ordered if further briefing is not required in the district court.
If there is further briefing following remand in the district court, such time limits shall run from the date on which a responsive brief is filed or, if no timely responsive brief is filed, the date on which such brief is due.
In proceedings following remand in the court of appeals, the time limit specified in paragraph (4)(B) shall run from the date the remand is ordered if further briefing is not required in the court of appeals.
If there is further briefing in the court of appeals, the time limit specified in paragraph (4)(B) shall run from the date on which a responsive brief is filed or, if no timely responsive brief is filed, from the date on which such brief is due.
The failure of a court to meet or comply with a time limitation under this subsection shall not be a ground for granting relief from a judgment of conviction or sentence, nor shall the time limitations under this subsection be construed to entitle a capital applicant to a stay of execution, to which the applicant would otherwise not be entitled, for the purpose of litigating any application or appeal.''.
Rights Associated With Habeas Corpus Proceedings.--Section 3771(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The rights established for crime victims by this section shall also be extended in a Federal habeas corpus proceeding arising out of a State conviction to victims of the State offense at issue.''
Application to Pending Cases.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to cases pending on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Time limits.--In a case pending on the date of enactment of this Act, if the amendments made by this section provide that a time limit runs from an event or time that has occurred prior to such date of enactment, the time limit shall run instead from such date of enactment.