AMENDMENT TO THE REVISED ORGANIC ACT OF THE VIRGIN ISLANDS.
Temporary Absence of Officials Clarified.--Section 14 of the Revised Organic Act of the Virgin Islands (48 United States Code 1595) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) The laws of the Virgin Islands may define whether an absence from the Virgin Islands of the Governor or the Lieutenant Governor, while on official business, is a `temporary absence' for purposes of this section.''.
Short Term Borrowing Authorization.--Section 8(b) of the Revised Organic Act of the Virgin Islands (48 United States Code 1574(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) The legislature of the government of the Virgin Islands may issue notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes and revenues for the current year, but the principal amount of such notes may not exceed the anticipated taxes and revenues for such year.
Such notes shall mature and be redeemed not later than 1 year from the date of issue.
No extension of such notes shall be valid and no additional notes shall be issued under this authority until the outstanding principal and interest on all notes issued under this authority during preceding years has been paid.''.
Priority of Bonds.--Section 3 of Public Law 94-392 (48 United States Code 1574c) is amended-- (1) by striking ``priority for payment'' and inserting ``a parity lien with every other issue of bonds or other obligations issued for payment''; and (2) by striking ``in the order of the date of issue''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to obligations issued on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
VIRGIN ISLANDS DEVELOPMENT ACT.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Virgin Islands Development Act of 1997''.
Establishment of Commission.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on the Economic Future of the Virgin Islands'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Appointed Members.--(1) The Commission shall consist of 6 members who shall be appointed by the President.
The members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall have a background and experience which shall enable them to contribute to achievement of the purposes of the Commission.
3 of the members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be selected from nominations made by the Governor of the Virgin Islands.
Ex-Officio Member.--The Secretary of the Interior shall be an ex-officio member of the Commission.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate 1 member from among the members appointed pursuant to subsection (c)(1) the Chairperson of the Committee.
Subject to general policies of the Commission, the Chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of the Commission and shall exercise the executive and administrative powers of the Commission.
The Chairperson may delegate the performance of such executive and administrative functions to the staff of the Commission.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
Powers.--The Commission may-- (1) hold hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive evidence as the Committee considers appropriate; (2) use the United States mail in the same manner and under the same conditions as departments and agencies of the United States; and (3) with available funds, incur such expenses and enter into contracts or agreements to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, office space, furnishings, equipment, staff, and other administrative services.
Assistance of Federal Agencies and Departments.--Upon request of the Commission, the President may direct the head of any Federal agency or department to assist the Commission and if so directed such head shall-- (1) furnish, upon request of the Commission, information-- (A) that may be necessary for carrying out the functions of the Commission; (B) to the extent permitted by law; (C) within available appropriations; and (D) that is available to or procurable by such department or agency; and (2) detail to temporary duty with the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such personnel as the Commission may need to carry out its duties.
Each such detail shall be without loss of seniority, pay, or other employee status.
Duties.--(1) The Commission shall make recommendations to the President and Congress on the policies and actions necessary to provide for a secure and self-sustaining future for the local economy of the Virgin Islands through 2020 and on the role of the Federal Government.
In developing recommendations pursuant to paragraph (1), the Commission shall-- (A) solicit and analyze information on projected private sector development and shifting tourism trends based on alternative forecasts of economic, political, and social conditions in the Caribbean, including the possible effect of expansion in the near future of Cuba in trade, tourism, and development; (B) analyze capital infrastructure, education, social, health, and environmental needs in light of the forecasts described in subparagraph (A); (C) analyze of the capability of the Virgin Islands to meet needs which are projected based on the analysis pursuant to subparagraphs (A) and (B); and (D) assemble relevant demographic, economic, and revenue and expenditure data for the years 1972 through 1997.
The Commission shall transmit a report which includes its recommendations made pursuant to this section to the President, the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, and the Committee on Resource of the House of Representatives no later than June 30, 1999.
The report shall set forth the basis for the recommendations and include the analysis made pursuant to paragraph (2)(C).
Funding.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior $300,000 per year, in fiscal years 1998 and 1999 for the work of the Commission.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 3 months after the report is transmitted pursuant to section (3)(k)(3).