This Act may be cited as the ``National Rail Infrastructure Program Act''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM SEC.
The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a National Rail Infrastructure Program to provide grants for projects that address railroad infrastructure and systems deficiencies in order to provide substantial public benefits such as mitigating highway traffic congestion, reducing transportation emissions, reducing energy used in transportation, or improving the overall efficiency of railroad operations.
In General.--Projects eligible for funding under this title shall include projects to maintain and increase track and intermodal yard capacity, to acquire rights-of-way for future expansion, to separate railroad and road crossings and make other railroad and road interface improvements, to separate rail-to-rail crossings, to integrate railroad systems, and to construct, repair, and rehabilitate track and related supporting structures.
Noneligible Purposes.--Funding shall not be provided under this title for operating expenses, acquisition of rolling stock, payment of debt, or construction or repair of maintenance facilities, passenger facilities at stations, or other ancillary railroad business structures.
INCLUSION IN STATE PLANS.
A project shall not be funded under this title unless it is included in-- (1) a long-range transportation plan prepared under section 134(g) of title 23, United States Code; (2) a State plan developed under section 135 of title 23, United States Code; or (3) a transportation improvement program under section 5304 of title 49, United States Code.
At least 20 percent of the costs of a project for which funding is provided under this title shall be provided by State, local, and other non-Federal public sources.
Formula Amounts.-- (1) Percentage.--The Secretary of Transportation shall provide 80 percent of the amount available for grants under this title for each fiscal year to States according to the formula described in paragraph (2), in grants for eligible projects in the States.
Formula.--Amounts described in paragraph (1) shall be distributed among the States according to a formula designed by the Secretary of Transportation to weigh equally for each State-- (A) the number of rail miles in the State; (B) the number of rail cars loaded in the State; (C) the number of rail cars unloaded in the State; and (D) the number of railroad and public road grade crossings in the State.
Secretary's Discretionary Amounts.--The Secretary of Transportation shall use 20 percent of the amount available for grants under this title for each fiscal year to directly make grants for eligible projects of national significance, with emphasis on projects with the greatest public benefit.
The Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that laborers and mechanics employed by contractors and subcontractors in construction work on projects funded under this title will be paid wages not less than those prevailing on similar construction in the locality, as determined by the Secretary of Labor under the Act of March 3, 1931 (known as the Davis-Bacon Act) (40 United States Code 276a-276a-5).
General Rule.--Except to the extent that the Secretary of Transportation determines otherwise, not less than 10 percent of the amounts made available under this Act shall be expended with small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals.
Definitions.--The terms used in this section have the meaning given those terms in section 1101(b)(2) of the Transportation Equity Act For the 21st Century (23 United States Code 101 note).
For purposes of this title-- (1) the term ``rail miles'' means route miles, not track miles; and (2) the term ``railroad'' means freight, intercity passenger, and commuter rail transportation operated as part of the general system of rail transportation.
EXCISE TAX ON SALE OF CERTAIN TRAIN EQUIPMENT.
In General.--Chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to manufacturers excise taxes) is amended by inserting after subchapter D the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter E--Railroad Locomotives and Rolling Stock ``Sec.
In General.--There is hereby imposed on the sale of any specified railroad equipment by the manufacturer, producer, or importer a tax equal to 5 percent of the price for which so sold.
Specified Railroad Equipment.--For purposes of this section, the term `specified railroad equipment' means-- ``(1) any railroad locomotive, and ``(2) any other railroad rolling stock.
Separate Purchase of Parts and Accessories.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary-- ``(1) In general.--If-- ``(A) the owner, lessee, or operator of any specified railroad equipment installs (or causes to be installed) any part or accessory on such equipment, and ``(B) such installation is not later than the date 6 months after the date such equipment was first placed in service, then there is hereby imposed on such installation a tax equal to 5 percent of the price of such part or accessory and its installation.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the part or accessory installed is a replacement part or accessory.
Installers secondarily liable for tax.--The owners of the trade or business installing the parts or accessories shall be secondarily liable for the tax imposed by paragraph (1).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 32 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to subchapter D the following new item: ``Subchapter E. Railroad locomotives and rolling stock.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2003.
TAX ON RAIL TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
In General.--Chapter 33 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting before subchapter B the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter A--Transportation by Rail ``Sec.
Definitions and special rules.
In General.--There is hereby imposed on the amount paid for taxable rail transportation of any person a tax equal to-- ``(1) 5 percent of the amount so paid in the case of taxable rail transportation by commuter rail, and ``(2) 10 percent of the amount so paid in any other case.
By Whom Paid.--The tax imposed by this section shall be paid by the person making the payment subject to the tax.
In General.--there is hereby imposed upon the amount paid within or without the United States for the taxable rail transportation of property a tax equal to 1 percent of the amount so paid for such transportation.
The tax imposed by this subsection shall apply only to amounts paid to a person engaged in the business of transporting property by rail for hire.
By Whom Paid.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid by the person making the payment subject to tax.
Payments made outside the united states.--If a payment subject to tax under subsection (a) is made outside the United States and the person making such payment does not pay such tax, such tax-- ``(A) shall be paid by the person to whom the property is delivered in the United States by the person furnishing the last segment of the taxable transportation in respect of which such tax is imposed, and ``(B) shall be collected by the person furnishing the last segment of such taxable transportation.
DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
Taxable Rail Transportation.--For purposes of this subchapter, the term `taxable rail transportation' means transportation by rail within the United States, other than by mass transit.
Transportation.--For purposes of this subchapter, the term `transportation' includes layover or waiting time and movement of the train in deadhead service.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Payments made outside the United States for prepaid orders.--If the payment upon which tax is imposed by section 4241 is made outside the United States for a prepaid order, exchange order, or similar order, the person furnishing the initial transportation pursuant to such order shall collect the amount of the tax.
Tax deducted upon refunds.--Every person who refunds any amount with respect to a ticket or order which was purchased without payment of the tax imposed by section 4241 shall deduct from the amount refundable, to the extent available, any tax due under such section as a result of the use of a portion of the transportation purchased in connection with such ticket or order, and shall report to the Secretary the amount of any such tax remaining uncollected.
Payment of tax.--Where any tax imposed by section 4241 is not paid at the time payment for transportation is made, then, under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, to the extent that such tax is not collected under any other provision of this subchapter, such tax shall be paid by the carrier providing the initial segment of such transportation in the United States.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 33 of such Code is amended by inserting before the item relating to subchapter B the following new item: ``Subchapter A.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2003.
NATIONAL RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `National Rail Infrastructure Program Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the National Rail Infrastructure Program Trust Fund amounts equivalent to-- ``(1) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4191 (relating to taxes on railroad locomotives and rolling stock), ``(2) 10 percent of all customs duties received in the Treasury after September 30, 2003, ``(3) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4041 or 4081 to the extent attributable to fuel used in a train, and ``(4) 10 percent of all royalties received by the United States attributable to the removal of oil or gas from Federal lands.
Expenditures.--Amounts in the National Rail Infrastructure Program Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only for purposes of making expenditures to carry out title I of the National Rail Infrastructure Program Act.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
National Rail Infrastructure Program Trust Fund.''