This Act may be cited as the ``Troops' Soft Landing, Employment, and Rural Transportation Act''.
RETENTION ON ACTIVE DUTY AFTER DEMOBILIZATION OF RESERVES FOLLOWING EXTENDED DEPLOYMENTS IN CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS OR HOMELAND DEFENSE MISSIONS.
In General.--Chapter 1209 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RESERVES: RETENTION ON ACTIVE DUTY AFTER DEMOBILIZATION FOLLOWING EXTENDED DEPLOYMENTS IN CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS OR HOMELAND DEFENSE MISSIONS.
In General.--A member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces described in subsection (b) shall be retained on active duty in the Armed Forces for a period of 90 days following the conclusion of the member's demobilization from a deployment as described in that subsection, and shall be authorized the use of any accrued leave.
Covered Members.--A member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces described in this subsection is any member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces who was deployed for more than 179 days under the following: ``(1) A contingency operation.
A homeland defense mission (as specified by the Secretary of Defense for purposes of this section).
Pay and Allowances.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a member on active duty under subsection (a) shall be paid pay and allowances as follows: ``(1) For the first 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty-- ``(A) the basic pay payable to a member of the Armed Forces under section 204 of title 37 in the same pay grade as the member; ``(B) the basic allowance for subsistence payable under section 402 of title 37; and ``(C) the basic allowance for housing payable under section 403 of title 37 for a member in the same pay grade, geographic location, and number of dependents as the member.
For the second 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty, basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing as described in paragraph (1) but at rates equal to 75 percent of the rates otherwise payable as described in that paragraph.
For the third 30 days during which the member is so retained on active duty, basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing as described in paragraph (1) but at rates equal to 50 percent of the rates otherwise payable as described in that paragraph.
Release From Active Duty.--(1) A member retained on active duty under subsection (a) may be released from active duty at the request of the member at any time following the end of the 15-day period commencing on the date the member is retained on active duty under subsection (a).
The request of a member for release from active duty under this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the officer in the chain of command of the member in grade O-5.
Reintegration Counseling and Services.--(1) The Secretary of the military department concerned shall provide each member retained on active duty under subsection (a), while the member is so retained on active duty, counseling and services to assist the member in reintegrating into civilian life.
The counseling and services provided members under this subsection shall include the following: ``(A) Physical and mental health evaluations.
Employment counseling and assistance.
Marriage and family counseling and assistance.
Counseling and assistance on benefits available to the member through the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The Secretary of the military department concerned shall provide, to the extent practicable, for the participation of appropriate family members of members retained on active duty under subsection (a) in the counseling and services provided such members under this subsection.
The counseling and services provided to members under this subsection shall, to the extent practicable, be provided at National Guard armories and similar facilities close the residences of such members.
Counseling and services provided a member under this subsection shall, to the extent practicable, be provided in coordination with the Yellow Ribbon Reintegration Program of the State concerned under section 582 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (10 United States Code 10101 note)''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 1209 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``12323.
Reserves: retention on active duty after demobilization following extended deployments in contingency operations or homeland defense missions.''.
WORK OPPORTUNITY TAX CREDIT.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(15) Special rule for veterans residing in high unemployment counties.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an unemployed veteran who is treated as a member of a targeted group under subparagraph (B) and who has performed at least 800 hours of service for the employer-- ``(i) subsection (a) shall be applied by substituting `50 percent' for `40 percent', and ``(ii) subsection (b)(3) shall be applied by substituting `$10,000' for `$6,000'.
Treatment as member of targeted group.--An unemployed veteran who is certified by the designated local agency as having his principal place of abode within a county that, at any time during the 6-month period ending on the hiring date, is a high unemployment county shall be treated as a member of a targeted group for purposes of this subpart.
Unemployed veteran.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `unemployed veteran' has the meaning given such term by paragraph (14)(B)(i) without regard to subclause (II) thereof.
High unemployment county.--The term `high unemployment county' means a county for which the unemployment rate for the preceding month equals or exceeds the national unemployment threshold for such month.
National unemployment threshold.-- ``(i) In general.--The national unemployment threshold is 12 percent.
Threshold indexed.--For any month beginning after the month in which this subparagraph is enacted, the national unemployment threshold in subclause (I) shall be the percentage in clause (i) (determined without regard to the application of this clause) multiplied by the ratio which the national unemployment rate for such month bears to 9.5 percent.
Unemployment rates.--The national unemployment rate and the unemployment rate for a county for any month shall be the unadjusted rates for such month determined by the Current Population Survey conducted by the Bureau of Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to individuals who begin work for the employer after the date of the enactment of this Act.
GRANTS FOR ELIGIBLE ENTITIES PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION TO DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL FACILITIES FOR VETERANS LIVING IN RURAL AREAS.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish a grant program to award grants on a competitive basis to eligible entities for the purpose of providing transportation options to veterans residing in rural areas.
Eligible entities.--For purposes of the grant program under this section, an eligible entity is a government entity and non-profit service provider, including a State veterans' service agency, a veterans service organization, a local governmental authority, and a private non-profit organization.
Use of funds.--The recipient of a grant under this section shall use the grant to assist veterans in rural areas to travel to Department of Veterans Affairs medical facilities.
Maximum amount.--The amount of a grant under this section may not exceed $100,000 for any fiscal year.
No matching requirement.--The recipient of a grant under this section shall not be required to provide matching funds as a condition for receiving such grant.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations for-- (1) evaluating grant applications under this section; (2) directing Department of Veterans Affairs medical facilities to coordinate with recipients of such grants to ensure maximum use of transportation service at the least cost; and (3) coordinating transportation services provided under this section with existing local transportation services.
Definitions and Special Rule.--In this section: (1) The term ``veterans service organization'' means any organization recognized by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the representation of veterans under section 5902 of title 38, United States Code.
The term ``local governmental authority'' means a local governmental authority as defined in 5302(a)(6) of title 49, United States Code, that provides public transportation as defined in 5302(a)(10) of title 49, United States Code.
A veteran is residing in a rural area if the veteran-- (A) resides in a location that is-- (i) more than 30 miles driving distance from the nearest Department health care facility providing primary care services, if the veteran is seeking such services; (ii) more than 60 miles driving distance from the nearest Department health care facility providing acute hospital care, if the veteran is seeking such care; or (iii) more than 100 miles driving distance from the nearest Department health care facility providing tertiary care, if the veteran is seeking such care; or (B) in the case of a veteran who resides in a location less than the distance specified in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subparagraph (A), as applicable, experiences such hardship or other difficulties in travel to the nearest appropriate Department health care facility that such travel is not in the best interest of the veteran, as determined by the Secretary pursuant to regulations prescribed for purposes of this subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2013 to carry out this section.