This Act may be cited as the ``FEC Reauthorization Act of 1998''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION FOR FISCAL YEAR 1999.
Section 314 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 439c) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and $9,400,000'' and inserting ``$9,400,000''; and (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting the following: ``, and $33,700,000 for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1999, of which $2,800,000 shall be available only if at least 4 members of the Commission vote not later than September 30, 1998, to adopt a re-prioritization plan for the purpose of improving enforcement procedures and preventing the unnecessary dismissal of appropriate enforcement actions.''.
APPOINTMENT AND SERVICE OF STAFF DIRECTOR AND GENERAL COUNSEL OF COMMISSION.
Appointment; Length of Term of Service.-- (1) In general.--The first sentence of section 306(f)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437c(f)(1)) is amended by striking ``by the Commission'' and inserting the following: ``by an affirmative vote of not less than 4 members of the Commission and may not serve for a term of more than 4 consecutive years without reappointment in accordance with this paragraph''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to any individual serving as the staff director or general counsel of the Federal Election Commission on or after January 1, 1999, without regard to whether or not the individual served as staff director or general counsel prior to such date.
Treatment of Individuals Filling Vacancies; Termination of Authority Upon Expiration of Term.--Section 306(f)(1) of such Act (2 United States Code 437c(f)(1)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentences: ``An individual appointed as a staff director or general counsel to fill a vacancy occurring other than by the expiration of a term of office shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the individual he or she succeeds.
An individual serving as staff director or general counsel may not serve in any capacity on behalf of the Commission after the expiration of the individual's term unless reappointed in accordance with this paragraph.''.
ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES FOR REPORTING VIOLATIONS.
In General.--Section 309(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)(4)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ``clause (ii)'' and inserting ``clause (ii) and subparagraph (C)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C)(i) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), in the case of a violation of any requirement under this Act relating to the reporting of receipts or disbursements, the Commission may-- ``(I) find that a person committed such a violation on the basis of information obtained pursuant to the procedures described in paragraphs (1) and (2); and ``(II) based on such finding, require the person to pay a civil money penalty in an amount determined under a schedule of penalties which is established and published by the Commission and which takes into account the amount of the violation involved, the existence of previous violations by the person, and such other factors as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may not make any determination adverse to a person under clause (i) until the person has been given written notice and an opportunity for the determination to be made on the record.
Any person against whom an adverse determination is made under this subparagraph may obtain a review of such determination in the district court of the United States for the district in which the person is found, resides, or transacts business, by filing in such court (prior to the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the date the person receives notification of the determination) a written petition requesting that the determination be modified or set aside.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 309(a)(6)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 437g(a)(6)(A)) is amended by striking ``paragraph (4)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraph (4)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to violations occurring on or after January 1, 1999.
STANDARD FOR INITIATION OF ACTIONS BY FEC.
In General.--Section 309(a)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Not later than 90 days after the time for responding to a complaint under paragraph (1) has elapsed for all respondents, the general counsel of the Commission shall provide a recommendation to the Commission regarding whether there is sufficient or insufficient reason for the Commission to investigate any violation alleged in the complaint.
If the Commission, upon receiving a complaint under paragraph (1) (or on the basis of information ascertained in the normal course of carrying out its supervisory responsibilities), determines by an affirmative vote of 4 of its members that it has a sufficient reason to investigate whether a person has committed (or is about to commit) a violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the Commission (through its chair or vice chair) shall notify the person of the alleged violation, and shall set forth in such notification the factual and legal basis for such alleged violation.
The Commission shall make an investigation of such alleged violation (which may include a field investigation or audit) in accordance with the provisions of this section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to complaints filed on or after January 1, 1999.