This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Heritage Firearms Act of 2002''.
AMNESTY PERIOD FOR VETERANS TO REGISTER QUALIFYING FIREARMS.
Registration.--Subject to such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the applicable veteran or a member of such a veteran's family, who owns and possesses a qualifying firearm, may register such firearm in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record (described in section 5841 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) during the amnesty period.
Qualifying Firearm.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``qualifying firearm'' means any firearm which was acquired-- (A) before October 31, 1968; and (B) by a veteran, while such veteran was a member of the Armed Forces and was stationed outside the continental United States.
Presumption of validity.--With respect to any firearm, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary-- (A) the Secretary shall accept as true and accurate any affidavit, document, or other evidence submitted by an individual to establish that such firearm meets the requirements of paragraph (1); and (B) the requirement of paragraph (1)(C) shall be treated as met.
Hearings.--If the Secretary determines that any individual may not register a firearm under subsection (a) during the amnesty period, the Secretary, upon the request of such individual, shall-- (1) provide such individual any evidence on which the Secretary's decision is based; and (2) promptly hold a hearing to review such determination.
Limited Immunity.-- (1) Criminal liability under title 18.--Any individual who registers a firearm under subsection (a)-- (A) shall be treated, for purposes of subsections (a)(3), (o), (v), and (w) of section 922 of title 18, United States Code, as having lawfully acquired and possessed the firearm before the date of the enactment of chapter 44 of such title and each of such chapter's provisions; and (B) shall not be liable under chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, for any violation of such chapter which-- (i) is based solely on such individual's ownership, possession, transportation, importation, or alteration of such firearm; and (ii) occurred before or concurrent with such registration.
Criminal liability under internal revenue code.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), any individual who registers a firearm under subsection (a) shall not be liable under chapter 53 or 75 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for any violation of such chapters which relates to such firearm and which occurred before or concurrent with such registration.
Transfer tax liability.--Paragraph (2) shall not affect the liability of any individual for any transfer tax imposed under section 5811 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Forfeiture.--Any firearm registered under subsection (a) shall not be subject to seizure or forfeiture under chapter 53 or 75 of the Internal Revenue Code or chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, for any violation of such chapters which relates to such firearm and which occurred before or concurrent with such registration.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Amnesty period.--The term ``amnesty period'' means the 90-day period beginning on the date that is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Firearm.--The term ``firearm'' has the meaning given such term in section 5845 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, except that such term does not include-- (A) any device described in subsection (f)(1) of such section; or (B) any combination of parts-- (i) designed or intended for use in converting any device into a device described in subparagraph (A); or (ii) from which a device described in subparagraph (A) may be readily assembled.
Applicable veteran.--With respect to any firearm, the term ``applicable veteran'' means the veteran described in subsection (b)(1)(B).
Veteran.--The term ``veteran'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(2) of title 38, United States Code.
Family.--The term ``family'' means, with respect to a veteran, the grandparents of such veteran, the grandparents of such veteran's spouse, the lineal descendants of such grandparents, and any spouse of such a lineal descendant.
A spouse of an individual who is legally separated from such individual under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance shall be treated as such individual's spouse for purposes of this paragraph.
Individuals related by the half blood or by legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole blood for purposes of this paragraph.
Continental united states.--The term ``continental United States'' means the several States and the District of Columbia, but does not include Alaska or Hawaii.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
TRANSFER OF MACHINEGUNS TO MUSEUMS.
Section 922(o)(2) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) a transfer to or by, or possession by, a museum which is open to the public and incorporated as a not-for-profit corporation under applicable State law; or''.