SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Rural Ambulance Service Improvement Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Payment increases for rural ambulance services.
Basing rural areas on population density by postal zip codes.
Requiring use of recent data for calculation of budget neutrality adjustment.
Exemption of ambulance suppliers from certain provider designation rules.
Calculation of separate rates for ground and air ambulance services.
PAYMENT INCREASES FOR RURAL AMBULANCE SERVICES.
20 Percent Increase.--Section 1834(l) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(l)), as amended by sections 205(a) and 221(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (114 United States Statutes at Large 2763A-482, 486), as enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (8), as added by such section 221(a), as paragraph (9), and (2) by inserting after that paragraph the following new paragraph: ``(10) Increase for rural ambulance services.--Effective for ambulance services furnished on or after January 1, 2002, for which the transportation originates in a rural area or tract to which paragraph (9) applies, notwithstanding the previous provisions of this subsection, the Secretary shall provide for an additional payment for such services equal to 20 percent of the payment amount otherwise made under this section for such services.''.
Increase in Mileage Rates for First 50 Miles.--Paragraph (9) of that section, as so redesignated under subsection (a)(1), is amended-- (1) in the heading, by striking ``Transitional assistance'' and inserting ``Mileage assistance''; (2) by striking ``furnished on or after July 1, 2001, and before January 1, 2004,''; (3) by striking ``that,'' and inserting ``that--''; (4) by designating the remaining text of paragraph (9) that follows ``that--'' a new subparagraph (B) and indenting such subparagraph 2 ems to the right; (5) in such subparagraph (B), by striking ``with respect to the payment rate for mileage for a trip above 17 miles, and up to 50 miles, the rate otherwise established shall be increased'' and inserting ``for ambulance services furnished on or after July 1, 2001, the payment rate otherwise established for mileage for a trip above 17 miles, and up to 50 miles, shall be increased''; and (6) by inserting before such subparagraph (B) the following new subparagraph: ``(A) for ambulance services furnished on or after January 1, 2002, the payment rate otherwise established for mileage for the first 17 miles of a trip transporting a patient shall be increased by $7.50 per mile; and''.
Nonapplication of Initial Budget Neutrality Provisions.--The provisions of section 1834(l)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(l)(3)(A)) do not apply with respect to the amendments made by this section.
BASING RURAL AREAS ON POPULATION DENSITY BY POSTAL ZIP CODES.
In General.--Section 1834(l) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(l)) is amended in paragraph (9), as so redesignated by section 2(a)(1), by striking ``(as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D))'' and all that follows through ``(57 Fed.
6725))'' and inserting ``(as determined under an area classification system established by the Secretary that is based on population density within postal zip code areas)''.
Effective Date.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish the classification system described in the amendment made by subsection (a) by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Such amendment shall apply to services furnished on or after such date, not later than 30 days after the establishment of such system, as the Secretary shall provide by regulation.
REQUIRING USE OF RECENT DATA FOR CALCULATION OF BUDGET NEUTRALITY ADJUSTMENT.
In General.--Section 1834(l)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(l)(3)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) in making the determination under subparagraph (A), use data from the most recent year for which such data are available, but may not use data from a year that preceded the two-year period ending on the date of the implementation of the fee schedule under this subsection; and''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to ambulance services furnished on or after January 1, 2003.
EXEMPTION OF AMBULANCE SUPPLIERS FROM CERTAIN PROVIDER DESIGNATION RULES.
In applying the regulation for requirements for determination that a facility or organization has provider-based status under section 413.65 of title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not apply the regulation with respect to ambulance services.
CALCULATION OF SEPARATE RATES FOR GROUND AND AIR AMBULANCE SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1861(v)(1)(U) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(U)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In carrying out the first sentence, upon request of a hospital, the Secretary shall determine and apply separately the reasonable costs of ground and air ambulance services.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to ambulance services furnished on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.