SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Hunger-Free Communities Act of 2006''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--NATIONAL COMMITMENT TO END HUNGER Sec.
TITLE II--STRENGTHENING COMMUNITY EFFORTS Sec.
Hunger-free communities collaborative grants.
Hunger-free communities training and technical assistance grants.
TITLE III--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS Sec.
Congress finds that-- (1)(A) at the 1996 World Food Summit, the United States, along with 185 other countries, pledged to reduce the number of undernourished people by half by 2015; and (B) as a result of this pledge, the Department of Health and Human Services adopted the Healthy People 2010 goal to cut food insecurity in half by 2010, and in doing so reduce hunger; (2)(A) national nutrition programs are among the fastest, most direct ways to efficiently and effectively prevent hunger, reduce food insecurity, and improve nutrition among the populations targeted by a program; (3) in 2001, food banks, food pantries, soup kitchens, and emergency shelters helped to feed more than 23,000,000 low- income people; and (4) community-based organizations and charities can help-- (A) play an important role in preventing and reducing hunger; (B) measure community food security; (C) develop and implement plans for improving food security; (D) educate community leaders about the problems of and solutions to hunger; (E) ensure that local nutrition programs are implemented effectively; and (F) improve the connection of food insecure people to anti-hunger programs.
In this Act: (1) Domestic hunger goal.--The term ``domestic hunger goal'' means-- (A) the goal of reducing hunger in the United States to at or below 2 percent by 2010; or (B) the goal of reducing food insecurity in the United States to at or below 6 percent by 2010.
Emergency feeding organization.--The term ``emergency feeding organization'' has the meaning given the term in section 201A of the Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983 (7 United States Code 7501).
Food security.--The term ``food security'' means the state in which an individual has access to enough food for an active, healthy life.
Hunger-free communities goal.--The term ``hunger-free communities goal'' means any of the 14 goals described in the H. Con.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
TITLE I--NATIONAL COMMITMENT TO END HUNGER SEC.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct a study not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and an update of the study not later than 5 years thereafter, of major matters relating to the problem of hunger in the United States, as determined by the Secretary.
Matters to be assessed.--The matters to be assessed by the Secretary shall include-- (A) data on hunger and food insecurity in the United States; (B) measures carried out during the previous year by Federal, State, and local governments to achieve domestic hunger goals and hunger-free communities goals; and (C) measures that could be carried out by Federal, State, and local governments to achieve domestic hunger goals and hunger-free communities goals.
Recommendations.--The Secretary shall develop recommendations on-- (1) removing obstacles to achieving domestic hunger goals and hunger-free communities goals; and (2) otherwise reducing domestic hunger.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and 5 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the President and Congress a report that contains-- (1) a detailed statement of the results of the study, or the most recent update to the study, conducted under subsection (a); and (2) the most recent recommendations of the Secretary under subsection (b).
TITLE II--STRENGTHENING COMMUNITY EFFORTS SEC.
HUNGER-FREE COMMUNITIES COLLABORATIVE GRANTS.
Definition of Eligible Entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a public food program service provider or a nonprofit organization, including but not limited to an emergency feeding organization, that demonstrates the organization has collaborated, or will collaborate, with 1 or more local partner organizations to achieve at least 1 hunger-free communities goal.
Program Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use not more than 90 percent of any funds made available under title III to make grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share of the costs of an activity described in subsection (d).
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of carrying out an activity under this section shall not exceed 80 percent.
Non-federal share.-- (A) Calculation.--The non-Federal share of the cost of an activity under this section may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including facilities, equipment, or services.
Sources.--Any entity may provide the non- Federal share of the cost of an activity under this section through a State government, a local government, or a private source.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To receive a grant under this section, an eligible entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at the time and in the manner and accompanied by any information the Secretary may require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) identify any activity described in subsection (d) that the grant will be used to fund; (B) describe the means by which an activity identified under subparagraph (A) will reduce hunger in the community of the eligible entity; (C) list any partner organizations of the eligible entity that will participate in an activity funded by the grant; (D) describe any agreement between a partner organization and the eligible entity necessary to carry out an activity funded by the grant; and (E) if an assessment described in subsection (d)(1) has been performed, include-- (i) a summary of that assessment; and (ii) information regarding the means by which the grant will help reduce hunger in the community of the eligible entity.
Priority.--In making grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that-- (A) demonstrate in the application of the eligible entity that the eligible entity makes collaborative efforts to reduce hunger in the community of the eligible entity; and (B)(i) serve a predominantly rural and geographically underserved area; (ii) serve communities in which the rates of food insecurity, hunger, poverty, or unemployment are demonstrably higher than national average rates; (iii) provide evidence of long-term efforts to reduce hunger in the community; (iv) provide evidence of public support for the efforts of the eligible entity; or (v) demonstrate in the application of the eligible entity a commitment to achieving more than 1 hunger- free communities goal.
Use of Funds.-- (1) Assessment of hunger in the community.-- (A) In general.--An eligible entity in a community that has not performed an assessment described in subparagraph (B) may use a grant received under this section to perform the assessment for the community.
Assessment.--The assessment referred to in subparagraph (A) shall include-- (i) an analysis of the problem of hunger in the community served by the eligible entity; (ii) an evaluation of any facility and any equipment used to achieve a hunger-free communities goal in the community; (iii) an analysis of the effectiveness and extent of service of existing nutrition programs and emergency feeding organizations; and (iv) a plan to achieve any other hunger- free communities goal in the community.
Activities.--An eligible entity in a community that has submitted an assessment to the Secretary shall use a grant received under this section for any fiscal year for activities of the eligible entity, including-- (A) meeting the immediate needs of people in the community served by the eligible entity who experience hunger by-- (i) distributing food; (ii) providing community outreach; or (iii) improving access to food as part of a comprehensive service; (B) developing new resources and strategies to help reduce hunger in the community; (C) establishing a program to achieve a hunger-free communities goal in the community, including-- (i) a program to prevent, monitor, and treat children in the community experiencing hunger or poor nutrition; or (ii) a program to provide information to people in the community on hunger, domestic hunger goals, and hunger-free communities goals; and (D) establishing a program to provide food and nutrition services as part of a coordinated community- based comprehensive service.
HUNGER-FREE COMMUNITIES TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
Definition of Eligible Entity.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a national or regional nonprofit organization that carries out an activity described in subsection (d).
Program Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use not more than 10 percent of any funds made available under title III to make grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share of the costs of an activity described in subsection (d).
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of carrying out an activity under this section shall not exceed 80 percent.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To receive a grant under this section, an eligible entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at the time and in the manner and accompanied by any information the Secretary may require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) demonstrate that the eligible entity does not operate for profit; (B) describe any national or regional training program carried out by the eligible entity, including a description of each region served by the eligible entity; (C) describe any national or regional technical assistance provided by the eligible entity, including a description of each region served by the eligible entity; and (D) describe the means by which each organization served by the eligible entity-- (i) works to achieve a domestic hunger goal; (ii) works to achieve a hunger-free communities goal; or (iii) used a grant received by the organization under section 201.
Priority.--In making grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities the applications of which demonstrate 2 or more of the following: (A) The eligible entity serves a predominantly rural and geographically underserved area.
The eligible entity serves a region in which the rates of food insecurity, hunger, poverty, or unemployment are demonstrably higher than national average rates.
The eligible entity serves a region that has carried out long-term efforts to reduce hunger in the region.
The eligible entity serves a region that provides public support for the efforts of the eligible entity.
The eligible entity is committed to achieving more than 1 hunger-free communities goal.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity shall use a grant received under this section for any fiscal year to carry out national or regional training and technical assistance for organizations that-- (1) work to achieve a domestic hunger goal; (2) work to achieve a hunger-free communities goal; or (3) receive a grant under section 201.
Not later than September 30, 2011, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report describing-- (1) each grant made under this title, including-- (A) a description of any activity funded by such a grant; and (B) the degree of success of each activity funded by such a grant in achieving hunger-free communities goals; and (2) the degree of success of all activities funded by grants under this title in achieving domestic hunger goals.
TITLE III--AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS SEC.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out title II $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2011.
Passed the Senate December 8, 2006.
109th CONGRESS 2d Session S. 1120 _______________________________________________________________________ AN ACT To reduce hunger in the United States, and for other purposes.