This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Torture Victims Relief Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The American people abhor torture by repressive governments and other parties.
The existence of torture creates a climate of fear and international insecurity that affects all people.
Torture is the strategic use of pain to destroy both individuals and society.
The effects of torture are long term.
Those effects can last a lifetime for the survivors and affect future generations.
By eliminating leadership of their opposition and frightening the general public, repressive governments use torture as a weapon against democracy.
Torture victims remain under physical and psychological threats, especially in communities where the perpetrators are not brought to justice.
In many nations, even those who treat torture victims are threatened with reprisals, including torture, for carrying out their ethical duties to provide care.
Both the survivors of torture and their treatment providers deserve, and often require, protection from further repression.
A significant number of refugees and asylees entering the United States have been victims of governmental torture.
Those claiming asylum deserve prompt consideration of their applications for political asylum to minimize their insecurity and sense of danger.
Many torture survivors now live in the United States.
They should be provided with the rehabilitation services which would enable them to become productive members of our communities.
The development of a treatment movement for torture survivors has created new opportunities for action by the United States and other nations to oppose state-sponsored and other acts of torture.
There is a need for a comprehensive strategy to protect and support torture victims and their treatment providers together with overall efforts to eliminate torture.
By acting to heal the survivors of torture and protect their families, the United States can help to heal the effects of torture and prevent its use around the world.
The United States has ratified the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, but has not implemented all provisions of the convention.
As used in this Act: (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, the terms used in this Act have the meaning given such terms in section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Torture.--The term ``torture'' has the meaning given such term in section 2340(1) of title 18, United States Code, and includes the use of rape and other forms of sexual violence by a person acting under the color of law upon another person under his custody or physical control.
PROHIBITION ON INVOLUNTARY RETURN OF PERSONS FEARING SUBJECTION TO TORTURE.
Prohibition.--The United States shall not expel, extradite, or return involuntarily an individual to a country if there is substantial evidence of circumstances that would lead a reasonable person to believe that the individual would fear subjection to torture.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``to return involuntarily'', in the case of an individual in any locale, means the following: (1) To return the individual without the individual's consent, whether or not the return is induced by physical force.
To take an action by which it is reasonably foreseeable that the individual will be returned, whether or not the return is induced by physical force.
IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES FOR TORTURE VICTIMS.
In General.--Any alien-- (1) who presents a credible claim of having been subjected to torture in the alien's country of nationality, or, in the case of an alien having no nationality, the country in which the alien last habitually resided, and (2) who applies for-- (A) refugee status under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, (B) asylum under section 208 of that Act, or (C) withholding of deportation under section 243(h) of that Act, shall be processed in accordance with this section.
Consideration of the Effects of Torture.--In considering applications for refugee status, asylum, or withholding of deportation made by aliens described in subsection (a), the appropriate officials shall take into account-- (1) the manner in which the effects of torture can affect the applicant's responses in the application and in the interview process or other immigration proceedings, as the case may be; (2) the difficulties torture victims often have in recounting their suffering under torture; and (3) the fear victims have of returning to their country of nationality where, even if torture is no longer practiced or the incidence of torture is reduced, their torturers may have gone unpunished and may remain in positions of authority.
Expedited Processing of Refugee Admissions.--For purposes of section 207(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, a refugee who presents a credible claim of having been subjected to torture shall be considered to be a refugee of special humanitarian concern to the United States and shall be accorded priority in selection from the waiting list of such refugees based on compelling humanitarian concerns.
Expedited Processing for Asylum and Withholding of Deportation.--Upon the request of the alien, the alien's counsel, or a health care professional treating the alien, an asylum officer or special inquiry officer may expedite the scheduling of an asylum interview or an exclusion or deportation proceeding for an alien described in subsection (a), if such officer determines that an undue delay in making a determination regarding asylum or withholding of deportation with respect to the alien would aggravate the physical or psychological effects of torture upon the alien.
Parole in Lieu of Detention.--The finding, upon inspection at a port of entry of the United States, that an alien described in subsection (a) suffers from the effects of torture, such as depressive and anxiety disorders, shall be a strong presumptive basis for a grant of parole, under section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, in lieu of detention.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Attorney General shall allocate resources sufficient to maintain in the Resource Information Center of the Immigration and Naturalization Service information relating to the use of torture in foreign countries.
SPECIALIZED TRAINING FOR CONSULAR, IMMIGRATION, AND ASYLUM PERSONNEL.
In General.--The Attorney General shall provide training for immigration inspectors and examiners, immigration officers, asylum officers, special inquiry officers, and all other relevant officials of the Department of Justice, and the Secretary of State shall provide training for consular officers, with respect to-- (1) the identification of the evidence of torture; (2) the identification of the surrounding circumstances in which torture is practiced; (3) the long-term effects of torture upon the person; (4) the identification of the physical, cognitive, and emotional effects of torture, including depressive and anxiety disorders, and the manner in which these effects can affect the interview or hearing process; and (5) the manner of interviewing victims of torture so as not to retraumatize them, eliciting the necessary information to document the torture experience, and understanding the difficulties victims often have in recounting their torture experience.
Gender-Related Considerations.--In conducting training under subsection (a)(4) or subsection (a)(5), gender specific training shall be provided on the subject of interacting with women and men who are victims of torture by rape or any other form of sexual violence.
STUDY AND REPORT ON TORTURE VICTIMS IN THE UNITED STATES.
Study.--The National Institutes of Health shall conduct a study with respect to refugees and asylees admitted to the United States since October 1, 1987, who were tortured abroad, for the purpose of identifying-- (1) the estimated number and geographic distribution of such persons; (2) the needs of such persons for recovery services; and (3) the availability of such services.
Report.--Not later than December 31, 1997, the National Institutes of Health shall submit a report to the Judiciary Committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate setting forth the findings of the study conducted under subsection (a), together with any recommendation for increasing the services available to persons described in subsection (a), including any recommendation for legislation, if necessary.
Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act.--Section 412 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1522) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Assistance for Treatment of Torture Victims.--(1) The Secretary may provide grants to programs in the United States to cover the cost of the following services: ``(A) Services for the rehabilitation of victims of torture, including treatment of the physical and psychological effects of torture.
Social services for victims of torture.
Research and training for health care providers outside of treatment centers or programs for the purpose of enabling such providers to provide the services described in subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `torture' has the meaning given to such term in section 3 of the Comprehensive Torture Victims Relief Act.''.
Funding.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Health and Human Services for fiscal year 1996, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out section 412(g) of that Act (relating to assistance for domestic centers and programs for the treatment of victims of torture), as added by subsection (a).
Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1995.
Amendments of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.--Part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended by adding at the end of chapter 1 the following new section: ``Sec.
Assistance for Victims of Torture.--(a) The President is authorized to provide assistance for the rehabilitation of victims of torture.
Such assistance shall be provided in the form of grants to treatment centers and programs in foreign countries which are carrying out projects or activities specifically designed to treat victims of torture for the physical and psychological effect of the torture.
Such assistance shall be available-- ``(1) for direct services to victims of torture; and ``(2) to provide research and training to health care providers outside of treatment centers or programs for the purpose of enabling such providers to provide the services described in paragraph (1).
For purposes of this section, the term `torture' has the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Comprehensive Torture Victims Relief Act.''.
Funding.--Of the total amount authorized to be appropriated in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 pursuant to chapter 1 of part I and chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and pursuant to section 31 of the Arms Export Control Act, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out section 129 of the Foreign Assistance Act, as added by subsection (a).
Amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 1995.
Funding.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 pursuant to chapter 1 of part I and chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and pursuant to section 31 of the Arms Export Control Act, there are authorized to be appropriated to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture (in this section referred to as the ``Fund'') the following amounts for the following fiscal years: (1) For fiscal year 1996, $4,000,000.
For fiscal year 1997, $5,000,000.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the President, acting through the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, should-- (1) request the Fund-- (A) to find new ways to support and protect treatment centers and programs that are carrying out rehabilitative services for victims of torture; and (B) to encourage the development of new such centers and programs; (2) use the voice and vote of the United States to support the work of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and the Committee Against Torture established under the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; and (3) use the voice and vote of the United States to establish a country rapporteur or similar procedural mechanism to investigate human rights violations in a country if either the Special Rapporteur or the Committee Against Torture indicates that a systematic practice of torture is prevalent in that country.