This Act may be cited as the ``National Economic Conversion and Environmental Restoration Act of 1993''.
In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall, from amounts appropriated pursuant to section 9(a), provide demonstration grants to institutions of higher education for the purpose of providing education and training in environmental restoration to dislocated defense workers and young adults.
Period of Grants.--A grant received under subsection (a) may extend for a period of not more than 3 fiscal years.
The payments under such grant shall be subject to annual approval by the Secretary and subject to the availability of appropriations for each fiscal year.
In General.--The Secretary may provide a grant to an institution of higher education under section 2(a) only if such institution submits to the Secretary an application which contains such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Assurances.--Such application shall include assurances that the institution of higher education will use Federal funds received from a grant under section 2(a) to supplement and not supplant non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under such section.
Establishment of Program.-- (1) In general.--An institution of higher education shall use amounts received from a grant under section 2(a) to establish a consortium consisting of the institution and the entities described in paragraph (2) for the purpose of establishing a program to provide education and training in environmental restoration to the eligible individuals described in subsection (b).
Entities described.--The entities described in this paragraph are 1 or more of each of the following: (A) Representatives of appropriate State and local agencies.
Private industry councils (described in section 102 of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1512)).
Other appropriate educational institutions.
Eligible Individuals.-- (1) Dislocated defense workers.--An individual who has been terminated or laid off from employment, or has received notice of termination or lay off, as a consequence of reductions in expenditures by the United States for defense or by closures of United States military facilities, as determined in accordance with regulations developed by the Secretary, shall be eligible for education and training in environmental restoration under this section.
Young adults.--An individual who has attained the age of 16 but not the age of 25 shall be eligible for education and training in environmental restoration under this section.
Conduct of Program.--In conducting the program established under subsection (a)(1), the consortium shall meet the following requirements: (1) Provision of education and training in environmental restoration.-- (A) In general.--The consortium shall establish and provide a work-based learning system consisting of education and training in environmental restoration, which may include basic educational courses, on-site basic skills training, and mentor assistance to eligible individuals described in subsection (b), which may lead to the awarding of a certificate of completion or advanced degree at the institution of higher education.
Use of closed military installation.--To the extent practicable, the consortium shall utilize a military installation closed or selected to be closed under a base closure law in providing on-site basic skills training to eligible individuals described in subsection (b).
Outreach and recruitment.--The consortium shall undertake outreach and recruitment efforts to encourage participation by eligible individuals in the program established under subsection (a)(1).
Selection of eligible individuals.--The consortium shall-- (A) to the extent practicable, select eligible individuals described in each of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b) for the program established under subsection (a)(1); and (B) give priority in the selection of young adults described in subsection (b)(2) to those young adults who-- (i) have not attended and do not plan to attend a postsecondary educational institution; or (ii) have, or are members of families who have, received a total family income that, in relation to family size, is not in excess of the higher of-- (I) the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 United States Code 9902(2)); or (II) 70 percent of the lower living standard income level.
Instructors.--The consortium shall, to the extent practicable, select instructors for the program established under subsection (a)(1) from institutions of higher education, appropriate community programs, and industry and labor.
Job placement services.--The consortium shall provide job placement services to each eligible individual who receives a certificate of completion or advanced degree under paragraph (1)(A).
Coordination.--To the extent practicable, the consortium shall consult with appropriate Federal, State, and local agencies carrying out environmental restoration programs for the purpose of achieving coordination between such programs and the program established by the consortium under subsection (a)(1).
In General.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall provide grants to institutions of higher education under section 2(a) in a manner which will equitably distribute such grants among the various regions of the United States.
Priority.--In providing grants to institutions of higher education under section 2(a), the Secretary shall give priority to institutions of higher education located in urban areas.
The Secretary shall provide grants under section 2(a) in a fiscal year to each institution of higher education in an amount totaling not more than \1/3\ of amounts appropriated pursuant to section 9(a) for that fiscal year.
Reports to Secretary.--The Secretary may provide a grant to an institution of higher education under section 2(a) only if such institution agrees to submit to the Secretary, in each fiscal year in which the Secretary makes payments under such grant to such institution, a report containing-- (1) a description and evaluation of the program established by such consortium under section 4(a)(1); and (2) any other information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Interim report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the President and the Congress an interim report containing-- (A) a compilation of the information contained in the reports received by the Secretary from each institution of higher education under subsection (a); and (B) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the demonstration grants authorized under section 2(a).
Final report.--Not later than January 1, 1997, the Secretary shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report containing-- (A) a compilation of the information described in paragraph (1)(A); and (B) a final evaluation of the effectiveness of the demonstration grants authorized under section 2(a), including a recommendation as to the feasibility of reauthorizing such grants.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Base closure law.--The term ``base closure law'' means the following: (A) The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 104 United States Statutes at Large 1808; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 102 United States Statutes at Large 2627; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Section 2687 of title 10, United States Code.
Any other similar law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Environmental restoration.--The term ``environmental restoration'' means actions taken consistent with a permanent remedy to prevent or minimize the release of hazardous substances into the environment so that such substances do not migrate to cause substantial danger to present or future public health or welfare or the environment.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141(a)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
Urban area.--The term ``urban area'' means-- (A) a metropolitan statistical area having a population of not less than 500,000 individuals; or (B) a State which does not contain a standard metropolitan statistical area but has a population of not less than 500,000 individuals.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996 to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.