This Act may be referred to as the ``Public Broadcasting Financial Independence and Family Viewing Act of 1995''.
Section 396(g)(1)(A) of title 47 is amended by inserting between the words ``which'' and ``are'' the following new language ``are suitable for family viewing throughout the broadcast day and which''.
USE OF FEDERAL FUNDS.
A new section 396(k)(1)(F) to title 47 is added as follows: ``(F) No Federal funds shall be used to broadcast any program which is indecent or to broadcast any dramatic program which includes nudity.''.
Section 396(a) of title 47 is amended by adding the following new subsection: ``(11) It is in the public interest what public broadcasting provide educational, cultural, informational and entertaining programming which is suitable for family viewing.''.
The Commission shall adopt regulations which would allow public broadcast license holders to make use of their broadcast spectrum for the transmission of ancillary and supplementary services, so long as the licensees provide without charge at least one schedule of public broadcast programming.
In permitting such use, the Commission shall assure thorough regulation or license terms that-- (1) the proceeds, if any from such ancillary and supplementary use go to the exclusive benefit of public broadcasting; (2) public broadcast licensees do not lessen their existing commitment or level of effort to public broadcasting; and (3) to the extent such spectrum is used for a purpose other than public broadcasting, fees charged for such use shall be at market rates.
The Commission shall adopt regulations which would allow public broadcast license holders to utilize their broadcast schedule between the hours of 1 a.m. and 6 a.m. to provide on a leased basis non-public broadcast programming for a fee or for public broadcast license holders to provide commercially sponsored programming provided that-- (1) the proceeds from such use go to the exclusive benefit of public broadcasting; (2) public broadcast licensees do not lessen their existing commitment or level of effort to public broadcasting; and (3) to the extent such use is for a purpose other than public broadcasting, fees charged for such use shall be at market rates.
Section 399(a) of title 47 is amended-- (1) by striking the word ``exclusive'' in subsection (a); and (2) by inserting before the period: ``through a call to action, an inducement to buy, sell, rent, or lease, or the provision of price information''.
Section 399B(a) of title 47 is amended-- (1) by inserting: ``through a call to action inducement to buy, sell, rent, or lease or the provision of price information'' after the word ``promote.
''; and (2) by inserting: ``when such offering is other than an educational or cultural event sponsored in part by a qualified public broadcasting station, or producer or distributor of programming for public broadcast stations'' after the word ``profit''.
SATELLITE, COMMON CARRIER AND OTHER FORMS OF PROGRAM DISTRIBUTION.
Public Broadcasting programming may be distributed to viewers by means of satellite, common carrier, or other form of telecommunications technology for a fee provided that the proceeds from such distribution go to the exclusive benefit of public broadcasting.
The Commission may approve an exchange of frequencies between a public broadcaster and a commercial broadcaster, when the proceeds from such exchange are dedicated to the benefit of the national public broadcasting system.
The Board of Directors of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and the Public Broadcasting System shall ensure that to the greatest extent possible agreements for programming include a provision to assure that public broadcasting share in benefits from the sale of any ancillary products, books, recordings, toys, character licencing or other products related to the broadcast of such programming.
The General Accounting Office shall conduct a review of the operations of the Corporation of Public Broadcasting, the Public Broadcasting System, Public Broadcasters and their program and other contractors.
These entities shall make their records and accounts available to the General Accounting Office for review.
The General Accounting Office shall protect proprietary information.
Within one year of the date of enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall report to the Congress its recommendations for improving the efficiency, and self-sufficiency of public broadcasting.
FEASIBILITY OF MERGER WITH INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING.
The General Accounting Office shall conduct a feasibility study of merging or coordinating public broadcasting operations and facilities or portions of operations and facilities with the international broadcasting operations of the United States Government.
Public broadcast licensees shall qualify for interstate and intrastate educational telecommunications service rates to the extent such rates are available and to the extent such telecommunications services are used for the purpose of providing public broadcasting.