This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Fraud and Fairness Reform Act''.
TITLE I--FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION SEC.
INVESTIGATION OF GASOLINE PRICES.
Investigation.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall commence an investigation to determine if the price of gasoline is being artificially manipulated by speculation in the oil markets and specifically at the Intercontinental Exchange in Atlanta, Georgia.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall transmit to Congress a report that describes-- (1) the progress of the investigation; and (2) any recommendations of the Federal Trade Commission regarding any legislation necessary to address speculation in the oil markets.
TITLE II--TAX PROVISIONS SEC.
INCREASE IN CREDIT FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLE REFUELING PROPERTY.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 30C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit allowed for alternative fuel vehicle refueling property) is amended by striking ``30 percent'' and inserting ``50 percent''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.
202. CREDIT FOR CONVERTING GAS AND DIESEL PROPELLED MOTOR VEHICLES TO VEHICLES PROPELLED BY ALTERNATIVE FUEL, CLEAN FUEL, OR FUEL CELLS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CONVERSION OF GAS AND DIESEL PROPELLED MOTOR VEHICLES PROPELLED BY ALTERNATIVE FUEL, CLEAN FUEL, OR FUEL CELLS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the aggregate costs of a qualified conversion of a motor vehicle-- ``(1) which, after such conversion, is placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year, ``(2) of which the original use after such conversion commences with the taxpayer, and ``(3) which, after such conversion, is for use or lease by the taxpayer and not for resale or lease to others.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified conversion.--The term `qualified conversion' means the conversion of a motor vehicle from a vehicle that is propelled by gasoline or diesel fuel to a vehicle that is propelled by alternative fuel, clean fuel, or fuel cells.
Alternative fuel.--The term `alternative fuel' has the meaning given such term by section 6426(d)(2), determined without regard to the last sentence thereof.
Clean fuel.--The term `clean fuel' has the meaning given such term by section 179A(e)(1).
Fuel cell.--The term `fuel cell' means qualified fuel cell property (as defined in section 48(c)(1)).
Motor vehicle.--The term `motor vehicle' has the meaning given such term by section 30(c)(2).
Application With Other Credits.-- ``(1) Business credit treated as part of general business credit.--So much of the credit which would be allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year (determined without regard to this subsection) that is attributable to property of a character subject to an allowance for depreciation shall be treated as a credit listed in section 38(b) for such taxable year (and not allowed under subsection (a)).
Personal credit.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this title, the credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year (determined after application of paragraph (1)) shall be treated as a credit allowable under subpart A for such taxable year.
Limitation based on amount of tax.--In the case of a taxable year to which section 26(a)(2) does not apply, the credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year (determined after application of paragraph (1)) shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(i) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(ii) the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A (other than this section and sections 23 and 25D) and section 27 for the taxable year.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Basis reduction.--The basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit (determined without regard to subsection (d)).
Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases to be property eligible for such credit.
Property used outside united states, etc., not qualified.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b)(1) or with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken into account under section 179.
Election not to take credit.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any conversion of a vehicle if the taxpayer elects to not have this section apply to such conversion.
Denial of double benefit.-- ``(A) If a credit is allowed under section 30B with respect to a vehicle, not credit shall be allowed under this section with respect to such vehicle.
No amount taken into account under this section shall be allowed as a deduction under any other provision of this subtitle.
Property used by tax-exempt entity; interaction with air quality and motor vehicle safety standards.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (6) and (10) of section 30B(h) shall apply for purposes of this section.''.
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (32), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (33) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(34) the portion of the motor vehicle conversion credit to which section 30D(d)(1) applies.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (35), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (36) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(37) to the extent provided in section 30D(e)(1).''.
Section 6501(m) of such Code is amended by inserting ``30D(e)(4),'' after ``30C(e)(5),''.
The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Conversion of gas and diesel propelled motor vehicles propelled by alternative fuel, clean fuel, or fuel cells.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.
TITLE III--REFINERY CAPACITY STUDY SEC.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall transmit to Congress a report containing the results of a study of refinery capacity in the United States.
Such study shall address-- (1) the impacts United States refinery capacity has on gasoline prices; (2) regulatory and other barriers to the construction and operation of sufficient United States refinery capacity, including possible collusion among oil companies; and (3) how oil companies use funding received from the Federal Government, and whether those Federal dollars expand our domestic oil supply or just go to dividends and stock buybacks.