This Act may be cited as the ``50 States Commemorative Coin Program Act''.
The Congress hereby finds the following: (1) It is appropriate and timely to-- (A) honor the unique Federal republic of 50 States that comprise the United States; and (B) promote the diffusion of knowledge among the youth of the United States about the individual States, their history and geography, and the rich diversity of the national heritage.
The circulating coinage of the United States has not been modernized within the past 25 years.
A circulating commemorative 25-cent coin program could produce earnings of $110,000,000 over the 10-year period of issuance and would produce indirect earnings of an estimated $3,400,000,000 to the United States Treasury, money that will replace borrowing to fund the national debt to at least that extent.
It is appropriate to launch a commemorative circulating coin program that encourages young people and their families to collect memorable tokens of all the States for the face value of the coins.
ISSUANCE OF REDESIGNED QUARTER DOLLARS OVER 10-YEAR PERIOD COMMEMORATING EACH OF THE 50 STATES.
Section 5112 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Redesign and Issuance of Quarter Dollar in Commemoration of Each of the 50 States.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding the 4th sentence of subsection (d)(1) and subsection (d)(2), quarter dollar coins issued during the 10-year period beginning on January 1, 1997, shall have designs selected in accordance with this subsection which are emblematic of the 50 States.
Single state designs.--The design for each quarter dollar issued during the 10-year period referred to in paragraph (1) shall be emblematic of 1 of the 50 States.
Issuance of coins commemorating 5 states during each of the 10 years.-- ``(A) In general.--The designs for the quarter dollar coins issued during each year of the 10-year period referred to in paragraph (1) shall be emblematic of 5 States which have not previously been commemorated during such period.
Number of each of 5 coin designs in each year.--Of the quarter dollar coins issued during each year (of the 10-year period referred to in paragraph (1)), the Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe, on the basis of such factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, the number of quarter dollars which shall be issued with each of the 5 designs selected for such year.
Selection of design.--Each of the 50 designs required under this subsection for quarter dollars shall be-- ``(A) selected by the Secretary after consultation with appropriate officials of the State being commemorated with such design and the Commission of Fine Arts; and ``(B) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Treatment as numismatic items.--For purposes of sections 5134 and 5136, all coins minted under this subsection shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Numismatic items.-- ``(A) Quality of coins.--The Secretary may mint and issue such number of quarter dollars of each design selected under paragraph (4) in uncirculated and proof qualities as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Silver coins.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the Secretary may mint and issue such number of quarter dollars of each design selected under paragraph (4) as the Secretary determines to be appropriate with a content of 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Sources of bullion.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under subparagraph (B) only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Sale price of coins.--The coins issued under this paragraph shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins and the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, profit, and shipping).
Application in event of the admission of additional states.--If any additional State is admitted into the Union before the end of the 10-year period referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury may issue quarter dollar coins, in accordance with this subsection, with a design which is emblematic of such State during any 1 year of such 10-year period, in addition to the quarter dollar coins issued during such year in accordance with paragraph (3)(A).''.
FIXED TERMS FOR MEMBERS OF THE CITIZENS COMMEMORATIVE COIN ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
In General.--Paragraph (4) of section 5135(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(4) Terms.-- ``(A) In general.--Each individual appointed to the Advisory Committee under clause (i) or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A) shall be appointed for a term of 4 years.
Interim appointments.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which such member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such term.
Continuation of service.--Each member appointed under clause (i) or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A) may continue to serve after the expiration of the term to which such member was appointed until a successor has been appointed and qualified.''.
Staggered Terms.--Of the members appointed to the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee under clause (i) or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A) of section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, who are serving on the Advisory Committee as of the date of the enactment of this Act-- (1) 1 member appointed under clause (i) and 1 member appointed under clause (iii), as designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, shall be deemed to have been appointed to a term which ends on December 31, 1997; (2) 1 member appointed under clause (i) and 1 member appointed under clause (iii), as designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, shall be deemed to have been appointed to a term which ends on December 31, 1998; and (3) 1 member appointed under clause (i) and 1 member appointed under clause (iii), as designated by the Secretary of the Treasury, shall be deemed to have been appointed to a term which ends on December 31, 1999.
Status of Members.--The members appointed to the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee under clause (i) or (iii) of paragraph (3)(A) of section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, shall not be treated as special Government employees.
Passed the House of Representatives September 4, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.