This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act''.
LIMITATION OF CUSTOMS AND TAX EXEMPTION UNDER THE TORT CLAIMS PROCEDURES.
Section 2680(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``law-enforcement officer'' and inserting ``law enforcement officer, except that this chapter and section 1346(b) shall apply to a claim based on the negligent destruction, injury, or loss of goods or merchandise (including real property) while in the possession of an officer of customs or excise or any other law enforcement officer''.
LONGER PERIOD FOR FILING CLAIMS IN CERTAIN IN REM PROCEEDINGS.
Rule C(6) of the Supplemental Rules for Certain Admiralty and Maritime Claims to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedures (28 United States Code App.)
is amended by striking ``10 days'' and inserting ``60 days''.
Section 608 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1608) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.-- ``(1) Filing of claim.--At any time within 60 days after the date on which a notice of seizure is first published, a person who claims a vessel, vehicle, aircraft, merchandise, or baggage seized under a law described in section 605 may file with the appropriate customs officer a claim stating the person's interest in the property.
Condemnation.--On filing of a claim under paragraph (1), the customs officer shall transmit the claim, with a duplicate list and description of the articles seized, to the United States attorney for the district in which the seizure was made, who shall proceed to a condemnation of the merchandise or other property in the manner prescribed by law.
Court-Appointed Counsel.-- ``(1) In general.--If a person filing a claim under subsection (a), or a claim regarding property seized under another law that incorporates by reference the seizure, forfeiture, and condemnation procedures of the customs laws, is financially unable to obtain representation of counsel, the court may appoint appropriate counsel to represent the person with respect to the claim.
Compensation.--(A) The court shall set the compensation for counsel appointed under paragraph (1) in an amount that is equivalent to that provided for counsel appointed under section 3006A of title 18, United States Code.
Compensation of counsel appointed under paragraph (1) shall be paid from the Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund established under section 524 of title 28, United States Code.''.
BURDEN OF PROOF IN FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS.
Section 615 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1615) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
BURDEN OF PROOF IN FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS.
In General.--In a suit or action described in subsection (b), the burden of proof is on the Government to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the property is subject to forfeiture.
Suits and Actions Described.--A suit or action is described in this subsection if it is-- ``(1) a suit or action (other than a suit or action arising under section 592) brought for the forfeiture of a vessel, vehicle, aircraft, merchandise, or baggage seized under any law relating to the collection of duties on imports or tonnage; or ``(2) a suit or action brought for the recovery of the value of any vessel, vehicle, aircraft, merchandise, or baggage, because of a violation of that law.''.
RELEASE OF SEIZED PROPERTY FOR SUBSTANTIAL HARDSHIP.
Section 614 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1614) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) Release Upon Payment.--'' before ``If''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Release of Seized Property for Substantial Hardship.-- ``(1) Request for release.--(A) A claimant is entitled to immediate release of seized property if continued possession by the Government would cause the claimant substantial hardship.
A claimant seeking release of property under this subsection shall-- ``(i) request possession of the property from the appropriate customs officer; and ``(ii) state in the request the basis for such release.
Civil action.--(A) If, within 10 days after the date on which a request is made under paragraph (1), the subject property has not been released, the claimant may file a complaint in any district court that would have jurisdiction over forfeiture proceedings relating to the property.
A complaint under subparagraph (B) shall state-- ``(i) the nature of the claim to the seized property; ``(ii) the reason why the continued possession by the United States Government pending the final disposition of forfeiture proceedings will cause substantial hardship to the claimant; and ``(iii) the steps that the claimant has taken to secure release of the property from the appropriate customs officer.
Return of property.--If a complaint is filed under paragraph (2), the district court shall order that the property be returned to the claimant, pending completion of proceedings by the United States Government to obtain forfeiture of the property, if the claimant shows that-- ``(A) the claimant is likely to demonstrate a possessory interest in the seized property; and ``(B) continued possession by the United States Government of the seized property is likely to cause substantial hardship to the claimant.
Conditions.--The court may place such conditions on release of the property as the court finds are appropriate to preserve the availability of the property or its equivalent for forfeiture.
Time for decision.--The district court shall render a decision on a complaint filed under paragraph (2) no later than 30 days after the date of the filing, unless such 30-day limitation is extended by consent of the parties or by the court for good cause shown.''.
JUSTICE ASSETS FORFEITURE FUND.
Section 524(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by striking ``law enforcement''; (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (H) and (I) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), respectively; and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) payment of court-awarded compensation for representation of claimants pursuant to section 608(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930;''; and (2) in paragraph (9)(A), by striking ``(H)'' and inserting ``(I)''.
CLARIFICATION REGARDING FORFEITURES UNDER THE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT.
Section 511(a)(7) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 881(a)(7)) is amended by striking ``without the knowledge or consent of that owner'' and inserting ``either without the knowledge of that owner or without the consent of that owner''.
The amendments made by this Act apply with respect to claims filed under section 608 of the Tariff Act of 1930 and suits and actions filed under section 615 of that Act on or after the date of enactment of this Act.