This Act may be cited as the ``Samuel Kelner Commission on Youth Authorization Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Samuel Kelner Commission on Youth'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall seek to reduce apathy among American youth regarding the Nation's system of government by discussing and making policy recommendations on issues affecting American youth, including issues in the following subject areas: (1) Public education.
Youth employment and wages.
Youth drug abuse and violence.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members, appointed as follows: (1) 4 members appointed by the President.
1 member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the House or Representatives.
1 member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Age Limit.--An individual may not be appointed under subsection (a) if that individual will attain 18 years of age by the date of the Commission's first meeting or conference that occurs after that individual's appointment in the term for which the individual is appointed.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for a term of 1 year beginning on August 1 and may be reappointed.
Initial term.--The first 8 members shall be appointed for the 1-year period that begins on August 1 of the calendar year that follows the calendar year of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, except that a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--In each 1 year period beginning August 1 the Commission-- (A) shall conduct 4 meetings each spanning a period of not more than 3 days; and (B) shall conduct 1 conference spanning a period of not more than 1 week.
Scheduling.-- (A) Initial meeting.--The initial meeting of the Commission each year under paragraph (1)(A) shall begin on the first Thursday in August.
Remaining meetings.--The Commission, by majority vote at the initial meeting each year, shall determine the dates of the remaining meetings and the conference under paragraph (1) for that year.
Emergency meeting.--In addition to the meetings required under paragraph (1), the Commission shall, at the call of the President, conduct 1 emergency meeting spanning a period of not more than 3 days.
DIRECTOR; STAFF; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the President.
Pay.--The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for GS-12 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint additional personnel as it considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
The Chairperson may request such information if such request is authorized by a majority vote of the Commission.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contract Authority.--To the extent and in the amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Director may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or person for supplies and other services.
In General.--The Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report not later than July 1 each year.
Contents.--Each report shall include policy recommendations on issues affecting youth, including issues in the following subject areas: (1) Public education.
Youth employment and wages.
Youth drug abuse and violence.
The Commission shall terminate 5 years after the beginning of the terms of its first members.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission to carry out this Act $100,000 for each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Such sums may remain available until expended.