This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on Employment and Economic Security Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Employment is the backbone of the United States economy, helping individuals feel positive about themselves, develop independence, and maintain hope for the future.
More than 2,600,000 Americans have become unemployed since January 2001.
In August 2003, individuals between the ages of 16 and 24 made up more than 25 percent of the total number of unemployed persons in the United States.
Minorities are more likely to be unemployed than Whites.
In August 2003, African Americans were more than twice as likely as Whites to be unemployed.
In August 2003, Hispanics were one and a half times as likely as Whites to be unemployed.
The loss of a job and the subsequent loss of income from that job can be a substantial trigger for depression.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission on Employment and Economic Security''.
The Commission shall-- (1) examine the issues of economic and psychological insecurity of members of the United States workforce caused by employment displacement; (2) examine the relationship between (A) psychological stress caused by employment insecurity and economic insecurity and (B) increased violence by employees and former employees in the workplace and in their private lives; (3) examine the economic and psychological effects of the decreasing number of well-paid jobs on members of the United States workforce; and (4) recommend potential solutions, including recommendations for legislative and administrative action, to alleviate the problems of economic and psychological insecurity of members of the United States workforce.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members who shall be appointed as follows: (1) 7 individuals appointed by the President, of which-- (A) 2 members shall be individuals who represent labor organizations as defined by section 2(5) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 152(5)); (B) 2 members shall be individuals who represent business interests; and (C) 2 members shall be individuals who represent mental health interests.
2 individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 individuals appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
2 individuals appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
2 individuals appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.-- (1) In general.--Members shall be experts in the fields of labor and employment.
Political affiliation.--Political affiliation shall not be a factor in the appointment of members.
Deadline for Appointment.--Each member shall be appointed to the Commission not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--8 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members not later than 30 days after the date on which all of the original members of the Commission have been appointed.
Presidential appointment.--If the members of the Commission are unable to elect the Chairperson in accordance with paragraph (1), the President shall appoint a member of the Commission to be the Chairperson.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Staff.--The Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of the personnel of the Commission as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall provide that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments and agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for purpose of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue a subpoena to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relating to any matter described in paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 4.
Failure to obey an order or subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Not later than 1 year after the date on which all original members have been appointed to the Commission, the Commission shall transmit to the President and Congress a report that contains a detailed statement of the findings and recommendations of the Commission made pursuant to section 4.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report pursuant to section 8.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated by subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.