This Act may be cited as the ``National Election Standards Act of 2001''.
UNIFORM NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL ELECTION PROCEDURES.
Uniform Standards.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Commission shall provide required uniform national standards regarding procedures for elections for Federal office that-- ``(1) minimize delay, error, or confusion in voting and in voter registration; ``(2) eliminate fraud in the voting process; ``(3) increase the accuracy and reliability of vote counts and counting procedure; ``(4) reduce the number of uncounted and discarded ballots; ``(5) encourage voter registration and voter turnout; ``(6) ensure accessibility to registration facilities and polling places for all voters; and ``(7) promote public confidence in the accuracy and reliability of the election process.
Standards.--The standards under subsection (a) shall include procedures regarding-- ``(1) the type of ballots used; ``(2) vote counting; ``(3) use of counting machines; ``(4) accuracy and security of elections and vote counts; ``(5) voter registration; and ``(6) verification and maintenance of voter rolls.
Study of State Procedures.--For purposes of determining standards under subsection (a), the Commission shall study and periodically review (not less often than once every 6 months following an election for Federal office) State election regulations and procedures.
Enforcement.--Standards established under this section shall only be enforceable under section 309(e).
Regulations.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than January 1, 2002, the Commission shall promulgate regulations to carry out the provisions of this section based on an initial study and analysis of election and vote counting procedures utilized in each State.
State compliance.--The Commission may-- ``(A) prescribe a reasonable period of time for States to comply with the uniform national standards established under this section; and ``(B) establish a process for a State to request a waiver of compliance with a standard or an extension of time to comply with a standard, based on a showing that the State cannot reasonably comply with such standard.''.
Enforcement.-- (1) Civil penalties.-- (A) In general.--Section 309 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) The Attorney General may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court for such declaratory or injunctive relief as is necessary to carry out the requirements under section 323.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 309(a)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``Any person'' and inserting ``Except as provided in section 323, any person''.
Criminal penalties.-- (A) In general.--Chapter 29 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
NONCOMPLIANCE WITH UNIFORM NATIONAL ELECTION STANDARDS.
``It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly conduct an election for Federal office (within the meaning of section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431)), or to knowingly interfere with such election, so that the election is in violation of the uniform national standards established by the Federal Election Commission under section 323 of such Act.
Any person who violates this section shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both.''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 29 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end the following: ``Sec.
Noncompliance with uniform national election standards.''.
Compliance Grant Program.-- (1) In general.--The Federal Election Commission is authorized to make grants to States to provide for the cost of implementing the uniform national standards for elections established under section 323 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Use of funds.--A State may use a grant received under paragraph (1) for costs in relation to compliance with the uniform national standards for elections established by the Federal Election Commission.
Application.--Each State that desires to receive a grant under this subsection shall submit an application to the Federal Election Commission, at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as reasonably required by the regulations promulgated under paragraph (5).
Approval of application.--The Federal Election Commission shall approve an application in accordance with the standards required under paragraph (5).
Administrative regulations.--The Federal Election Commission shall issue regulations regarding grants under this subsection that provide for the following: (A) The application process.
The content of an application.
The standard amount of each grant.
The criteria for approval of an application.
Authorization of appropriations.-- (A) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2011 to carry out the provisions of this subsection.
Availability of funds.--Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Federal Election Commission shall submit to Congress a report on the activities under this subsection.
CHANGE IN GENERAL ELECTION DATE.
Electors.--Section 1 of title 3, United States Code, is amended by striking ``on the Tuesday next after the first Monday'' and inserting ``on the first consecutive Saturday and Sunday prior to the first Monday''.
Congressional Elections.--Section 25 of the Revised Statutes (2 United States Code 7) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
The first consecutive Saturday and Sunday prior to the first Monday in November, in every even numbered year, are established as the days for the election, in each of the States and Territories of the United States, of Representatives and Delegates to the Congress commencing on the 3d day of January thereafter.''.
VOTER REGISTRATION IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
Section 4 of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-2) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Same Day Registration.--Notwithstanding any other Federal or State law, each State shall establish procedures to allow voters in the State to register to vote at the polling place at the time of voting in a general election for Federal office.