This Act may be cited as the ``Mothers' and Infants' Good Health Act of 1995''.
REQUIRED COVERAGE FOR CHILD BIRTH.
In General.--A health plan that provides maternity benefits that include benefits for child birth shall ensure that-- (1) in the case of delivery in a hospital or other inpatient setting, coverage is provided for a minimum of 48 hours of inpatient care following a vaginal delivery and a minimum of 96 hours of inpatient care following a caesarean section for a mother and her newly born child in a health care facility; and (2) in the case of delivery in the home or other outpatient setting, coverage for appropriate home health care in the setting is provided for a minimum of 48 hours following delivery.
Terms of Coverage.--A health plan fails to provide coverage required under subsection (a) if the plan imposes cost-sharing with respect to care described in such subsection which varies depending on the length of stay within the minimum period required under such subsection.
Prohibition.--In implementing the requirements of this section, a health plan may not modify the terms and conditions of coverage based on the determination by an enrollee to request less than the minimum coverage required under subsection (a).
Notice.--A health plan shall provide notice to each enrollee under such plan regarding the coverage required by this section in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
Such notice shall be in writing and prominently positioned in any literature or correspondence made available or distributed by the health plan and shall be transmitted-- (1) in the next mailing of general information made by the plan to the enrollee, (2) as part of the yearly informational packet sent to the enrollee, or (3) not later than January 1, 1996, whichever is earliest.
Enforcement.-- (1) Failure to provide coverage.--Any health plan that violates the provisions of this section (other than subsection (d)) shall be subject to a civil money penalty in an amount determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Failure to provide notice.--Any health plan that violates the provisions of subsection (d) shall be subject to a civil money penalty in an amount determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Process.--The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under this subsection in the same manner as they apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
Health Plan.-- (1) In general.--As used in this section, the term ``health plan'' means any plan or arrangement which provides, or pays the cost of, health benefits.
Exclusions.--Such term does not include the following, or any combination thereof: (A) Coverage only for accidental death or dismemberment.
Coverage providing wages or payments in lieu of wages for any period during which the employee is absent from work on account of sickness or injury.
A medicare supplemental policy (as defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social Security Act).
Coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance.
Worker's compensation or similar insurance.
A long-term care policy, including a nursing home fixed indemnity policy (unless the Secretary determines that such a policy provides sufficiently comprehensive coverage of a benefit so that it should be treated as a health plan).
Such other plan or arrangement as the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines is not a health plan.
Certain plans included.--Such term includes any plan or arrangement not described in any subparagraph of paragraph (2) which provides for benefit payments, on a periodic basis, for-- (A) a specified disease or illness, or (B) period of hospitalization, without regard to the costs incurred or services rendered during the period to which the payments relate.
The provisions of section 2 shall apply to all health plans offered, sold, issued, or renewed after the date of the enactment of this Act.