This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Year 2000 Computer Problem Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) A devastating computer problem will have extreme negative economic and national security consequences in the year 2000 and in subsequent years, unless the Federal Government addresses and remedies that problem.
Most computer programs (particularly programs in mainframes) in computers used by both the public and private sector express dates with only 2 digits, on the assumption that the first 2 digits are ``19''.
Because of the problem referred to in paragraph (2), most computer programs-- (A) read ``00-01-01'' as ``January 1, 1900''; and (B) will not recognize the year 2000 or the 21st century without a massive rewriting of codes.
The Congressional Research Service has completed a report on the implications of the problem described in paragraphs (2) and (3) (referred to in this Act as the ``year 2000 computer problem'').
According to the report by the Congressional Research Service, each line of computer code will need to be analyzed and either passed on or be rewritten.
According to leading research in the computer field-- (A) on the basis of an average cost of $1.10 per line of code, it may cost as much as $30,000,000,000 to correct the computer systems of the Federal Government; and (B) it is important to address the crisis caused by the year 2000 computer problem immediately by making funds available by appropriations, because-- (i) the cost of remedying that problem will increase at an approximate rate of 20 to 50 percent per year; (ii) the number of available persons with skills to address that problem will diminish as a result of increased demand; (iii) the year 2000 computer problem is an international problem that could cost as must as $600,000,000,000 to repair on a worldwide basis; (iv) that repair could be compromised by external contamination by foreign countries that do not comply with measures to effectuate the repair; (v) the Federal Government and the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof will bear a significant share of the cost of remedying the year 2000 computer problem; and (vi) it is necessary to have adequate financial resources to ensure the proper operation of computer systems at the levels of government referred to in clause (v).
The following analyses, determinations, and recommendations need to be made to address the problem of remedying the year 2000 computer problem: (A) A brief analysis of the history and background concerning the reasons for the occurrence of the year 2000 computer problem.
A determination of the costs of reviewing and rewriting computer codes for both the Federal Government and the governments of States for the 3-year period immediately following the date of enactment of this Act, including-- (i) a legal analysis of responsibilities for the costs; and (ii) possible equitable bases for sharing the costs.
An analysis of the implications of the year 2000 computer problem with respect to intergovernmental and integrated systems.
(i) A determination of the period of time necessary to remedy the year 2000 computer problem (including testing).
If the earliest practicable date determined under clause (i) is not January 1, 2000, a determination of-- (I) with respect to each Federal agency (as that term is defined in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code)-- (aa) priority functions of that Federal agency; and (bb) priority systems of that agency; and (II) which Federal agencies are at risk of being incapable of performing basic services as a result of the year 2000 computer problem.
The development of balanced and sound contracts to be used in necessary Federal procurement with respect to using private contractors in the computer industry, including contracts to carry out compliance with measures necessary to achieve a remedy of the year 2000 computer problem for computer programs and systems-- (i) in use as of the date of enactment of this Act; and (ii) acquired after the date of enactment of this Act.
An analysis of the effects and potential effects on the United States economy that would result if the year 2000 computer problem is not resolved by June 1, 1999.
Recommendations to the President and the Congress concerning, with respect to minimizing costs and risks to the public and private sector as a result of the year 2000 computer problem-- (i) lessons to be learned; and (ii) policies and actions to be taken-- (I) before the year 2000; and (II) after the year 2000, if certain public agencies have not taken measures to remedy the year 2000 problem.
(A) Congress recognizes that an executive branch interagency committee has been established to raise awareness of the year 2000 computer problem and facilitate efforts at remedying that problem.
However, in order to best minimize the impact and cost of the year 2000 computer problem, and in recognition of the extreme urgency of the problem, this Act establishes a bipartisan commission to-- (i) conduct the analyses and determinations, and make the recommendations referred to in paragraph (7); and (ii) take the responsibility for assisting appropriate Federal officials in ensuring that all Federal agencies will be in compliance with necessary measures to remedy the year 2000 computer problem not later than January 1, 1999.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission to Address the Year 2000 Computer Problem'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 20 members appointed as follows: (A) 5 members shall be appointed by the President from among officers or employees of the executive branch or private citizens of the United States (or both), of which not more than 3 individuals shall be members of the same political party.
5 members shall be appointed by the President from among officers or employees of the governments of States or private citizens of the United States (or both), of which not more than 3 individuals shall be members of the same political party.
5 members shall be appointed by the President from among nominations made by the President pro tempore of the Senate, in consultation with the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate, from among officers or employees of the Senate or private citizens of the United States (or both), of which not more than 3 shall be members of the same political party.
5 members shall be appointed by the President from among nominations made by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, from among Members of the House of Representatives or private citizens of the United States (or both), of which not more than 3 individuals shall be members of the same political party.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate a Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
In General.--The duties of the Commission are as follows: (1) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of the history of the year 2000 computer problem.
The study shall provide for the following: (A) A brief analysis of the history and background concerning the reasons for the occurrence of the year 2000 computer problem.
A determination of the costs of reviewing and rewriting computer codes for both the Federal Government and the governments of States for the 3-year period immediately following the date of enactment of this Act, including-- (i) a legal analysis of responsibilities for the costs; and (ii) possible equitable bases for sharing the costs.
An analysis of the implications of the year 2000 computer problem with respect to intergovernmental and integrated systems.
(i) A determination of the period of time necessary to remedy the year 2000 computer problem (including testing).
If the earliest practicable date determined under clause (i) is not January 1, 2000, a determination of-- (I) with respect to each Federal agency (as that term is defined in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code)-- (aa) priority functions of that Federal agency; and (bb) priority systems of that agency; and (II) which Federal agencies are at risk of being incapable of performing basic services as a result of the year 2000 computer problem.
The development of recommended balanced and sound contracts to be used in necessary Federal procurement with respect to using private contractors in the computer industry, including contracts to carry out compliance with measures necessary to achieve a remedy of the year 2000 computer problem for computer programs and systems-- (i) in use as of the date of enactment of this Act; and (ii) acquired after the date of enactment of this Act.
An analysis of the effects and potential effects on the United States economy that would result if the year 2000 computer problem is not resolved by June 1, 1999.
Examinations.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Commission shall-- (A) examine-- (i) the historical context of computer programs that relate to date fields and their relationship to the year 2000 computer problem; (ii) the current condition (at the time of the examination) of computer programs that relate to date fields and their relationship to the year 2000 computer problem; and (iii) the long-term condition of computer programs as they relate to date fields and the year 2000; (B) identify problems in computers that serve the public or private sector (or both) that threaten the proper functions of computers during the period immediately preceding the 21st century; and (C) analyze potential solutions to problems related to the year 2000 computer problem that will address-- (i) the brief period remaining to remedy the problem; (ii) the substantial cost of reviewing and rewriting computer codes; and (iii) the shared responsibilities for the costs referred to in clause (ii).
Recommendations.--During the period during which the Commission conducts the study under paragraph (1), the Commission shall make such recommendations as the Commission determines to be appropriate concerning addressing the year 2000 computer problem (including addressing the problem as a matter of national security and making recommendations concerning the procurement contracts referred to in paragraph (1)(E)) to-- (A) the Secretary of Defense; (B) the President; and (C) Congress.
Reports.-- (1) Report to congress.--Not later 180 days after the initial meeting of the Commission, and every 180 days thereafter during the period in which the Commission is in existence, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report containing such recommendations concerning the year 2000 computer problem as the Commission determines to be appropriate to remedy the problem in such manner as to ensure an effective transition of the computer programs and systems of the Federal Government and the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof from the year 1999 to the year 2000, including-- (A) proposals for new procedures or regulations; and (B) legislative proposals (including recommendations concerning levels of appropriations that are needed to ensure that transition).
Report to president.--Not later than July 3, 1997, the Commission shall submit a report to the President that contains the information referred to in paragraph (1).
Information.--The head of a Federal agency, as that term is defined in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code, shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Commission such information as it may require for the purpose of carrying out its functions.
Compensation.--Except as provided in subsection (c), members of the Commission shall serve without any additional compensation for their work on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses including per diem in lieu of substance, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The Chairperson of the commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Expenses.--Any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from funds that are available to the Secretary of Defense.
The Commission, shall terminate on December 31, 1999.