This Act may be cited as the ``Internet Crimes Against Children Prevention Act of 2000''.
FEDERAL INTERNET CRIMES AGAINST CHILDREN COMPUTER TRAINING FACILITY.
Establishment.--The Attorney General shall establish within the Federal Bureau of Investigation a Federal Internet Crimes Against Children computer training facility to be known as the ``Innocent Images Online Training Center'' (in this section referred to as the ``IIOTC'').
Purpose.--The IIOTC shall be responsible for training local, State, and Federal law enforcement officers who investigate Internet and on-line crimes against children.
The IIOTC shall be located in or around the Innocent Images operation in Calverton, Maryland, and shall be managed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (in this section referred to as the ``FBI'') as the lead agency.
The staff of the IIOTC shall include representatives from the Federal agencies that have statutory authority to investigate Internet and on-line crimes against children, including the FBI, United States Customs Service, and the United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Criminal Division, United States Department of Justice.
Duties of the IIOTC.--The FBI shall perform such duties as the Attorney General determines appropriate to carry out the purpose of the IIOTC, including the following: (1) Educate and train local, State, and Federal law enforcement officers and prosecutors who investigate and prosecute Internet and on-line crimes against children investigations.
This training shall consist of teaching these law enforcement officers the Innocent Images national initiative investigative techniques and protocols.
The training facility shall include classrooms and computers to facilitate ``hands-on'' training for participants.
Consideration may be given to train international law enforcement officers on a limited basis.
Travel throughout the United States to teach local law enforcement officers in a local or regional basis when requested.
Provide advice and guidance in the application of current and emerging computer technology and other investigative techniques.
In a classroom environment and as part of the curriculum, provide investigative support and advice to Federal, State, and local officers and prosecutors on current and complex investigations.
In a private setting and upon request, provide consultation and advice on multifaceted Internet crimes against children investigations.
Conduct research related to the detection and investigation of Internet and on-line crimes against children, including identification and investigative application of current and emerging technologies, identification of investigative searching technologies and methods for investigating Internet crimes against children.
Work with the approved Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Program, Internet Crimes Against Children task forces to train these officers on the use of FBI Innocent Images National Initiative investigative techniques and protocols.
Within the training curriculum, the IIOTC shall strongly encourage State and local adoption of the protocol consistent with the FBI's Innocent Images National Case Management System.
Appointment of Personnel to the IIOTC.-- (1) Selection of staff.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall appoint the staff of the IIOTC.
The training facility staff shall include experienced investigators and specialists from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Customs Service, the United States Postal Inspection Service, and the Criminal Division, Department of Justice.
The Commissioner of the United States Customs Service and the Chief Postal Inspector for the United States Postal Inspection Service shall nominate to the Director their representatives to work at the IIOTC.
The IIOTC shall also be staffed by FBI support employees who will assist with the administrative functions associated with the center.
Each respective agency will be responsible for their costs of providing staff to the IIOTC.
Additional support personnel.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation is authorized to employ 33 additional FBI support personnel employees necessary to provide for a 24-hour operation, staff a toll-free number for law enforcement personnel, and assist in processing casework generated and received at the FBI's Innocent Images National Initiative.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2001 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years-- (A) $4,200,000 to carry out subsection this section, other than subsection (d)(2); and (B) $4,200,000 to carry out subsection (d)(2).
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall submit to the Congress an implementation plan for the IIOTC.