Subsection (a) of section 300112 of title 36, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Establishment.--The corporation shall establish an Office of the Ombudsman to enhance dispute resolution regarding concerns raised to the Office of the Ombudsman by internal and external stakeholders regarding the corporation, regularly report to the board of governors information on trends and patterns on concerns communicated to the Office of the Ombudsman regarding the corporation, and carry out such other duties and responsibilities as may be provided in the bylaws or a resolution of the board of governors.''.
In General.--Chapter 3001 of title 36, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``Sec.
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration audit ``Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this section, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration shall conduct an audit of the corporation's revenues, expenditures, and governance not less often than once every three years.
Such audit shall be posted on the website of the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration.
In carrying out this section, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration shall coordinate activities to maximize the effectiveness of oversight activities, avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts, and minimize administrative burdens on the corporation.
Department of Homeland Security Inspector General audit ``Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Inspector General of the Department of Homeland Security shall evaluate the performance of the corporation's disaster assistance services pursuant to paragraph (4) of section 300102, including services provided in connection with the national preparedness system established under section 644 of the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2007 (6 United States Code 744), or any successor system, not less often than once every three years.
Such audit shall be posted on the website of the Inspector General.
In carrying out this section, the Inspector General shall coordinate activities to maximize the effectiveness of oversight activities, avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts, and minimize administrative burdens on the corporation.
United States Agency for International Development Inspector General audit ``Not later than three years after the date of the enactment of this section, the Inspector General of the United States Agency for International Development shall evaluate the performance of the corporation's international activities not less often than once every three years.
Such audit shall be posted on the website of the Inspector General.
In carrying out this section, the Inspector General shall coordinate activities to maximize the effectiveness of oversight activities, avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts, and minimize administrative burdens on the corporation.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents of chapter 3001 of title 36 is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``300114.
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration.
Department of Homeland Security Inspector General audit.
United States Agency for International Development Inspector General audit.''.
Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the American National Red Cross shall make prominent on its website information on how to submit to the Office of the Ombudsman of the American National Red Cross concerns about the organization, including concerns related to the administration of its programs, policies, fundraising activities, advertising messages, and employment practices.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Under Secretary for Science and Technology of the Department of Homeland Security, shall conduct a one-year pilot program with the American National Red Cross to research and develop mechanisms for the Department to better leverage social media to improve preparedness and response capabilities, including the following: (1) The timely dissemination of public preparedness information for terrorist attacks and other disasters.
The delivery of response supplies to affected areas.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after completion of the pilot program required under subsection (a), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the lessons learned from such pilot program and any plan to integrate such lessons into operations of the Department of Homeland Security.
On an annual basis, together with the President's submission of a budget request under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the extent to which the Department of Homeland Security partnered with the American National Red Cross in furtherance of preparedness and response capabilities in the previous year.
Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act may be construed as hindering, reducing, impeding, or otherwise impacting the ability of a State to conduct oversight or investigations of the American National Red Cross.