This Act may be cited as the ``Harold Hughes-Bill Emerson Commission on Alcoholism Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Harold Hughes- Bill Emerson Commission on Alcoholism (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall carry out the following duties: (1) Hold public hearings on selected areas of interest related to alcoholism.
Promote the development of a national consensus on policy issues related to alcoholism, which may include conducting a national opinion survey on attitudes toward the disease of alcoholism and its prevention.
Evaluate the interest of the provider and medical communities in new medications related to alcoholism and the barriers to the communities in obtaining such medications, and make recommendations regarding research on and the manufacturing and availability of such medications.
In conjunction with the National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse and the advisory council of such Institute, conduct a study to identify the current state-of- the-art alcohol research, unmet alcohol research needs, and appropriate research funding in view of the size and scope of the alcoholism problem.
Evaluate and make recommendations regarding the education of physicians in American medical schools concerning alcoholism (including an examination of the requirements of accreditation of medical schools) and the certification of other individuals trained to provide alcoholism prevention and treatment services.
Evaluate and make recommendations regarding the availability, timing, and dissemination of research information to alcoholism prevention and treatment services administrators and providers, and the application of current research findings by these administrators and providers.
Make recommendations designed to reduce and prevent alcoholism which include recommendations concerning appropriate roles for the Federal, State, and local governments and the private sector, and concerning specific changes needed to Federal laws and Federal programs.
Reports.--Not later than two years after the date on which amounts under section 8 are first made available for carrying out this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report describing the findings made in studies under subsection (a).
The Commission may submit to the President and the Congress such interim reports regarding the duties of the Commission under such subsection as the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members appointed in accordance with paragraph (2), one ex officio voting member designated in paragraph (3), and such ex officio nonvoting members as may serve pursuant to paragraph (4).
Appointed members.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed in accordance with the following: (A) The President shall appoint four individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Such individuals shall be appointed from four of the following fields of expertise: (i) An economist.
A biomedical or behavioral researcher or clinician.
A person from the field of business.
A representative of the medical schools.
The President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the Senate, appoint four individuals.
Of such individuals-- (i) two shall be Senators; (ii) one shall be an expert in alcoholism prevention; and (iii) one shall be an expert in alcoholism treatment.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the House, appoint four individuals.
Of such individuals-- (i) two shall be Members of the House; (ii) one shall be a person with personal or family experience with alcoholism; and (iii) one shall be a marketing or communications expert.
Voting ex officio member.--The Director of the National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse shall serve as a voting ex officio member of the Commission.
Nonvoting ex officio members or advisors.--The Commission may request Federal officials to serve as nonvoting members of or advisors to the Commission, including but not limited to-- (A) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs or the designee of the Secretary; (B) the Assistant Secretary of Health, Department of Defense, or the designee of the Assistant Secretary; (C) the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the designee of the Secretary; and (D) the Attorney General or the designee of the Attorney General.
Chair.-- The Commission shall designate a voting member of the Commission to serve as the chair of the Commission.
Terms.--The term of a member of the Commission is the duration of the Commission.
Vacancies.-- (1) Authority of commission.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission does not affect the power of the remaining members to carry out the duties under section 3.
Appointment of successors.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Incomplete term.--If a member of the Commission does not serve the full term applicable to the member, the individual appointed to fill the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term of the predecessor of the individual.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of the members, except that not less than two meetings shall be held each year for the duration of the Commission.
Quorum.--A quorum for meetings of the Commission is constituted by the presence of 7 members, except that a lesser number may conduct hearings under section 6(a).
Compensation; Reimbursement of Expenses.-- (1) Compensation.--Members of the Commission may not receive compensation for service on the Commission, subject to paragraph (2).
Reimbursement.--Members of the Commission may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may appoint and determine the compensation of such staff as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission, including an executive director.
Such appointments and compensation may be made without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive services, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title that relate to classifications and the General Schedule pay rates.
Limitation.--Staff members appointed under paragraph (1) may not be compensated in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-15, except that the executive director may not be compensated in an amount exceeding the maximum rate of basic pay payable under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
Consultants.--The Commission may procure such temporary and intermittent services of consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission may determine to be useful in carrying out the duties under section 3.
The Commission may not procure services under this subsection at any rate in excess of the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
Consultants under this subsection may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred for activities carried out on behalf of the Commission pursuant to section 3.
In General.--For the purpose of carrying out the duties of the Commission under section 3, the Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Official Information.--Upon the request of the Commission, the heads of Federal agencies shall furnish directly to the Commission information necessary for the Commission to carry out the duties under section 3.
Use of Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support, including quarters for the Commission, as may be necessary for the Commission to carry out the duties under section 3.
Acceptance of Gifts.--The Commission may accept cash and in- kind contributions to the Commission for the purpose of carrying out the activities of the Commission.
The Commission terminates upon the expiration of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the final report is submitted under section 3(b).
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence are available until the termination of the Commission under section 7.
Section 18 of Public Law 96-180 (93 United States Statutes at Large 1306; 42 United States Code 4541 note) is repealed.