This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Commission on Telemedicine Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Presidential Commission on Telemedicine (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall carry out the following duties: (1) Conduct a full and complete review and study of the use of telecommunications and information systems technologies-- (A) in the provision of health care and in the performance of health research-- (i) to perform examinations and procedures, and to conduct consultations, relating to the diagnosis and treatment of illnesses, injuries, and other physical and mental conditions; and (ii) to archive, access, and transmit data that is necessary or appropriate to perform or conduct such examinations, procedures, and consultations; (B) in the training of students of health professions and the continuing education of practicing health care providers; and (C) in the monitoring of medical conditions by individuals at home.
Assess whether such technologies are effective in improving the quality and accessibility of health care and reducing the costs of such care.
Examine methods by which training in the use of telecommunications and information systems technologies in the delivery of health care might be improved.
Analyze any obstacles that may impede such technologies from being widely used and accepted by health care providers in the United States.
Develop a model definition of the term ``telemedicine'' that may be used by health care providers, persons that provide payment for health care services, and other participants in the health care system.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 31 members.
The Commission shall consist of the following members: (1) The Vice President of the United States or such individual's delegate.
The Secretary of Defense or such individual's delegate.
The Secretary of Commerce or such individual's delegate.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services or such individual's delegate.
The Secretary of Energy or such individual's delegate.
26 individuals appointed by the President from among individuals who are consumers of health care services or are distinguished in the field of biomedical engineering, computer science, telecommunications, medicine, nursing, health care law, administration of health care, health education, or business.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled not later than 30 days after the date of the creation of the vacancy in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--16 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings, take testimony, or receive evidence.
Chairperson.--The Vice President (or such individual's delegate) shall be the chairperson of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson of the Commission or a majority of its members.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.--The Commission shall have a director appointed by the Commission and paid at a rate not to exceed the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS-13 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as it considers appropriate, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-11 of the General Schedule.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except as provided in subsections (a) and (b).
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-13 of the General Schedule.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any information that the Commission is prohibited to secure or request by another law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies or services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Not later than the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the appointment of the last member of the Commission to be appointed under section 4(a), the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report containing the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate not later than the expiration of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 7.
Any spending authority (as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 401(c)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 651(c)(2)(A))) authorized by this title shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.