This Act may be cited as the ``Campus Care and Counseling Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) In a recent report, a startling 85 percent of college counseling centers revealed an increase in the number of students they see with psychological problems.
Furthermore, the American College Health Association found that 61 percent of college students reported feeling hopeless, 45 percent said they felt so depressed they could barely function, and 9 percent felt suicidal.
There is clear evidence of an increased incidence of depression among college students.
According to a survey described in the Chronicle of Higher Education (February 1, 2002), depression among freshmen has nearly doubled (from 8.2 percent to 16.3 percent).
Without treatment, researchers recently noted that ``depressed adolescents are at risk for school failure, social isolation, promiscuity, self medication with drugs and alcohol, and suicide--now the third leading cause of death among 10-24 year olds.''.
Researchers who conducted the study ``Changes in Counseling Center Client Problems Across 13 Years'' (1989-2001) at Kansas State University stated that ``students are experiencing more stress, more anxiety, more depression than they were a decade ago.''
(The Chronicle of Higher Education, February 14, 2003).
According to the 2001 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, 20 percent of full-time undergraduate college students use illicit drugs.
The 2001 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse also reported that 18.4 percent of adults aged 18 to 24 are dependent on or abusing illicit drugs or alcohol.
In addition, the study found that ``serious mental illness is highly correlated with substance dependence or abuse.
Among adults with serious mental illness in 2001, 20.3 percent were dependent on or abused alcohol or illicit drugs, while the rate among adults without serious mental illness was only 6.3 percent.''.
A 2003 Gallagher's Survey of Counseling Center Directors found that 81 percent were concerned about the increasing number of students with more serious psychological problems, 67 percent reported a need for more psychiatric services, and 63 percent reported problems with growing demand for services without an appropriate increase in resources.
The International Association of Counseling Services accreditation standards recommend 1 counselor per 1,000 to 1,500 students.
According to the 2003 Gallagher's Survey of Counseling Center Directors, the ratio of counselors to students is as high as 1 counselor per 2,400 students at institutions of higher education with more than 15,000 students.
MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES ON CAMPUS.
Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1011 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 120 the following: ``SEC.
MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES ON CAMPUS.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to increase access to, and enhance the range of, mental and behavioral health services for students so as to ensure that college students have the support necessary to successfully complete their studies.
Program Authorized.--From funds appropriated under subsection (j), the Secretary shall award competitive grants to institutions of higher education to create or expand mental and behavioral health services to students at such institutions, to provide such services, and to develop best practices for the delivery of such services.
Such grants shall, subject to the availability of such appropriations, be for a period of 3 years.
Eligible Grant Recipients.--Any institution of higher education that seeks to provide, or provides, mental and behavioral health services to students is eligible to apply, on behalf of such institution's treatment provider, for a grant under this section.
Treatment providers may include entities such as-- ``(1) college counseling centers; ``(2) college and university psychological service centers; ``(3) mental health centers; ``(4) psychology training clinics; ``(5) institution of higher education supported, evidence- based, mental health and substance abuse screening programs; and ``(6) any other entity that provides mental and behavioral health services to students at an institution of higher education.
Applications.--Each institution of higher education seeking to obtain a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary.
Each such application shall include-- ``(1) a description of identified mental and behavioral health needs of students at the institution of higher education; ``(2) a description of currently available Federal, State, local, private, and institutional resources to address the needs described in paragraph (1) at the institution of higher education; ``(3) an outline of program objectives and anticipated program outcomes, including an explanation of how the treatment provider at the institution of higher education will coordinate activities under this section with existing programs and services; ``(4) the anticipated impact of funds provided under this section in improving the mental and behavioral health of students attending the institution of higher education; ``(5) outreach strategies, including ways in which the treatment provider at the institution of higher education proposes to reach students, promote access to services, and address the range of needs of students; ``(6) a proposed plan for reaching those students most in need of services; ``(7) a plan to evaluate program outcomes and assess the services provided with funds under this section; and ``(8) such additional information as is required by the Secretary.
Peer Review of Applications.-- ``(1) Panel.--The Secretary shall provide the applications submitted under this section to a peer review panel for evaluation.
With respect to each application, the peer review panel shall recommend the application for funding or for disapproval.
Composition of panel.-- ``(A) In general.--The peer review panel shall be composed of-- ``(i) experts who are competent, by virtue of their training, expertise, or experience, to evaluate applications for grants under this section; and ``(ii) mental and behavioral health professionals and higher education professionals.
Non-federal government employees.--A majority of the members of the peer review panel shall be individuals who are not employees of the Federal Government.
Evaluation and priority.--The peer review panel shall-- ``(A) evaluate the applicant's proposal to improve current and future mental and behavioral health at the institution of higher education; and ``(B) give priority in recommending applications for funding to proposals that-- ``(i) provide direct service to students, as described in subsection (f)(1); ``(ii) improve the mental and behavioral health of students at institutions of higher education with a counselor to student ratio greater than 1 to 1,500; or ``(iii) will best serve students based on the projected impact of the proposal on mental and behavioral health at the institution of higher education as well as the level of coordination of other resources to aid in the improvement of mental and behavioral health.
Use of Funds.--Funds provided by a grant under this section may be used for 1 or more of the following activities: ``(1) Prevention, screening, early intervention, assessment, treatment, management, and education of mental and behavioral health problems of students enrolled at the institution of higher education.
Education of families to increase awareness of potential mental and behavioral health issues of students enrolled at the institution of higher education.
Hiring appropriately trained staff, including administrative staff.
Strengthening and expanding mental and behavioral health training opportunities in internship and residency programs, such as psychology doctoral and post-doctoral training.
Supporting the use of evidence-based and emerging best practices.
Evaluating and disseminating outcomes of mental and behavioral health services so as to provide information and training to other mental and behavioral health entities around the Nation that serve students enrolled in institutions of higher education.
Additional Required Elements.--Each institution of higher education that receives a grant under this section shall-- ``(1) provide annual reports to the Secretary describing the use of funds, the program's objectives, and how the objectives were met, including a description of program outcomes; ``(2) perform such additional evaluation as the Secretary may require, which may include measures such as-- ``(A) increase in range of services provided; ``(B) increase in the quality of services provided; ``(C) increase in access to services; ``(D) college continuation rates; ``(E) decrease in college dropout rates; and ``(F) increase in college graduation rates; and ``(3) coordinate such institution's program under this section with other related efforts on campus by entities concerned with the mental, health, and behavioral health needs of students.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Grant funds provided under this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, Federal and non- Federal funds available for carrying out the activities described in this section.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Percentage limitations.--Not more than-- ``(A) 5 percent of grant funds received under this section shall be used for administrative costs; and ``(B) 20 percent of grant funds received under this section shall be used for training costs.
Prohibition on use for construction or renovation.-- Grant funds received under this section shall not be used for construction or renovation of facilities or buildings.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.