FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER CREDIT FOR EMPOWERMENT ZONES AND ENTERPRISE COMMUNITIES.
In General.--Subchapter U of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional incentives for empowerment zones) is amended by redesignating part V as part VI, by redesignating section 1397F as section 1397G, and by inserting after part IV the following new part: ``Part V--First-Time Homebuyer Credit ``Sec.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual who is a first-time homebuyer of a principal residence in an empowerment zone or an enterprise community during any taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to so much of the purchase price of the residence as does not exceed $2,000.
Limitation Based on Modified Adjusted Gross Income.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) (determined without regard to this subsection) for the taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to the credit so allowable as-- ``(A) the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the taxpayer's modified adjusted gross income for such taxable year, over ``(ii) $70,000 ($110,000 in the case of a joint return), bears to ``(B) $20,000.
Modified adjusted gross income.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `modified adjusted gross income' means the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year increased by any amount excluded from gross income under section 911, 931, or 933.
First-Time Homebuyer.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual if such individual (and if married, such individual's spouse) had no present ownership interest in a principal residence in either an empowerment zone or an enterprise community during the 1-year period ending on the date of the purchase of the principal residence to which this section applies.
One-time only.--If an individual is treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to any principal residence, such individual may not be treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to any other principal residence.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 121.
Carryover of Credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A of part IV of subchapter A (other than this section), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h) of section 1400C shall apply.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to property purchased after the date of the enactment of this section and before January 1, 2001.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) No carryback of empowerment zone-enterprise community first-time homebuyer credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the first-time homebuyer credit determined under section 1397F may be carried back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of section 1397F.''
Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(28) in the case of a residence with respect to which a credit was allowed under section 1397F, to the extent provided under such section 1397F.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The table of parts for subchapter U of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Part V. First-time homebuyer credit.
The table of sections for part VI of such Code, as so redesignated, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.