TITLE I--AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 11 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE SEC 101.
This title may be cited as the ``Spousal Equity in Bankruptcy Amendments of 1994''.
Relief From Automatic Stay.--Section 362(b)(2) of title 11, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) under subsection (a) of this section-- ``(A) of the commencement or continuation of an action or proceeding for-- ``(i) the establishment of paternity; or ``(ii) the establishment or modification of an order for alimony, maintenance, or support; or ``(B) of the collection of alimony, maintenance, or support from property that is not property of the estate;''.
Priority of Claims.--(1) Section 507 of title 11, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)-- (i) in paragraph (8) by striking ``(8) Eighth'' and inserting ``(9) Ninth'', (ii) in paragraph (7) by striking ``(7) Seventh'' and inserting ``(8) Eighth'', and (iii) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following: ``(7) Seventh, allowed unsecured claims due to a spouse, former spouse, or child of the debtor for alimony to, maintenance for, or support of such spouse or child, in connection with a separation agreement, divorce decree, or other order of a court of record, a determination made in accordance with State or territorial law by a governmental unit, or a property settlement agreement, but not to the extent that-- ``(A) such debt is assigned to another entity, voluntarily, by operation of law, or otherwise (other than debts assigned pursuant to section 402(a)(26) of the Social Security Act, or any such debt which has been assigned to the Federal Government or to a State or any political subdivision of such State); or ``(B) such debt includes a liability designated as alimony, maintenance, or support, unless such liability is actually in the nature of alimony, maintenance or support;'', and (B) in subsection (d) by striking ``or (6)'' and inserting ``(6), or (7)''.
Title 11 of the United States Code is amended-- (A) in sections 502(i), 503(b)(1)(B)(i), 523(a)(1)(A), and 1123(a)(1) by striking ``507(a)(7)'' and inserting ``507(a)(8)'', (B) in section 724(b)(2) by striking ``or 507(a)(6)'' and inserting ``507(a)(6), or 507(a)(7)'', (C) in section 726(b) by striking ``or (7)'' and inserting ``, (7), or (8)'', and (D) in section 1129(a)(9)-- (i) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``or 507(a)(6)'' and inserting ``, 507(a)(6), or 507(a)(7)'', and (ii) in subparagraph (C) by striking ``507(a)(7)'' and inserting ``507(a)(8)''.
Protection of Liens.--Section 522(f)(1) of title 11, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(1) a judicial lien (other than a judicial lien that secures a debt to a spouse, former spouse, or child of the debtor, for alimony to, maintenance for, or support of the spouse or child, in connection with a separation agreement, divorce decree or other order of a court of record, determination made in accordance with State or territorial law by a governmental unit, or property settlement agreement, to the extent that the debt-- ``(A) is not assigned to another entity, voluntarily, by operation of law, or otherwise; and ``(B) includes a liability designated as alimony, maintenance, or support, unless such liability is actually in the nature of alimony, maintenance or support).''.
Exception to Discharge.--Section 523 of title 11, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (11) by striking ``or'' at the end, (B) in paragraph (12) by inserting ``or'' after the semicolon at the end, and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(13) assumed or incurred by the debtor in the course of a divorce or separation or in connection with a separation agreement, divorce decree or other order of a court of record, a determination made in accordance with State or territorial law by a governmental unit, or property settlement agreement, unless-- ``(A) excepting such debt from discharge under this paragraph would impose an undue hardship for the debtor; and ``(B) discharging such debt would result in a benefit to the debtor that outweighs the detrimental consequences to a spouse, former spouse, or child of the debtor.
'', and (2) in subsection (c)(1) by striking ``or (6)'' each place it appears and inserting ``, or (13)''.
Protection Against Trustee Avoidance.--Section 547(c) of title 11, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (6); (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) to the extent that the transfer was a bona fide payment of a debt to a spouse, former spouse, or child of the debtor, for alimony to, maintenance for, or support of such spouse or child, in connection with a separation agreement, divorce decree or other order of a court of record, determination made in accordance with State or territorial law by a governmental unit, or property settlement agreement, but not to the extent that such debt-- ``(A) is assigned to another entity, voluntarily, by operation of law, or otherwise; or ``(B) includes a liability designated as alimony, maintenance, or support, unless such liability is actually in the nature of alimony, maintenance or support; or''.
Appearance Before Court.--A child support creditor or its representative shall be permitted to appear and intervene without charge and without meeting any special local court rule requirement for attorney appearances in any bankruptcy proceeding in any bankruptcy court or district court of the United States if the creditor or representative files with the court a statement describing in detail the child support debt, its status, and other characteristics.
TITLE II--BANKRUPTCY REVIEW COMMISSION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``National Bankruptcy Review Commission Act''.
There is established the National Bankruptcy Review Commission (referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The duties of the Commission are-- (1) to investigate and study issues and problems relating to title 11, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Bankruptcy Code''); (2) to evaluate the advisability of proposals and current arrangements with respect to such issues and problems; (3) to prepare and submit to the Congress, the Chief Justice, and the President a report in accordance with section 208; (4) to solicit divergent views of all parties concerned with the operation of the bankruptcy system; and (5) to study the impact of the bankruptcy laws on the family and particularly on the increase in the number of women and children living in poverty after divorce.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 10 members appointed from among individuals who have experience and expertise in bankruptcy law as follows: (1) Four members appointed by the President, one of whom shall be designated as chairman by the President.
One member shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate.
One member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One member shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the Chief Justice.
Term.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Quorum.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may conduct meetings.
Appointment Deadline.--The first appointments made under subsection (a) shall be made within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
First Meeting.--The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the chairman and shall be held within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Vacancy.--A vacancy on the Commission resulting from the death or resignation of a member shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Continuation of Membership.--If any member of the Commission who was appointed to the Commission as a member of Congress or as an officer or employee of a government leaves that office, or if any member of the Commission who was not appointed in such a capacity becomes an officer or employee of a government, the member may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the 90-day period beginning on the date the member leaves that office or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Consultation Prior to Appointment.--Prior to the appointment of members of the Commission, the President, the President pro tempore of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Chief Justice shall consult with each other to ensure fair and equitable representation of various points of view in the Commission and its staff.
COMPENSATION OF THE COMMISSION.
Pay.-- (1) Nongovernment employees.--Each member of the Commission who is not otherwise employed by the United States Government shall be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which he or she is engaged in the actual performance of duties as a member of the Commission.
Government employees.--A member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the United States Government shall serve without additional compensation.
Travel.--Members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment.--The chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint, and terminate an executive director and such other personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of that title.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Meetings.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission, may hold such hearings, sit and act at such time and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission or a member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department, agency, or court information necessary to enable it to carry out this title.
Upon request of the chairman of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency or chief judge of a Federal court shall furnish such information, consistent with law, to the Commission.
Facilities and Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such facilities and support services as the Commission may request.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency may make any of the facilities or services of the agency available to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this title.
Expenditures and Contracts.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission may make expenditures and enter into contracts for the procurement of such supplies, services, and property as the Commission or member considers appropriate for the purposes of carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Such expenditures and contracts may be made only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments and agencies of the United States.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
The Commission shall submit to the Congress, the Chief Justice, and the President a report not later than 2 years after the date of its first meeting.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislative or administrative action as it considers appropriate.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 30 days after the date on which it submits its report under section 208.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 to carry out this title.