This Act may be cited as the ``Hunting Heritage Protection Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Recreational hunting is an important and traditional recreational activity in which 14,000,000 Americans 16 years of age and older participate.
Hunters have been and continue to be among the foremost supporters of sound wildlife management and conservation practices in the United States.
Persons who hunt and organizations related to hunting provide direct assistance to wildlife managers and enforcement officers of Federal, State, and local governments.
Purchases of hunting licenses, permits, and stamps and excise taxes on goods used by hunters have generated billions of dollars for wildlife conservation, research, and management.
Recreational hunting is an essential component of effective wildlife management, in that it is an important tool for reducing conflicts between people and wildlife and provides incentives for the conservation of wildlife and habitats and ecosystems on which wildlife depends.
Each State has established at least one agency staffed by professionally trained wildlife management personnel, that has legal authority to manage the wildlife in the State.
Recreational hunting is an environmentally acceptable activity that occurs and can be provided for on Federal public lands without adverse effects on other uses of that land and water.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, Federal public lands shall be open to access and use for recreational hunting except-- (1) as limited by the Federal agency with responsibility for Federal public lands-- (A) for reasons of national security; (B) for reasons of public safety; or (C) for reasons authorized in applicable Federal statutes as reasons for closure; and (2) as recreational hunting is limited by the State in which the Federal public lands are located.
Management.--The head of each Federal agency with authority to manage a natural resource or Federal public lands on which a natural resource depends shall exercise that authority, consistent with subsection (a), in a manner so as to support, promote, and enhance recreational hunting opportunities, to the extent authorized under State law and regulation and in accordance with applicable Federal law.
No Net Loss.-- (1) In general.--Federal land management decisions and actions should, to the greatest extent practicable, result in no net loss of land area available for hunting opportunities on Federal public lands.
Annual report.--Not later than October 1 of each year, the head of each Federal agency with authority to manage Federal public lands on which recreational hunting occurs shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report describing-- (A) areas administered by the agency that have been closed during the previous year to recreational hunting and the reasons for such closure; and (B) areas administered by the agency that were open to recreational hunting to compensate for those areas described under subparagraph (A).
Areas Not Affected.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to compel the opening to recreational hunting of national parks or national monuments administered by the National Park Service.
No Priority.--This section does not require a Federal agency to give preference to hunting over other uses of Federal public lands, or over land or water management priorities established in Federal law.
Authority of the States.-- (1) Savings.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the authority, jurisdiction, or responsibility of the several States to manage, control, or regulate fish and resident wildlife under State law or regulations on land or water within a State, including Federal public lands, nor as impliedly preempting such State authority.
Federal licenses.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing the head of any Federal agency, or any official of such an agency, to require licenses or permits to hunt, fish or trap on lands or waters within a State, including on Federal public lands.
State right of action.--Any State aggrieved by the failure of the head of a Federal agency or an official thereof to comply with this subsection may file a civil action in the United States District Court for the district in which the alleged act in violation of this subsection occurred or is occurring to enjoin permanently such act.
The court may grant preliminary injunctive relief in any such action if the granting of such relief is appropriate under the facts on which such action is based.
A State which is a prevailing party in an action pursuant to this paragraph shall be awarded its costs and attorneys' fees.
NATIONAL RECREATIONAL HUNTING COORDINATION COUNCIL.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a National Recreational Hunting Coordination Council (in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
Recreational Hunting Resources Conservation Plan.-- (1) In general.--The Council, in cooperation with Federal agencies, States, and tribes, and the hunting community, shall develop a comprehensive recreational hunting and wildlife resource conservation plan.
Contents.--The plan shall-- (A) recommend short- and long-term actions to be carried out by the Federal agencies identified in the plan to conserve and restore wildlife habitat in a manner so as to support, promote, facilitate, and enhance recreational hunting opportunities on Federal public lands; and (B) include-- (i) a review and evaluation of Federal policies that affect recreational hunting opportunities on Federal public lands; (ii) recommendations to ensure that Federal agencies consider the social and economic values of healthy wildlife habitat and recreational hunting in land management decisions; (iii) recommended actions to be taken by Federal agencies to facilitate and promote hunting access to appropriate Federal public lands; (iv) recommended actions to facilitate the transfer of the latest resource information and management technologies to wildlife managers and the public to assist in the conservation and management of wildlife and the promotion of hunting opportunities on Federal public lands; (v) recommendations for improving Federal agency cooperation with States, tribes, wildlife conservation groups, and the hunting community; (vi) measurable objectives of efforts to conserve and restore wildlife habitats that support viable and healthy wildlife resources that may be hunted; (vii) a comprehensive mechanism to evaluate the attainment of the objectives described in clause (vi); and (viii) an evaluation of the need for a permanent National Recreational Hunting Coordination Council.
Integration.--To the extent practicable, the Council in developing such plan shall integrate it with existing plans and programs to reduce duplication of efforts.
Submission of plan.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Council shall publish a draft plan in the Federal Register and provide opportunity for public review and comment.
Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment, the Council shall revise and update as necessary the draft plan and submit a final plan to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, and the President.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Council shall consist of 11 members appointed as follows: (A) 1 member appointed by the Secretary of the Interior.
1 member appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
1 member appointed by the Secretary of Defense.
1 member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
2 members appointed by the President from among the directors of State fish and wildlife agencies.
2 members appointed by the President to represent recreational hunters.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Council shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay.--Each member shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Chairperson.--The members of the Council shall elect a Chairperson of the Council from among its members.
Powers of Council.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Council may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Council considers appropriate.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agency of the Council may, if authorized by the Council, take any action which the Council is authorized to take by this subsection.
Termination.--The Council shall terminate upon the earlier of the date of submission of the final plan under subsection (b) or 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior $250,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2003 to support the Council established under this section.
Effective Date.--This section shall become effective January 20, 2001.
In this Act: (1) Hunting.--The term ``hunting'' means the lawful pursuit, hunting, trapping, shooting, capture, collection, or killing of wildlife or the attempt to pursue, hunt, trap, shoot, capture, collect, or kill wildlife.
Federal public lands.--The term ``Federal public lands'' means any land or water the title to which is in the United States after the date of enactment of this Act.