The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Congress has previously directed the Secretary of Defense to seek to enter into multiyear burden sharing support agreements with economically strong North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies of the United States in order to obtain increased host nation contributions toward defraying the overseas basing costs for forces of the Armed Forces of the United States in that host country.
In fiscal year 1992-- (A) the government of Germany contributed approximately 23 percent of the overseas basing costs for United States forces in that country; (B) the government of Italy contributed approximately 20 percent of the overseas basing costs for United States forces in that country; (C) the government of the United Kingdom contributed approximately 14 percent of the overseas basing costs for United States forces in that country; and (D) the United States paid the remainder of such costs.
The Japanese government will pay 75.1 percent of overseas basing costs according to the host nation burden sharing support agreement between the United States and Japan.
In accordance with that agreement, the government of Japan contributed in fiscal year 1992 approximately 70 percent of the overseas basing costs for United States forces in that country, and the United States paid the remainder of such costs.
If the economically strong NATO allies of the United States had contributed 75 percent of the overseas basing costs that were incurred for fiscal year 1992 for United States forces in the countries of such allies, the United States would have saved an estimated $5,000,000,000 of the amount paid by the United States for overseas basing costs for that fiscal year.
It is in the national interest of the United States for the United States and our economically strong allies to enter into burden sharing support agreements that provide for such allies to defray most or all of the overseas basing costs for the United States forces stationed in the allied countries.
INCREASED BURDEN SHARING BY ALLIES OF THE UNITED STATES.
Defense Cost-Sharing Agreements.--The President shall enter into negotiations with each foreign nation described in subsection (b)(1) to seek to conclude an agreement that provides for such nation to pay at least 75 percent of the overseas basing costs that are incurred for the stationing of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and related civilian employees of the Department of Defense in that nation as a result of the implementation of a bilateral or multilateral defense agreement with that nation.
Covered Foreign Nations.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the foreign nations referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (A) Each member nation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (other than the United States).
Every other foreign nation with which the United States has a bilateral or multilateral defense agreement that provides for the assignment of combat units of the Armed Forces of the United States to permanent duty ashore in that nation or the placement of combat equipment of the United States in that nation.
Inapplicability to certain foreign nations.--The foreign nations referred to in subsection (a) do not include any foreign nation that receives assistance or financing under-- (A) section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2673), relating to the foreign military financing program; or (B) the provisions of chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2346 et seq.).
USE OF FUNDS FOR PAYING OVERSEAS BASING COSTS.
Limitation.--Funds may not be expended to pay more than the allowable percent of the overseas basing costs that are incurred during a fiscal year referred to in subsection (b) for the stationing of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and related civilian employees of the Department of Defense in a nation referred to in section 2(a) as a result of the implementation of a bilateral or multilateral defense agreement with that nation.
Maximum Allowable Percent.--For purposes of subsection (a), the allowable percent for a fiscal year is as follows: (1) Fiscal year 1994.--For fiscal year 1994, 60 percent.
Fiscal year 1995.--For fiscal year 1995, 40 percent.
Fiscal years after fiscal year 1995.--For each fiscal year that begins after September 30, 1995, 25 percent.
If the President determines that it is necessary to do so in the national security interest of the United States, the President may waive, with respect to a foreign nation referred to in section 2(a), the limitation in section 3.
In the case of each such waiver, the President shall submit to Congress a written certification of the determination and a description of the extent of the waiver.
Not later than September 30, 1993, the President shall submit to the Congress a plan and schedule for concluding with foreign nations referred to in section 2(a) agreements that provide for each such nation to pay 75 percent of the overseas basing costs that are incurred for the stationing of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and related civilian employees of the Department of Defense in that nation as a result of the implementation of a bilateral or multilateral defense agreement with that nation.
OVERSEAS BASING COSTS DEFINED.
In this Act, the term ``overseas basing costs'' means all costs related to the operation of installations in foreign countries at which forces of the Armed Forces of the United States are based and-- (1) includes but are not limited to-- (A) pay for foreign nationals; (B) costs of utilities; (C) costs of local services; (D) costs of military construction projects; (E) costs of real property maintenance; (F) costs of environmental restoration; (G) leasing costs; (H) taxes; (I) user fees; (J) tolls; and (K) import duties; and (2) does not include the pay and allowances of members of the Armed Forces of the United States and civilian employees of the Department of Defense.