Subpart 1 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (1) in chapter 3, by redesignating section 407E (20 United States Code 1070a-35) as section 406E; and (2) by inserting after such chapter 3 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 4--FUTURE MATH AND SCIENCE TEACHER RECRUITMENT ``SEC.
Short Title.--This chapter may be cited as the `Recruit and Reward Future Math and Science Teachers of America Act of 2001'.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: ``(1) United States high school students rate 16th and 19th, respectively, in science and math out of 21 countries.
Of United States high school students who take math courses, 22 percent are taught by teachers who did not prepare in that field.
Of United States high school students who take biology courses, 24 percent are taught by teachers who did not prepare in that field.
Of United States high school students who take chemistry courses, 30 percent are taught by teachers who did not prepare in that field.
Of United States high school students who take physics courses, 56 percent are taught by teachers who did not prepare in that field.
Teachers' knowledge and skills powerfully influence student learning.
More than 2,000,000 teachers will need to be hired over the next decade.
The ability of the United States to place highly qualified math and science teachers specializing in their field of instruction will depend on proactive policies that increase funding for teacher training, recruitment, and induction.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this chapter to make grants available, through a pilot program, to eligible institutions described in section 407C, to enable such institutions to provide 500 scholarship awards to outstanding students enrolled in an accredited teacher training graduate program who are committed to pursuing careers teaching math and science at an urban or rural secondary level classroom.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this chapter $5,000,000 in each of the fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004.
SCHOLARSHIP DESIGNATION AND SELECTION CRITERIA.
Scholarship Designation.--Funds made available under this chapter shall be designated as the `National Math and Science Teacher Scholarships'.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary of Education may award funds for National Math and Science Teacher Scholarships on a competitive basis to qualifying institutions of higher education that have graduate programs in teacher training.
The Secretary may not provide any individual institution of higher education with more than $100,000 per academic year for the purpose of the National Math and Science Teacher Scholarships.
An institution applying for such scholarships may only be eligible to receive funds if such institution is ranked by the Secretary in the top 25 percent of schools in the State in which the institution is located with the highest percentage of graduates passing the State teacher qualification assessment for new teachers.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if there are fewer than 4 such institutions in a State, only the institution with the highest percentage of such graduates shall be eligible to receive funding.
Priorities.--The Secretary shall give priority to eligible institutions that meet 1 or more of the following criteria: ``(1) Provide a year long internship program in a professional development school.
Provide mentoring programs for novice teachers in their first 3 years.
Demonstrate a history of placing graduates in rural and urban schools.
Demonstrate that there is a high retention rate of teachers that the institution places in teaching positions.
``An individual may be eligible for a National Math and Science Teacher Scholarship only if such individual-- ``(1) is a citizen or national of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence; ``(2) is majoring in a physical or life science or mathematics graduate teacher training program; ``(3) is enrolled in a higher education institution that-- ``(A) is ranked by the Secretary in the top 25 percent of schools in the State in which the institution is located with the highest percentage of graduates passing the State teacher qualification assessment for new teachers; or ``(B) if there are fewer than 4 such institutions in a State, is the institution with the highest percentage of such graduates; and ``(4) is willing to teach math or science in a rural or urban public secondary school for no less than 3 full academic years.
Amount of Award.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of a scholarship awarded by participating teacher training graduate programs under this chapter for any academic year shall be $10,000 per student, except that in no case shall the total amount of the scholarship exceed the total cost of attendance.
Insufficient funds.--In any fiscal year in which the amount appropriated to carry out this chapter is insufficient to award 500 scholarships, the Secretary shall reduce the number of awards to eligible institutions.
Assistance Not To Exceed Cost of Attendance.--No individual shall receive an award under this chapter in any academic year which exceeds the cost of attendance.
A scholarship awarded under this chapter shall not be reduced on the basis of the student's receipt of other forms of Federal student financial assistance.
AGREEMENT; SCHOLARSHIP REPAYMENT PROVISIONS.
Agreement.--Recipients of the National Math and Science Teachers Scholarships shall agree to teach in an urban or rural public secondary school for no less than 3 full academic years.
Repayment for Failure To Fulfill Agreement.--Any recipients of a Scholarship found by the Secretary to be in noncompliance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) of this section shall be required to repay a pro rata amount of the scholarship awards received, plus interest and, where applicable, reasonable collection fees, on a schedule and at a rate of interest prescribed by the Secretary by regulations.
EXCEPTIONS TO REPAYMENT PROVISIONS.
``An individual recipient of a Scholarship under this chapter shall not be considered in violation of the agreement entered into pursuant to section 407F during any period in which the recipient-- ``(1) is pursuing a full-time course of study in math and science at an accredited institution; ``(2) is serving, not in excess of 3 years, as a member of the armed services of the United States; ``(3) is temporarily disabled for a period of time not to exceed 3 years as established by sworn affidavit of a qualified physician; ``(4) is seeking and unable to find full-time employment for a single period not to exceed 12 months; ``(5) is seeking and unable to find full-time employment as a math and science teacher in a public or private nonprofit elementary or secondary school or education program for a single period not to exceed 27 months; ``(6) satisfies the provision of additional repayment exceptions that may be prescribed by the Secretary in regulations issued pursuant to this section; or ``(7) is permanently totally disabled, as established by sworn affidavit of a qualified physician.
``Three years after the date on which funds are first made available to carry out this chapter, the Secretary of Education shall submit a report to Congress evaluating the success of the National Math and Science Teacher Scholarships pilot program in recruiting math and science teachers to teach in America's public secondary schools.