This Act may be cited as the ``Post Office Community Partnership Act of 1999''.
GUIDELINES FOR RELOCATION, CLOSING, CONSOLIDATION, OR CONSTRUCTION OF POST OFFICES.
Section 404 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b)(1) Before making a determination under subsection (a)(3) as to the necessity for the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of any post office, the Postal Service shall provide adequate notice to persons served by that post office of the intention of the Postal Service to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct that post office not later than 60 days before the final determination is made to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct.
(A) The notification under paragraph (1) shall be in writing, hand delivered or delivered by mail to persons served by that post office, and published in 1 or more newspapers of general circulation within the zip codes served by that post office.
The notification under paragraph (1) shall include-- ``(i) an identification of the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of the post office involved; ``(ii) a summary of the reasons for the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction; ``(iii) the proposed date for the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction; ``(iv) notice of the opportunity of a hearing, if requested; and ``(v) notice of the opportunity for public comment, including suggestions.
Any person served by the post office that is the subject of a notification under paragraph (1) may offer an alternative relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction proposal during the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the notice is provided under paragraph (1).
(A) At the end of the period specified in paragraph (3), the Postal Service shall make a determination under subsection (a)(3).
Before making a final determination, the Postal Service shall conduct a hearing, if requested by persons served by the post office that is the subject of a notice under paragraph (1).
If a hearing is held under this paragraph, the persons served by such post office may present oral or written testimony with respect to the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of the post office.
In making a determination as to whether or not to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct a post office, the Postal Service shall consider-- ``(i) the extent to which the post office is part of a core downtown business area; ``(ii) any potential effect of the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction on the community served by the post office; ``(iii) whether the community served by the post office opposes a relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction; ``(iv) any potential effect of the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction on employees of the Postal Service employed at the post office; ``(v) whether the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of the post office is consistent with the policy of the Government under section 101(b) that requires the Postal Service to provide a maximum degree of effective and regular postal services to rural areas, communities, and small towns in which post offices are not self-sustaining; ``(vi) the quantified long-term economic saving to the Postal Service resulting from the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction; ``(vii)(I) the adequacy of the existing post office; and ``(II) whether all reasonable alternatives to relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction have been explored; and ``(viii) any other factor that the Postal Service determines to be necessary for making a determination whether to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct that post office.
In making a determination as to whether or not to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct a post office, the Postal Service may not consider compliance with any provision of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes).
(A) Any determination of the Postal Service to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct a post office shall be in writing and shall include the findings of the Postal Service with respect to the considerations required to be made under paragraph (4).
The Postal Service shall respond to all of the alternative proposals described in paragraph (3) in a consolidated report that includes-- ``(i) the determination and findings under subparagraph (A); and ``(ii) each alternative proposal and a response by the Postal Service.
The Postal Service shall make available to the public a copy of the report prepared under subparagraph (B) at the post office that is the subject of the report.
(A) The Postal Service shall take no action to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct a post office until the applicable date described in subparagraph (B).
The applicable date specified in this subparagraph is-- ``(i) if no appeal is made under paragraph (7), the end of the 30-day period specified in that paragraph; or ``(ii) if an appeal is made under paragraph (7), the date on which a determination is made by the Commission under paragraph 7(A), but not later than 120 days after the date on which the appeal is made.
(A) A determination of the Postal Service to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct any post office may be appealed by any person served by that post office to the Postal Rate Commission during the 30- day period beginning on the date on which the report is made available under paragraph (5).
The Commission shall review the determination on the basis of the record before the Postal Service in the making of the determination.
The Commission shall make a determination based on that review not later than 120 days after appeal is made under this paragraph.
The Commission shall set aside any determination, findings, and conclusions of the Postal Service that the Commission finds to be-- ``(i) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law; ``(ii) without observance of procedure required by law; or ``(iii) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record.
The Commission may affirm the determination of the Postal Service that is the subject of an appeal under subparagraph (A) or order that the entire matter that is the subject of that appeal be returned for further consideration, but the Commission may not modify the determination of the Postal Service.
The Commission may suspend the effectiveness of the determination of the Postal Service until the final disposition of the appeal.
The provisions of sections 556 and 557, and chapter 7 of title 5 shall not apply to any review carried out by the Commission under this paragraph.
A determination made by the Commission shall not be subject to judicial review.
In any case in which a community has in effect procedures to address the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of buildings in the community, and the public participation requirements of those procedures are more stringent than those provided in this subsection, the Postal Service shall apply those procedures to the relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of a post office in that community in lieu of applying the procedures established in this subsection.
In making a determination to relocate, close, consolidate, or construct any post office, the Postal Service shall comply with any applicable zoning, planning, or land use laws (including building codes and other related laws of State or local public entities, including any zoning authority with jurisdiction over the area in which the post office is located).
The relocation, closing, consolidation, or construction of any post office under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470h-2).
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to a temporary customer service facility to be used by the Postal Service for a period of less than 60 days.
(A) For purposes of this paragraph the term `emergency' means any occurrence that forces an immediate relocation from an existing facility, including natural disasters, fire, health and safety factors, and lease terminations.
If the Postmaster General makes a determination that an emergency exists relating to a post office, the Postmaster General may suspend the application of the provisions of this subsection for a period not to exceed 180 days with respect to such post office.
The Postmaster General may exercise the suspension authority under subparagraph (A) once with respect to a single emergency for any specific post office.