INSTITUTION FINANCIAL AID OFFER FORM REQUIREMENTS.
Title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART E--INSTITUTION FINANCIAL AID OFFER FORM REQUIREMENTS ``SEC.
``In this part: ``(1) Adequacy.--The term `adequacy', with respect to a financial aid offer form from a covered institution, means a letter that provides parents and students with comprehensive information on the postsecondary education costs and the terms and conditions of financial aid offered so that the parents and students can make informed educational loan borrowing decisions.
Cost of attendance.--The term `cost of attendance' has the meaning given the term in section 472.
Covered institution.--The term `covered institution' means any educational institution that-- ``(A) offers a postsecondary educational degree, certificate, or program of study (including any institution of higher education, as such term is defined in section 102); and ``(B) receives any Federal funding or assistance.
INSTITUTION REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO FINANCIAL AID OFFER FORMS.
Secretary Duties.-- ``(1) Report and model formats.--Not later than October 1, 2009, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) prepare a report on the adequacy of the financial aid offer forms provided by covered institutions to students and the parents of such students, after consulting with-- ``(i) students; ``(ii) parents of students; ``(iii) representatives of covered institutions (including financial aid administrators, registrars, and business officers); and ``(iv) consumer groups that receive no commercial or covered institution support; ``(B) include in the report model financial aid offer formats for financial aid offer forms that-- ``(i) are based on the report's findings; and ``(ii) include the information described in paragraph (2); and ``(C)(i) submit the report and model formats to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of Representatives; and ``(ii) make the report and model formats available to covered institutions, lenders, and the public.
Model formats contents.--The model financial aid offer formats developed under paragraph (1) shall present, in a consumer-friendly manner, the following information: ``(A) The student's total cost of attendance for the year for which the covered institution is issuing the financial aid offer form, including the actual or estimated costs included in the total cost of attendance for such year for each of the following: ``(i) Tuition and fees.
Room and board costs.
Transportation and miscellaneous expenses.
The amount of financial aid that the student does not have to repay, such as scholarships and grants, offered to the student for such year.
The conditions under which the financial aid described in subparagraph (B) is renewable each year.
The net cost of attendance for the student, calculated as the total cost of attendance for the student (as described in subparagraph (A) less the amount of financial aid that the student does not have to repay (as described in subparagraph (B)).
The amount of work-study assistance offered to the student for such year, and the conditions that the student has to fulfill for the work-study assistance.
Information about loans for which the student, or a parent of the student, is eligible for such year and loans the covered institution recommends for such year, as the Secretary determines necessary for the model formats to meet the definition of adequacy under this part.
The information shall include the applicable interest rates and other terms and conditions of the loans, including the estimated monthly repayment amount.
The loans may include loans under part B, D, or E of title IV or awards under subpart 9 of part A of title IV (TEACH Grants).
Where a student or the student's parent can seek additional information regarding the financial aid offered.
Any other information the Secretary determines necessary so that students and parents can make informed student loan borrowing decisions.
Covered Institution Duties.--Not later than 1 year after the release of the report and model financial aid offer formats described in subsection (a), each covered institution shall-- ``(1) use one of the model financial aid offer formats as part of the information provided in any financial aid offer form that the covered institution provides to a student attending or planning to attend the covered institution, or the parents of such student; and ``(2) ensure that such student and the parents of such student receive the financial aid offer form in time for such student or parent to take the information provided into account before applying for or selecting an educational loan.