This Act may be cited as the ``Strengthening Democratic Institutions Act of 2002''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) An elected legislature that represents a nation's citizens is a critical element of a democratic government that is accountable to its people.
The drafting of effective legislation requires legislative staff who possess substantive expertise in relevant subject matters.
Legislative oversight of governmental policies, programs, and budgets--steps that are imperative to ensure good governance, prevent waste and abuse, and guarantee effective use of state resources--similarly requires legislative staff who have technical expertise needed to exercise effective oversight.
Many new and emerging democracies, burdened by the legacy of oppressive and autocratic regimes, struggle to reform their government institutions, develop wise laws, implement sound policies, and ensure that the power of the state is used to enhance political freedoms, economic well-being, and social welfare.
It is in the interests of the United States to promote sound lawmaking and government accountability in countries that have political, economic, and security relations with the United States.
A cadre of professional legislative staff trained in public policy, national security affairs, and legislative procedure is essential for the development of sound legislation and the exercise of effective legislative oversight over government operations.
Legislative staff who have developed substantive expertise in one or more areas of public policy and gained a thorough understanding of democratic legislative procedures will raise the level of public debate in their societies and encourage a more open discussion of political, economic, and social issues between and among political leaders and ordinary citizens.
Such staff members, even should they leave the employ of their country's legislature, are likely to remain active, prominent, and well-informed members of their nations' civil service, defense establishments, or political systems and will in this manner continue to promote democracy in their own country and thus the national interest of the United States abroad.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INTERNATIONAL LEGISLATIVE STAFF TRAINING PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish a program that will encourage the professionalization of legislative staff working for foreign legislative bodies and elected members of such bodies.
The program shall bring foreign legislative staff to the United States for seminars, workshops, discussions, and meetings concerning techniques, standards, and practices of professional legislative staff work.
To the extent possible, the program shall include close observation of the legislative process and the role of professional legislative staff in the Congress of the United States.
Activities.-- (1) The program shall include seminars, workshops, discussions, and other activities concerning the following: (A) The role of a legislature in a democratic system.
The role of constituents, lobbyists, nongovernmental organizations, political parties, the media, and other stakeholders in the legislative process.
Contemporary policy issues being addressed in the United States by Congress.
The value of a career as professional legislative staff.
The program shall include meetings and contact with-- (A) academics, think tank scholars, and other appropriate experts on executive-legislative relations, policy issues being addressed by the Congress, and the role of a legislature in a democratic system; (B) Members of Congress, congressional committee staff, congressional staff, and others knowledgeable about the legislative process; (C) officials from executive branch agencies with experience in policy issues and executive-legislative relations; (D) individuals working in the legislative and executive branches of the United States Government; (E) journalists who report on congressional activities; and (F) members and staff of State legislatures, as appropriate.
Participants.-- (1) In the selection of individuals to participate in the program under this section, the Secretary of State shall consider only individuals from countries which-- (A) have a legislature whose members have been elected in elections that are generally regarded as having been free and fair; (B) have a legislature that possesses a constitutional or legal authority to draft, approve, or otherwise substantively affect legislation on a wide range of policy issues, including budgetary matters; (C) are not considered state sponsors of terrorism.
The Secretary of State shall give priority consideration to the participation of individuals from countries whose legislatures employ relatively few professional staff and whose nascent democratic institutions would especially benefit from the professionalization of the staff.
The Secretary of State shall make every effort to select as participants in this program individuals who demonstrate a commitment to a career in public policy, international affairs, defense, or public sector budgetary matters.
Administration.-- (1) The Secretary of State shall administer the program under this section through the Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs in consultation with the Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor.
The Secretary may enter into one or more contracts with private or nonprofit organizations having an expertise in the fostering of democratic institutions for the administration of the program under this section.
The Secretary may enter into such contracts without regard to any any provision of law requiring the use of competitive procedures.
Definitions.--In this section the term ``elections that are generally regarded as having been free and fair'' refers to an electoral process that is generally regarded by the United States and the international community as being open and democratic and governed by the principles of free and open debate and informed citizen participation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the fiscal year 2003 and for each subsequent fiscal year, there are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 to carry out this section.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under this subsection are authorized to remain available until expended.
It is the sense of the Congress that Members of Congress should support the program established under section 2 to the greatest extent possible by providing for the involvement of professional legislative staff from their offices in seminars, meetings, and other activities organized for the benefit of participants in the program.