SECTION 1. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF INDIAN TRIBAL PRISON FACILITY BONDS.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credits against tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart H--Nonrefundable Credit for Holders of Indian Tribal Prison Facility Bonds ``Sec.
54. Credit to holders of Indian tribal prison facility bonds.
54. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF INDIAN TRIBAL PRISON FACILITY BONDS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds an Indian tribal prison facility bond on a credit allowance date of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year an amount equal to the sum of the credits determined under subsection (b) with respect to credit allowance dates during such year on which the taxpayer holds such bond.
Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to any Indian tribal prison facility bond is the amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the credit rate determined by the Secretary under paragraph (2) for the month in which such bond was issued, multiplied by ``(B) the face amount of the bond held by the taxpayer on the credit allowance date.
Determination.--During each calendar month, the Secretary shall determine a credit rate which shall apply to bonds issued during the following calendar month.
The credit rate for any month is the percentage which the Secretary estimates will permit the issuance of Indian tribal prison facility bonds without discount and without interest cost to the issuer.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(1) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(2) the sum of the credits allowable under this part (other than this subpart and subpart C).
Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section (determined without regard to subsection (c)) and the amount so included shall be treated as interest income.
Indian Tribal Prison Facility Bond.--For purposes of this part, the term `Indian tribal prison facility bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue if-- ``(1) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of such issue are to be invested in investment grade obligations and the proceeds from such investment are used for the construction, acquisition, rehabilitation, expansion, or operating expanses of a qualified Indian tribal prison facility, ``(2) the bond is issued by the Indian tribe within the jurisdiction of which such facility is located, ``(3) the bond is issued pursuant to a plan developed by the Indian tribe, ``(4) the issuer designates such bond for purposes of this section, ``(5) the term of each bond which is part of such issue does not exceed 10 years, and ``(6) no amount of proceeds of such issue (including proceeds from any investment under paragraph (1)) may be used to pay the costs of issuance to the extent such amount exceeds 2 percent of the sale proceeds of such issue.
Qualified Indian Tribal Prison Facility.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified Indian tribal prison facility' means any residential correctional or detention facility located on the qualified Indian land of the issuing Indian tribe substantially all of the inmates of which are adult or juvenile members of such Indian tribe.
Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated; Allocation of Bonds.-- ``(1) National limitation.--There is an Indian tribal prison facility bond limitation for each calendar year.
Such limitation is-- ``(A) $200,000,000 for 2005, ``(B) $200,000,000 for 2006, ``(C) $200,000,000 for 2007, and ``(D) except as provided in paragraph (3), zero thereafter.
Allocation of bonds.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall allocate the Indian tribal prison facility bond limitation among those Indian tribes which submit a plan which contains a description of the proposed use of investment proceeds, assurances that such proceeds will be used only for such use, a proposed expenditure schedule, information relevant to the criteria described in subparagraph (B), and any other information determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Approval criteria.--In allocating the limitation among plan requests of Indian tribes under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall consider-- ``(i) the percentage of prison overcrowding in excess of the facility occupancy level as determined by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, ``(ii) the condition of existing facilities, ``(iii) the health and safety of both inmates and prison employees, ``(iv) the type of offenders incarcerated, and ``(v) other financial resources available to the Indian tribe.
Carryover of unused issuance limitation.--If for any calendar year the limitation amount imposed by paragraph (1) exceeds the amount of Indian tribal prison facility bonds issued during such year, such excess shall be carried forward to one or more succeeding calendar years as an addition to the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) and until used by issuance of such bonds.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Credit allowance date.--The term `credit allowance date' means, with respect to any issue, the last day of the 1- year period beginning on the date of the issuance of such issue and the last day of each successive 1-year period thereafter.
Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' has the meaning given such term by section 7871(c)(3)(E)(ii).
Qualified indian lands.--The term `qualified Indian lands' has the meaning given such term by section 7871(c)(3)(E)(i).
Partnership; s corporation; and other pass-thru entities.--In the case of a partnership, trust, S corporation, or other pass-thru entity, rules similar to the rules of section 41(g) shall apply with respect to the credit allowable under subsection (a).
Bonds held by regulated investment companies.--If any Indian tribal prison facility bond is held by a regulated investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by the Secretary.
Reporting.--Each Indian tribe with an allocation of Indian tribal prison facility bonds under an approved plan shall submit reports similar to the reports required under section 149(e).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Reporting.--Subsection (d) of section 6049 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns regarding payments of interest) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Reporting of credit on indian tribal prison facility bonds.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `interest' includes amounts includible in gross income under section 54(d) and such amounts shall be treated as paid on the credit allowance date (as defined in section 54(h)(1)).
Reporting to corporations, etc.--Except as otherwise provided in regulations, in the case of any interest described in subparagraph (A), subsection (b)(4) shall be applied without regard to subparagraphs (A), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (L)(i) of such subsection.
Regulatory authority.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including regulations which require more frequent or more detailed reporting.''.
Treatment for estimated tax purposes.-- (A) Individual.--Section 6654 of such Code (relating to failure by individual to pay estimated income tax) is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection: ``(m) Special Rule for Holders of Indian Tribal Prison Facility Bonds.--For purposes of this section, the credit allowed by section 54 to a taxpayer by reason of holding an Indian tribal prison facility bond on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.''.
Corporate.--Subsection (g) of section 6655 of such Code (relating to failure by corporation to pay estimated income tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Special rule for holders of indian tribal prison facility bonds.--For purposes of this section, the credit allowed by section 54 to a taxpayer by reason of holding an Indian tribal prison facility bond on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of subparts for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Subpart H. Nonrefundable Credit for Holders of Indian Tribal Prison Facility Bonds.''.
Section 6401(b)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and G'' and inserting ``G, and H''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to obligations issued after December 31, 2004.