Congress finds that: (1) Adak Island is an isolated island located 1,200 miles southwest of Anchorage, Alaska, between the Pacific Ocean and the Bering Sea.
The Island, with its unique physical and biological features, including a deep water harbor and abundant marine-associated wildlife, was recognized early for both its natural and military values.
In 1913, Adak Island was reserved and set aside as a Preserve because of its value to seabirds, marine mammals, and fisheries.
Withdrawals of portions of Adak Island for various military purposes date back to 1901 and culminated in the 1959 withdrawal of approximately half of the Island for use by the Department of the Navy for military purposes.
By 1990, military development on Adak Island supported a community of 6,000 residents.
Outside of the Adak Naval Complex, there is no independent community on Adak Island.
As a result of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 1808), as amended, the Adak Naval Complex has been closed by the Department of Defense.
The Aleut Corporation is an Alaskan Native Regional Corporation incorporated in the State of Alaska pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA), as amended (43 United States Code 1601, et sequentes).
The Aleut Corporation represents the indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands who prior to the Russian exploration and settlement of the Aleutian Islands were found throughout the Aleutian Islands which includes Adak Island.
None of Adak Island was available for selection by The Aleut Corporation under section 14(h)(8) of ANCSA (43 United States Code 1613(h)(8)) because it was part of a National Wildlife Refuge and because the portion comprising the Adak Naval Complex was withdrawn for use by the United States Navy for military purposes prior to the passage of ANCSA in December 1971.
The Aleut Corporation is interested in establishing a community on Adak and has offered to exchange ANCSA land selections for conveyance of certain lands and interests therein on a portion of Adak formerly occupied by the Navy.
Removal of a portion of Adak Island land from refuge status will be offset by the acquisition of high quality wildlife habitat in other Aleut Corporation selections within the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, maintaining a resident human population on Adak to control caribou, and making possible a continued United States Reports Fish and Wildlife Service presence in that remote location to protect the natural resources of the Aleutian Islands Unit of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge.
It is in the public interest to promote reuse of the Adak Island lands by exchanging certain lands for lands selected by The Aleut Corporation elsewhere in the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge.
Experience with environmental problems associated with formerly used defense sites in the State of Alaska suggests that the most effective and efficient way to avoid future environmental problems on Adak is to support and encourage active reuse of Adak.
The document entitled the ``Agreement Concerning Transfer of Lands at Adak Naval Complex'' (hereinafter ``the Agreement''), and dated __________, executed by The Aleut Corporation, the Department of the Interior and the Department of the Navy, is hereby ratified, confirmed, and approved and the terms, conditions, procedures, covenants, reservations, and other provisions set forth in the Agreement are declared to be obligations and commitments of the United States as a matter of Federal law.
REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM REFUGE.
Effective on the date of conveyance to The Aleut Corporation of the Adak Exchange Lands as described in the Agreement, all such lands shall be removed from the National Wildlife Refuge System and shall neither be considered as part of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge nor subject to any laws pertaining to lands within the boundaries of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge.
The conveyance restrictions imposed by section 22(g) of the ANCSA, 43 United States Code 1621(g), on said lands shall then be ineffective and cease to apply.
The Secretary shall adjust the boundaries of the Refuge so as to exclude all interests in lands and land rights, surface and substance, received by The Aleut Corporation in accordance with this Act and the Agreement.
ALASKA NATIVE CLAIMS SETTLEMENT ACT.
Lands and interests therein exchanged and conveyed by the United States pursuant to this act shall be considered and treated as conveyances of lands or interests therein under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, except that receipt of such lands and interests therein shall not constitute a sale or disposition of land or interests received pursuant to such Act.