This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of 1994''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 6 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 156) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated for the administration of this Act by the Commission $186,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, together with such sums as may be necessary for increases resulting from adjustments in salary, pay, retirement, other employee benefits required by law, and other nondiscretionary costs, for fiscal year 1995.
Of the sum appropriated in each fiscal year under this section, a portion, in an amount determined under section 9(b), shall be derived from fees authorized by section 9.''.
Travel and Reimbursement Program.--Subsection (g) of section 4 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 154) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (2), and (2) by redesignating paragraph (3) as (2).
Communications Support From Older Americans.--Section 6(a) of the Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of 1988 (47 United States Code 154 note) is amended by striking ``fiscal years 1992 and 1993'' and inserting ``fiscal year 1995''.
Hawaii Monitoring Station.--Section 9(a) of the Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of 1988 (Public Law 100- 594; 102 United States Statutes at Large 3024) is amended by striking ``1991, 1992, 1993, and 1994'' and inserting ``1995,''.
Schedule of Application Fees for PCS.--The schedule of application fees in section 8(g) of such Act is amended by adding, at the end of the portion under the heading ``common carrier services'', the following new item: ``23.
Personal communications services ``a.
Initial or new application.................... 230 ``b.
Amendment to pending application.............. 35 ``c. Application for assignment or transfer of 230 control.
Application for renewal of license............ 35 ``e. Request for special temporary authority....... 200 ``f. Notification of completion of construction.... 35 ``g. Request to combine service areas.............. 50''.
Vanity Call Signs.-- (1) Lifetime license fees.-- (A) Amendment.--The schedule of application fees in section 8(g) of such Act is further amended by adding, at the end of the portion under the heading ``private radio services'', the following new item: ``11.
Amateur vanity call signs........................... 150.00''.
Treatment of receipts.--Moneys received from fees established under the amendment made by this subsection shall be deposited as an offsetting collection in, and credited to, the account providing appropriations to carry out the functions of the Commission.
Termination of annual regulatory fees.--The schedule of regulatory fees in section 9(g) of such Act (47 United States Code 159(g)) is amended by striking the following item from the fees applicable to the Private Radio Bureau: ``Amateur vanity call-signs............................... 7''.
Description of Application Functions.--Section 8(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Any fees established under this section shall be assessed and collected to recover the costs of performing application activities, including all executive and legal costs incurred by the Commission in the discharge of these activities.''.
Executive and Legal Costs.--Section 9(a)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 159(a)(1)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, and all executive and legal costs incurred by the Commission in the discharge of these functions''.
Establishment and Adjustment.--Section 9(b) of such Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4)(B), by striking ``90 days'' and inserting ``45 days''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Effective date of adjustments.--The Commission may continue to collect fees at the prior year's rate until the effective date of any fee adjustment or amendment of that fee under this section.''.
Regulatory Fees for Satellite TV Operations.--The schedule of regulatory fees in section 9(g) of such Act is amended, in the fees applicable to the mass media bureau, by inserting after each of the items pertaining to construction permits in the fees applicable to VHF commercial and UHF commercial TV the following new item: ``Terrestrial television satellite operations............. 500''.
Governmental entities use for common carrier purposes.--Section 9(h) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The exceptions provided by this subsection for governmental entities shall not be applicable to any services that are provided on a commercial basis in competition with another carrier.''.
Information Required in Connection with Adjustment of Regulatory Fees.--Title I of such Act is amended-- (1) in section 9, by striking subsection (i); and (2) by inserting after section 9 the following new section: ``SEC.
ACCOUNTING SYSTEM AND ADJUSTMENT INFORMATION.
Accounting System Required.--The Commission shall develop accounting systems for the purposes of making any adjustments authorized by sections 8 and 9.
The Commission shall annually prepare and submit to the Congress an analysis of such systems and shall annually afford interested persons the opportunity to submit comments concerning the allocation of the costs of performing the functions described in section 8(b)(3) and 9(a)(1).
Information Required in Connection with Adjustment of Application and Regulatory Fees.-- ``(1) Schedule of requested amounts.--No later than May 1 of each calendar year, the Commission shall prepare and transmit to the Committees of Congress responsible for the Commission's authorization and appropriations a detailed schedule of the amounts requested by the President's budget to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for the activities described in sections 8(b)(3) and 9(a)(1), allocated by bureaus, divisions, and offices of the Commission.
Explanatory statement.--If the Commission anticipates increases in the application fees or regulatory fees applicable to any applicant, licensee, or unit subject to payment of fees, the Commission shall submit to the Congress by May 1 of such calendar year a statement explaining the relationship between any such increases and either (A) increases in the amounts requested to be appropriated for Commission activities in connection with such applicants, licensees, or units subject to payment of fees, or (B) additional activities to be performed with respect to such applicants, licensees, or units.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `amount requested by the President's budget' shall include any adjustments to such requests that are made by May 1 of such calendar year.
If any such adjustment is made after May 1, the Commission shall provide such Committees with updated schedules and statements containing the information required by this subsection within 10 days after the date of any such adjustment.''.
INSPECTION OF SHIP RADIO STATIONS.
Contracting Out Inspections.--Section 4(f)(3) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 154(f)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this paragraph, the Commission may designate an entity to make the inspections referred to in this paragraph instead of using engineers in charge, radio engineers, or other field employees.''.
Annual Inspection Required.--Section 362(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 360(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``as may'' in the third sentence and inserting ``as the Commission determines to'', and (2) by striking ``thereby'' in the fourth sentence and all that follows and inserting the following: ``thereby-- ``(1) waive the annual inspection required under this section for a period of up to 90 days for the sole purpose of enabling a vessel to complete its voyage and proceed to a port in the United States where an inspection can be held, or ``(2) waive the annual inspection required under this section for a vessel that is in compliance with the radio provisions of the Safety Convention and that is operating solely in waters beyond the jurisdiction of the United States, but the inspection shall be performed within 30 days after the vessel's return to the United States.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 385 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 385) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or an entity designated by the Commission'' after ``Commission'', and (2) by striking out ``as may'' and inserting ``as the Commission determines to''.
Section 5(c)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 155(c)(1)) is amended by striking the last sentence and inserting the following: ``Except for cases involving the authorization of service in the Instructional Television Fixed Service, or as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing in this paragraph shall authorize the Commission to provide for the conduct, by any person or persons other than persons referred to in paragraph (2) or (3) of section 556(b) of title 5, United States Code, of any hearing to which such section applies.''.
Section 203(d) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 203(d)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentences: ``The Commission may, after affording interested parties an opportunity to comment, reject a proposed tariff filing in whole or in part, if the filing or any part thereof is patently unlawful.
In evaluating whether a proposed tariff filing is patently unlawful, the Commission may consider additional information filed by the carrier or any interested party and shall presume the facts alleged by the carrier to be true.''.
Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
``In addition to any other provision of this Act under which the Commission may order refunds, the Commission may require by order the refund of such portion of any charge by any carrier or carriers as results from a violation of sections 220 (a), (b), or (d) or 221 (c) or (d) or of any of the rules promulgated pursuant to such sections or pursuant to sections 215, 218, or 219.
Such refunds shall be ordered only to the extent that the Commission or a court finds that such violation resulted in unlawful charges and shall be made to such persons or classes of persons as the Commission determines reasonably represent the persons from whom amounts were improperly received by reason of such violation.
No refunds shall be required under this section unless-- ``(1) the Commission issues an order advising the carrier of its potential refund liability and provides the carrier with an opportunity to file written comments as to why refunds should not be required; and ``(2) such order is issued not later than 5 years after the date the charge was paid.
In the case of a continuing violation, a violation shall be considered to occur on each date that the violation is repeated.''.
LICENSING OF AVIATION, MARITIME, AND PERSONAL RADIO SERVICES BY RULE.
Section 307(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 307(e)) is amended to read as follows: ``(e)(1) Notwithstanding any license requirement established in this Act, if the Commission determines that such authorization serves the public interest, convenience, and necessity, the Commission may by rule authorize the operation of radio stations without individual licenses in the following radio services: (A) the personal radio services; (B) the aviation radio service for aircraft stations operated on domestic flights when such aircraft are not otherwise required to carry a radio station; and (C) the maritime radio service for ship stations navigated on domestic voyages when such ships are not otherwise required to carry a radio station.
Any radio station operator who is authorized by the Commission to operate without an individual license shall comply with all other provisions of this Act and with rules prescribed by the Commission under this Act.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms `personal radio services', `aircraft station', and `ship station' shall have the meanings given them by the Commission by rule, except that the term `personal radio services' shall not include the amateur service.''.
Section 309(j)(8) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 309(j)(8)) is amended-- ``(1) by inserting ``are authorized to remain available until expended and'' after ``Such offsetting collections'' in the second sentence of subparagraph (B), and ``(2) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(C) Revenues on deposit.--The Commission is authorized, based on the competitive bidding methodology selected, to provide for the deposit of monies for bids in an interest- bearing account until such time as the Commission accepts a deposit from the high bidder.
All interest earned on bid monies received from the winning bidder shall be deposited into the general fund of the Treasury.
All interest earned on bid monies deposited from unsuccessful bidders shall be paid to those bidders, less any applicable fees and penalties.''.
FORFEITURES FOR VIOLATIONS IMPERILING SAFETY OF LIFE.
Administrative Sanctions.--Section 312(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 312(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (6); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) for failure to comply with any requirement of this Act or the Commission's rules that imperils the safety of life.''.
Forfeitures.--Section 503(b)(1) of such Act (47 United States Code 503(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (C); (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) failed to comply with any requirement of this Act or the Commission's rules that imperils the safety of life;''.
USE OF EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Section 4(f)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 154) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The Commission may also procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, relating to appointments in the Federal Service, at rates of compensation for individuals not to exceed the daily rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions under section 5276 of title 5, United States Code.''.
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST COMMON CARRIERS.
Section 503(b)(6) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 503(b)(6)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (2) by inserting ``and is not a common carrier'' after ``title III of this Act'' in subparagraph (B); (3) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (4) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) such person is a common carrier and the required notice of apparent liability is issued more than 5 years after the date the violation charged occurred; or''.
UTILIZATION OF FM BAND FOR ASSISTIVE DEVICES FOR HEARING IMPAIRED INDIVIDUALS.
Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Communications Commission shall report to the Congress on the existing and future use of the FM band to facilitate the use of auditory assistive devices for individuals with hearing impairments.
In preparing such report, the Commission shall consider-- (1) the potential for utilizing FM band auditory assistive devices to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act; (2) the impact on such compliance of the vulnerability of such devices to harmful interference from radio licensees; and (3) alternative frequency allocations that could facilitate such compliance.
Section 302(d)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 309(d)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``allocated to the domestic cellular radio telecommunications service'' and inserting ``utilized to provide commercial mobile service (as defined in section 332(d))''; and (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``cellular'' and inserting ``commercial mobile service''.
Passed the House of Representatives October 7, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.