This Act may be cited as the ``Volunteer Firefighter's Relief Act''.
DEDUCTION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 222 as section 223 and by inserting after section 221 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
Deduction Allowed.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a qualified volunteer firefighter, there shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year an amount equal to the contributions of the individual to a volunteer firefighter savings account of the individual for the taxable year.
Maximum annual amount.--The amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) to any individual for a taxable year shall not exceed $500.
Qualified Volunteer Firefighter.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified volunteer firefighter' means an individual who, on the last day of the taxable year, is a member in good standing of a qualified volunteer fire department (as defined in section 150(e)).
Volunteer Firefighter Savings Account.--For purposes of this section, the term `volunteer firefighter savings account' means a trust created or organized in the United States for the exclusive benefit of an individual and the individual's beneficiaries, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(1) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
The interest of an individual in the balance of the individual's account is nonforfeitable.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of a volunteer firefighter savings account shall be included in the gross income of the payee or distributee for the taxable year in which the payment or distribution is received in the manner provided under section 72.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution paid during a taxable year to a volunteer firefighter savings account to the extent that such contribution exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) if-- ``(A) such distribution is received on or before the day prescribed by law (including extensions of time) for filing such individual's return for such taxable year, ``(B) no deduction is allowed under subsection (a) with respect to such excess contribution, and ``(C) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in subparagraph (C) shall be included in the gross income of the individual for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Rollover contributions.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed to an account holder from a volunteer firefighter savings account to the extent that the amount received is paid into an individual retirement plan (as defined in section 7701(37)) for the benefit of the account holder not later than the 60th day after the day on which the account holder receives the payment or distribution.
Limitation.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any payment or distribution described in subparagraph (A) if, at any time during the 1-year period ending on the day of such receipt, such account holder received any other amount described in subparagraph (A) which was not includible in the account holder's gross income because of the application of subparagraph (A).
Investment in collectibles treated as distributions.--Rules similar to the rules of section 408(m) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--A volunteer firefighter savings account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a volunteer firefighter savings account by reason of paragraph (2).
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Loss of exemption of account where individual engages in prohibited transaction.-- ``(A) In general.--If the individual for whose benefit a volunteer firefighter savings account is established or any individual who contributes to such account engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to the account, the account shall cease to be a volunteer firefighter savings account as of the first day of the taxable year (of the individual so engaging in such transaction) during which such transaction occurs.
Account treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any account ceases to be a volunteer firefighter savings account by reason of subparagraph (A) as of the first day of any taxable year, paragraph (1) of subsection (d) shall apply as if there was a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day).
Effect of pledging account as security.--If, during any taxable year, the individual for whose benefit a volunteer firefighter savings account is established uses the account or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used shall be treated as distributed to the individual so using such portion.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Time when contributions deemed made.--A taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a contribution to a volunteer firefighter savings account on the last day of the preceding taxable year if the contribution is made on account of such taxable year and is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (not including extensions thereof).
Death and divorce.--Rules similar to the rules of sections 401(a)(9), 401(a)(11), and 408(d)(6) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Community property laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Reports.--The trustee of a volunteer firefighter savings account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the account holder with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''.
Allowance of Deduction in Computing Adjusted Gross Income.-- Subsection (a) of section 62 of such Code (defining adjusted gross income) is amended by inserting after paragraph (17) the following new paragraph: ``(18) Contributions to volunteer firefighter savings accounts.--The deduction allowed by section 222(a).''.
Additional Tax on Early Distributions.--Subsection (t) of section 72 of such Code (relating to 10-percent additional tax on early distributions from qualified retirement plans) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting ``or a volunteer firefighter savings account (as defined in section 220(c))'' after ``section 4974(c))'', and (2) in the heading by striking ``Qualified Retirement Plans'' and inserting ``Certain Tax-Favored Plans''.
Tax on Excess Contributions.--Section 4973 of such Code (relating to tax on excess contributions to certain tax-favored accounts and annuities) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3), by inserting ``or'' at the end of paragraph (4), and by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: ``(5) a volunteer firefighter savings account (as defined in section 222(c)),'', and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Excess Contributions to Volunteer Firefighter Savings Accounts.--For purposes of this section, in the case of a volunteer firefighter savings account, the term `excess contributions' means the sum of-- ``(1) the aggregate amount contributed for the taxable year to the account which is not allowable as a deduction under section 222 for such taxable year, and ``(2) the amount determined under this subsection for the preceding taxable year, reduced by-- ``(A) the distributions out of the accounts which were included in gross income under section 222(d)(1) for the taxable year, over ``(B) the amount contributed to the accounts for the taxable year.
For purposes of this subsection, any contribution which is distributed out of the volunteer firefighter account in a distribution to which section 222(d)(2) applies shall be treated as an amount not contributed.''.
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 of such Code (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(6) Special rule for volunteer firefighter savings accounts.--An individual for whose benefit a volunteer firefighter savings account is established and any contributor to such account shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be a volunteer firefighter savings account by reason of the application of section 222 to such account.
'', and (2) in subsection (e)(1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (E), by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G), and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) a volunteer firefighter savings account described in section 222, or''.
Failure To Provide Reports on Volunteer Firefighter Savings Accounts.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on certain tax-favored accounts or annuities) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) section 222(g) (relating to volunteer firefighter savings accounts).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 408(a) is amended by inserting ``222(d)(3),'' before ``402(c)''.
The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 222 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Contributions to volunteer firefighter savings accounts.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.