This Act may be cited as the ``Enhancement of Military Benefits Act''.
2001 PAY RAISE FOR MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.
Waiver of Section 1009 Adjustment.--The adjustment to become effective during fiscal year 2001 required by section 1009 of title 37, United States Code, in the rates of monthly basic pay authorized members of the uniformed services shall not be made.
Increase in Basic Pay.--Effective on January 1, 2001, the rates of monthly basic pay for members of the uniformed services are increased by 4.8 percent.
EXPANSION OF MEDICARE SUBVENTION PROJECT FOR MILITARY RETIREES AND DEPENDENTS.
Expansion of Sites.-- (1) Expansion to 16 sites.--Effective January 1, 2001, subsection (b)(2) of section 1896 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ggg) is amended by striking ``6'' and inserting ``16''.
Future repeal of limitation on number of sites.-- Effective October 1, 2003, paragraph (2) of section 1896(b) of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Location of sites.--The program shall be conducted in any site designated jointly by the administering Secretaries.''.
Making Project Permanent; Changes in Project References.-- (1) Elimination of time limitation.--Paragraph (4) of section 1896(b) of such Act is repealed.
Treatment of caps.--Subsection (i)(4) of section 1896 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``This paragraph shall not apply after calendar year 2001.''.
Conforming changes of references to demonstration project.--Section 1896 of such Act is further amended-- (A) in the heading, by striking ``demonstration project'' and inserting ``program''; (B) by amending subsection (a)(2) to read as follows: ``(2) Program.--The term `program' means the program carried out under this section.
''; (C) in the heading to subsection (b), by striking ``Demonstration Project'' and inserting ``Program''; (D) by striking ``demonstration project'' or ``project'' each place either appears and inserting ``program''; (E) in subsection (k)(2)-- (i) by striking ``extension and expansion of demonstration project'' and inserting ``program''; and (ii) by striking subparagraphs (A) through (C) and inserting the following: ``(A) whether there is a cost to the health care program under this title in conducting the program under this section; and ``(B) whether the terms and conditions of the program should be modified.''.
Additional conforming amendment.--Paragraph (5) of section 1896(b) of such Act is repealed.
Permitting Payment on a Fee-for-Service Basis.-- (1) In general.--Section 1896 of the Social Security Act is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Payment on a Fee-for-Service Basis.--Instead of the payment method described in subsection (i)(1) and in the case of individuals who are not enrolled in the program in the manner described in subsection (d)(1), the Secretary may reimburse the Secretary of Defense for services provided under the program at a rate that does not exceed the rate of payment that would otherwise be made under this title for such services if sections 1814(c) and 1835(d), and paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 1862(a), did not apply.''.
Conforming amendments.--Such section is further amended-- (A) in subsections (b)(1)(B)(v) and (b)(1)(B)(viii)(I), by inserting ``or subsection (l)'' after ``subsection (i)'; (B) in subsection (b)(2), by adding at the end the following: ``If feasible, at least one of the sites shall be conducted using the fee-for-service reimbursement method described in subsection (l).
''; (C) in subsection (d)(1)(A), by inserting ``(insofar as it provides for the enrollment of individuals and payment on the basis described in subsection (i))'' before ``shall meet''; (D) in subsection (d)(1)(A), by inserting ``and the program (insofar as it provides for payment for facility services on the basis described in subsection (l)) shall meet all requirements for such facilities under this title'' after ``medicare payments''; (E) in subsection (d)(2), by inserting ``, insofar as it provides for the enrollment of individuals and payment on the basis described in subsection (i),'' before ``shall comply''; (F) in subsection (g)(1), by inserting ``, insofar as it provides for the enrollment of individuals and payment on the basis described in subsection (i),'' before ``the Secretary of Defense''; (G) in subsection (i)(1), by inserting ``and subsection (l)'' after ``of this subsection''; (H) in subsection (i)(4), by inserting ``and subsection (l)'' after ``under this subsection''; and (I) in subsection (j)(2)(B)(ii), by inserting ``or subsection (l)'' after ``subsection (i)(1)''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection take effect on January 1, 2001, and apply to services furnished on or after such date.
Elimination of Restriction on Eligibility.--Section 1896(b)(1) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Elimination of restrictive policy.--If the enrollment capacity in the program has been reached at a particular site designated under paragraph (2) and the Secretary therefore limits enrollment at the site to medicare-eligible military retirees and dependents who are enrolled in TRICARE Prime (as defined for purposes of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code) at the site immediately before attaining 65 years of age, participation in the program by a retiree or dependent at such site shall not be restricted based on whether the retiree or dependent has a civilian primary care manager instead of a military primary care manager.''.
Medigap Protection for Enrollees.--Section 1896 of such Act is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(m) Medigap Protection for Enrollees.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of section 1882(s)(3) (other than clauses (i) through (iv) of subparagraph (B)) and 1882(s)(4) of the Social Security Act shall apply to any enrollment (and termination of enrollment) in the program (for which payment is made on the basis described in subsection (i)) in the same manner as they apply to enrollment (and termination of enrollment) with a Medicare+Choice organization in a Medicare+Choice plan.
In applying paragraph (1)-- ``(A) in the case of enrollments occurring before January 1, 2001, any reference in clause (v) or (vi) of section 1882(s)(3)(B) of such Act to 12 months is deemed a reference to the period ending on December 31, 2001; and ``(B) the notification required under section 1882(s)(3)(D) of such Act shall be provided in a manner specified by the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management.''.
INCREASE IN MILITARY SURVIVOR BENEFIT PLAN ANNUITIES FOR BENEFICIARIES 62 YEARS OF AGE AND OLDER.
Repeal of Annuity Reduction at Age 62.--(1) Subsection (a) of section 1451 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Computation of Annuity for a Spouse, Former Spouse, or Child.-- ``(1) Standard annuity.--In the case of a standard annuity provided to a beneficiary under section 1450(a) of this title (other than under section 1450(a)(4)), the monthly annuity shall be the amount equal to 55 percent of the base amount.
Reserve-component annuity.--In the case of a reserve- component annuity provided to a beneficiary under section 1450(a) of this title (other than under section 1450(a)(4)), the monthly annuity payable to the beneficiary shall be the amount equal to a percentage of the base amount that-- ``(A) is less than 55 percent; and ``(B) is determined under subsection (f).''.
Subsection (c)(1) of such section is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--In the case of an annuity provided under section 1448(d) or 1448(f) of this title, the amount of the monthly annuity shall be the amount equal to 55 percent of the retired pay to which the member or former member would have been entitled if the member or former member had been entitled to that pay based upon his years of active service when he died.''.
Subsections (d) and (e) of such section are repealed.
Termination of Supplemental SBP Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall terminate the Supplemental Survivor Benefit Plan program under subchapter III of chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code, effective on the date specified in subsection (d).
No annuity may be paid under that subchapter, and no reduction in retired pay may be made under that subchapter, for any period on or after that date.
Recomputation of Annuities.--Effective as of the date specified in subsection (d), the Secretary concerned shall recompute annuities payable under subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code, as necessary so that each such annuity is in the amount that would be in effect if initially computed under section 1450 of title 10, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 2000, and shall apply to payments under chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code, for months beginning on or after that date.
INCLUSION OF UNIFORMED SERVICES RETIREES AND DEPENDENTS IN FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1108 the following new section: ``Sec.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program: retirees and dependents ``(a) FEHBP Option.--The Secretary of Defense, after consulting with the other administering Secretaries, shall enter into an agreement with the Office of Personnel Management under which eligible beneficiaries described in subsection (b) may enroll in health benefits plans offered through the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5.
Eligible Beneficiaries; Coverage.--(1) An eligible beneficiary under this subsection is-- ``(A) a member or former member of the uniformed services described in section 1074(b) of this title; or ``(B) an individual who is a dependent of such a member or former member.
Eligible beneficiaries may enroll in a Federal Employees Health Benefit plan under chapter 89 of title 5 under this section for self-only coverage or for self and family coverage.
A person eligible for coverage under this subsection shall not be required to satisfy any eligibility criteria specified in chapter 89 of title 5 as a condition for enrollment in health benefits plans offered through the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under this section.
Separate Risk Pools; Charges.--(1) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall require health benefits plans under chapter 89 of title 5 that participate under this section to maintain a separate risk pool for purposes of establishing premium rates for eligible beneficiaries who enroll in such a plan in accordance with this section.
The Director shall determine total subscription charges for self only or for family coverage for eligible beneficiaries who enroll in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5 in accordance with this section.
The subscription charges shall include premium charges paid to the plan and amounts described in section 8906(c) of title 5 for administrative expenses and contingency reserves.
Government Contributions.--The Secretary of Defense shall be responsible for the Government contribution for an eligible beneficiary who enrolls in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5 in accordance with this section, except that the amount of the contribution may not exceed the amount of the Government contribution which would be payable if the electing beneficiary were an employee (as defined for purposes of such chapter) enrolled in the same health benefits plan and level of benefits.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1108 the following new item: ``1108a.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program: retirees and dependents.''.
Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, is amended in section 8905(d) by inserting ``or 1108a'' after ``section 1108''.