STATE PROGRAMS FOR CLEAN UP OF MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL SUPERFUND SITES.
State Programs.--(1) The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end of title I the following new section: ``SEC.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL SITES.
State Programs.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State may develop and submit to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency a State program under which the State will remediate, in accordance with this section, qualified municipal waste landfills.
Submission of program.--The Administrator shall require that State programs under this section be submitted at such time, in such form, and in such manner as the Administrator deems appropriate.
Not later than 180 days after receipt of a State program, the Administrator shall approve or disapprove the program.
The Administrator shall approve the program if the Administrator determines that the program provides for the remediation of qualified municipal waste landfills in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b).
Upon approval of such program, the provisions of this title (other than this section and section 101) shall not apply to any release or threatened release at any qualified municipal waste landfill which is covered by such program.
If the program is disapproved, the Administrator shall inform the State of the reasons for the disapproval and permit the State to correct and resubmit the program for approval.
Remediation.--The President shall promulgate, after opportunity for notice and comment, regulations governing response action under this section.
Such regulations shall provide for a presumptive remedy based on streamlined site characterization using the Environmental Protection Agency's Model Municipal Landfill Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study Guidance and for closure of the site consistent with subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Such presumptive remedy shall include each of the following: ``(1) Waste consolidation where feasible if multiple discrete disposal sites can be more economically contained in one unit.
Final cover, including a barrier layer with a permeability equal to 1 x 10&lt;SUP&gt;-5 cm per second or a flexible membrane liner of at least 30mm thickness, and properly maintained vegetative cover.
Upon demonstration, existing caps providing comparable control may be used or upgraded as needed.
Landfill gas control consistent with subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and where necessary passive gas controls unless gas volumes and composition require active collection.
Control of leachate where feasible and necessary given the landfill's design and as required by its contact with ground water.
Ground water monitoring as required by subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Where ground water has been impacted by the site, assurance of no migration of contamination beyond the facility boundary or, if appropriate, treatment at point of withdrawal.
Institutional controls to prevent future exposure to waste, including, where appropriate and consistent with local zoning authority, prohibitions on the use of private wells on site or on adjacent properties; creation of buffer zones; use of zoning to prevent future land uses which would disturb the site's final cover.
To the maximum extent feasible and as authorized by the local land control authority, beneficial uses consistent with maintenance of proper closure should be employed (e.g., use as parkland, conservation district, active waste management facility, limited access industrial activity, roadway).
Residential use is not permitted at sites employing presumptive remedies.
Site security to prevent access inconsistent with closure requirements.
A post-closure care plan that ensures the maintenance and stability of containment and institutional control measures for so long as each measure is necessary to assure the integrity of the remedy.
If the President has reason to believe, based on site-specific risk factors such as records of disposal of significant quantities of hazardous waste, that the presumptive remedy will not protect human health and the environment, he may require additional protections, including but not limited to, removal of drums or other discrete, accessible areas of high concentration waste where practicable.
Remediation Costs.-- ``(1) Reimbursement from superfund.--The President shall reimburse each State with an approved municipal waste landfill remediation program for all costs incurred by the State for the remediation, in accordance with subsection (b), of hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants at facilities listed on the National Priorities List which are qualified municipal waste landfills located in that State.
The President shall use funds in the Hazardous Substance Superfund, up to an amount not exceeding $5,000,000,000, for purposes of providing such reimbursement.
Reimbursement shall be provided for costs incurred with respect to facilities which have a higher ranking on the Hazard Ranking System before reimbursement is provided for costs incurred for facilities having a lower ranking on such system.
No reimbursement shall be provided under this section for any transaction costs or other related costs.
Effective date.--Reimbursement under paragraph (1) shall be provided for any remediation costs incurred after the date of approval of a State program under this section if the remediation is in accordance with such program.
Transition provisions.--(A) If remediation commenced before approval of a program under this section and was not completed before January 1, 1994, the President shall reimburse each person who incurred costs for such remediation for such costs if the President determines that the remediation is consistent with, or provides at least equivalent protection for public health and the environment as, the remediation specified in subsection (b).
The Administrator may not reimburse any State or other person for costs incurred for remediation which was completed before January 1, 1994.
Liability Exemption.-- ``(1) In general.--If a State has an approved remediation program which covers qualified municipal waste landfills, no person who is otherwise liable under this Act or under any other Federal law with respect to any release or threatened release of a hazardous substance or pollutant or contaminant from any qualified such landfill shall be subject to liability to any other person under this Act or any such other law for injuries, costs, damages, expenses, or other liability (including claims for indemnification or contribution and claims by third parties for death, personal injury, illness or loss of or damage to property or economic loss) that results from such release or threatened release.
Exceptions.--(A) The exemption under this subsection shall not apply in the case of any landfill at which the remediation was completed before January 1, 1994.
The exemption under this subsection shall not apply to any person who violated any Federal, State, or local law relating to the generation, transporation, or disposal of any solid waste which is present at the facility concerned.
Any such person shall be liable, in the same manner as provided in section 107, to the State for any costs incurred by the State pursuant to the State program under this section; and such person shall be liable to the Administrator in the same manner for any such costs for which the Administrator has reimbursed the State under this section.
Definition of Municipal Waste Landfills.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified municipal waste landfill' means a landfill listed on the National Priorities List as of the date of enactment of this section which is designated by the Administrator as-- ``(1) a site owned by a municipality or county, or ``(2) a privately-owned site which has a record of receiving municipal waste.
The Administrator shall publish a list of such sites within 30 days after the enactment of this section.''.
The table of contents for title I of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Uses of Superfund.--Section 111(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9611(a)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) Reimbursement of costs for remediation of municipal waste landfills.--Payment of not to exceed $5,000,000,000 for the costs of remediation of municipal waste landfills in accordance with section 127.