This Act may be cited as the ``Native American Census Participation Enhancement Act of 1999''.
2000 Census.--The term ``2000 census'' means the 2000 decennial census of population.
Bureau.--The term ``Bureau'' means the Bureau of the Census.
Indian Tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Indian Lands.--For purposes of this title, the term ``Indian lands'' shall include lands within the definition of ``Indian country'', as defined in 18 United States Code 1151; or ``Indian reservations'' as defined in section 3(d) of the Indian Financing Act of 1974, 25 United States Code 1452(d), or section 4(10) of the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 United States Code 1903(10).
For purposes of this definition, such section 3(d) of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 shall be applied by treating the term ``former Indian reservations in Oklahoma'' as including only those lands which are within the jurisdictional area of an Oklahoma Indian Tribe (as determined by the Secretary of the Interior) and are recognized by such Secretary as eligible for trust land status under 25 CFR part 151 (as in effect on the date of enactment of this sentence).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Tribal Organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' has the meaning given that term by section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
The Congress finds that-- (1) article I of the United States Constitution provides that an enumeration be taken of the United States population every 10 years to permit the apportionment of Representatives and for other purposes; (2) information collected through the decennial census is used to determine-- (A) the boundaries of congressional districts within States; (B) the boundaries of the districts for the legislature of each State and the boundaries of other political subdivisions within the States; and (C) the allocation of billions of dollars of Federal and State funds; (3) the enumeration of Native Americans has not been accurate and has led to an undercounting of the Native American population living on Indian lands and in rural areas; (4) the United States has a legal obligation to conduct an enumeration of the census in all communities in the United States, including Native communities; and (5) Tribal governments and Native Americans have an obligation to answer the census and ensure they are represented in the census.
TITLE I--GRANTS TO TRIBES AND ORGANIZATIONS SECTION 1.
In order to improve Native American participation in the 2000 census, the Secretary may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, provide for grants to be made to Indian tribes and tribal organizations, consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Applications Required.--Each entity referred to in section 2 that wishes to receive a grant under this Act shall submit an application at such time, in such form, and complete with such information as the Secretary shall by regulation require, except that any such application shall include at least-- (1) a statement of the objectives for which the grant is sought; and (2) a description of the types of programs and activities for which the grant is sought.
Notice of Approval or Disapproval.--Each entity submitting an application under subsection (a) shall, not later than 60 days after the date of its submission, be notified in writing as to whether such application is approved or disapproved.
In General.--A grant may not be made to an entity under this Act unless such entity agrees, with respect to the costs to be incurred by such entity in carrying out the programs an activities for which the grant is made, to make available non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Non-Federal Contributions.--An entity receiving a grant under this Act may meet the requirement under subsection (a) through-- (1) the use of amounts from non-Federal sources; or (2) in-kind contributions, fairly evaluated, but only if and to the extent allowable under section 9.
The Secretary shall allocate the amounts appropriated to carry out this Act equitably and in a manner that best achieves the purposes of this Act.
USE OF GRANT FUNDS.
A grant made under this Act may be used only for one or more of the following: (1) To train volunteers to assist individuals residing on Indian lands to complete and return census questionnaires.
To educate Native American and the public about the importance of participating in the 2000 census.
To educate Native Americans and the public about the confidentiality that is accorded to information collected in the 2000 census.
To recruit candidates to apply for census office and field enumerator positions.
To sponsor community events to promote the 2000 census.
To produce community-tailored promotional materials.
To rent space to provide any of the training described in this section.
Any regulations to carry out this Act shall be prescribed not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
The regulations shall include-- (1) provisions requiring that any application for a grant under this Act be submitted to the appropriate regional center or area office of the Bureau of the Census, as identified under the regulations; and (2) provisions under which the decision to approve or disapprove any such application shall be made by the head of the appropriate center or office in accordance with guidelines set forth in the regulations.
TITLE II--RECRUITMENT OF TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES SECTION 1.
Compensation Shall Not Be Taken Into Account.--Section 23 of title 13, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d)(1) As used in this subsection, the term `temporary census position' shall mean a temporary position within the Bureau, established for purposes related to the 2000 census, as determined under regulations which the Secretary shall prescribe.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the earning or receipt by an individual of compensation for service performed by such individual in a temporary census position shall not have the effect of causing-- ``(A) such individual or any other individual to become eligible for any benefits described in paragraph (3)(A); or ``(B) a reduction in the amount of any benefits described in paragraph (3)(A) for which such individual or any other individual would otherwise be eligible.
This subsection-- ``(A) shall apply with respect to benefits provided under any Federal program or under any State, tribal or local program financed in whole or in part with Federal funds; ``(B) shall apply only with respect to compensation for service performed during calendar year 2000; and ``(C) shall not apply if the individual performing the service involved was first appointed to a temporary census position (whether such individual's then current position or a previous one) before January 1, 2000.''.
Nothing in the amendment made by paragraph (1) shall be considered to apply with respect to Public Law 101-86 or the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Reemployed Annuitants and Former Members of the Uniformed Services.--Public Law 101-86 (13 United States Code 23) is amended-- (1) in section 1(b) and the long title by striking ``the 1990 decennial census'' and inserting ``the 2000 decennial census''; and (2) in section 4 by striking ``December 31, 1990'' and inserting December 31, 2000''.
In General.--Subject to available appropriations, and after consulting with Indian tribes, the Secretary may provide such reasonable and appropriate incentives to facilitate and encourage volunteers to assist in the enumeration of Native Americans.
Reimbursements.--In his discretion, the Secretary may reimburse volunteers for fuel and mileage expenses; meals and related expenses; and other reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by assistants in the conduct of the Census.
Debt Relief.--In consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary shall develop and implement a program of undergraduate or graduate debt relief for those Census assistants that have provided significant service in the conduct of the enumeration of the Census.