This Act may be cited as the ``Cell Phone Consumer Protection Act of 2000''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS REGARDING OF QUALITY OF COMMERCIAL MOBILE SERVICE AND MONITORING OF COMPLAINTS REGARDING SUCH SERVICE.
Section 332(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 332) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Quality of commercial mobile services.-- ``(A) In general.--The Commission shall, by regulation, establish such requirements as the Commission considers appropriate to ensure that providers of commercial mobile services meet minimum standards regarding the quality and performance of such service, which shall include standards regarding connection, reception, and billing practices.
Complaint system.-- ``(i) Establishment.--The Commission shall establish and administer a system that makes available a procedure for any subscriber of a commercial mobile service to register a complaint regarding the quality or performance of the service.
Toll-free number.--Such system shall include establishment of a toll-free number applicable to commercial mobile services for reporting a complaint.
The Commission and any agency or entity to which the Commission has delegated authority under section 251(e) shall designate `#FCC' as such number and shall provide appropriate transition periods for areas in which such number is otherwise in use as of the date of the enactment of the Cell Phone Consumer Protection Act of 2000.
Records.--The Commission shall maintain a record of each complaint made under the system established pursuant to this subparagraph.
Notice.--The Commission shall require each provider of commercial mobile service (or the billing agent for such provider) to include, in each subscriber's bill for such service, a statement informing the subscriber that a complaint regarding the quality or performance of the service may be registered with the Commission and providing the toll-free number under clause (ii) and an address for mailing a complaint.
The Commission shall take such other actions as may be appropriate to publicize the availability of the complaint system to subscribers of commercial mobile services.
Reporting of complaints to congress.--Not less often than once every 6 months, the Commission shall submit a report to the Congress regarding complaints received under the complaint system required under subparagraph (B), which shall-- ``(i) indicate the number of complaints received, during the period for which the report is made, regarding each provider of a commercial mobile service for which a complaint is made; and ``(ii) indicate the types of complaints received during such period, including complaints regarding dead spots, dropped calls, network busy signals, and improper billing practices, and the number of each type of complaint received during such period.
Upon submission to the Congress of each report under this subparagraph, the Commission shall make such report publicly available by providing access to the report through a World Wide Web site of the Commission.
Effect on consumer protection laws.--This paragraph may not be construed as relieving any provider of a commercial mobile service from the obligation to comply with any Federal, State, or local statute or regulation relating to consumer protection or unfair trade.
State authority.--This paragraph may not be construed as precluding any State from enacting and enforcing additional and complementary oversight and regulatory systems or procedures, or both, so long as such systems and procedures do not significantly impede the enforcement of this paragraph or other Federal statutes.
Exemption from forfeiture provisions.-- Notwithstanding any provision of title V, failure to comply with the requirements established under subparagraph (A) shall not be subject to any penalty or forfeiture under such title.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND REGULATIONS.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by section 2 shall take effect upon the expiration of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Regulations.--The Commission shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the amendment made by section 2.
Such regulations shall be issued not later than, and shall take effect upon, the effective date under subsection (a).