The Congress finds the following: (1) In 1978, the Judicial Conference of the United States established a procedure for creating new Federal judicial districts, which is still in force.
According to the ``Proceedings of the Judicial Conference, September 21-22, 1978'', this procedure requires that 4 principal criteria be taken into consideration in evaluating the establishment of a new Federal judicial district: caseload, judicial administration, geography, and community convenience.
The criterion of ``caseload'' is found to include the total number of Federal court cases and the number of cases per Federal judge, for both civil and criminal Federal cases.
(A) The substantial criminal caseload concentrated in the southern counties of New Jersey requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
281 Federal criminal cases originated in the 8 southern New Jersey counties in 1998 and were handled by the 5 judges of the Camden vicinage and the 3 judges of the Trenton vicinage.
The criminal caseload in the southern region of New Jersey exceeds that of 51 of the current Federal judicial districts.
Only 44 of the 95 Federal district courts have more criminal cases filed than the southern region of New Jersey.
For example, in the Eastern District of Virginia (9 judges), 110 criminal cases were filed in 1998.
In the District of Connecticut (8 judges), only 221 criminal cases were filed in 1998.
(A) The substantial civil caseload concentrated in the southern counties of New Jersey requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
2,116 Federal civil cases originated in the 8 southern New Jersey counties in 1998 and were handled by the 5 judges of the Camden vicinage and the 3 judges of the Trenton vicinage.
The civil caseload in the southern region of New Jersey exceeds that of 52 of the current Federal judicial districts.
Only 43 out of the 95 Federal districts have more civil cases filed than this region of the New Jersey District.
For example, in the Southern District of West Virginia, a separate judicial district with 5 judges, only 1,315 civil cases were filed in 1998.
The Western District of Tennessee, similarly, with 5 judges, had only 1,581 civil cases filed in 1998.
The criterion of ``judicial administration'' is found to include the backlog of pending cases in a Federal judicial district, which hinders the effective resolution of pending business before the court.
(A) The size of the backlog of pending cases concentrated in the southern counties of New Jersey requires the creation of a separate judicial district.
The number of pending cases in the Camden vicinage of New Jersey exceeds the number of cases pending before entire judicial districts with similar numbers of judges, clearly indicating that southern New Jersey merits a separate Federal judicial district.
For example, there are 1,431 civil cases pending before the Camden vicinage, and only 113 of those were commenced in 1999.
The Western District of Tennessee, with 5 judges, had only 1,104 civil cases pending in 1998.
The Western District of Oklahoma had only 1,359 civil cases pending in 1998 before 6 judges.
Finally, there are 161 criminal cases pending before the Camden vicinage, while the entire Southern District of Indiana, with 5 judges, had only 116 criminal cases pending in 1998.
The criterion of ``geography'' is found to mean the accessibility of the central administration of the Federal judicial district to officers of the court, parties with business before the court, and other citizens living within the Federal judicial district.
(A) The distance between the northern and southern regions of New Jersey creates a substantial barrier to the efficient administration of justice.
The distance from Newark, New Jersey to Camden, New Jersey is more than 85 miles.
When a new Federal court district was created in Louisiana in 1971, the distance between New Orleans and Baton Rouge (nearly 80 miles) was cited as a major factor in creating a new district court, as travel difficulties were impeding the timely administration of justice.
The criterion of ``community convenience'' is found to mean the extent to which creating a new Federal judicial district will allow the court to better serve the population and diverse communities of the area.
(A) New Jersey's culturally and regionally diverse population of 8,000,000 citizens, widely distributed across a large State, is inconvenienced by having only 1 judicial district.
Of the 25 States that have only a single Federal judicial district (including Puerto Rico, the United States territories, and the District of Columbia), New Jersey has the highest population.
More than a dozen States have smaller populations than New Jersey, yet they have multiple Federal judicial districts, including Washington, Oklahoma, Iowa, Georgia, West Virginia, and Missouri.
In evaluating the creation of a new Southern District of New Jersey, the Judicial Conference should seek the views of the chief judge of the affected district, the judicial council for the affected circuit court, and the affected United States Attorney as representative of the views of the Department of Justice, as required in the procedure established by the ``Proceedings of the Judicial Conference, September 21-22, 1978''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF 2 DISTRICTS IN NEW JERSEY.
Creation.--Section 110 of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
New Jersey ``New Jersey is divided into 2 judicial districts to be known as the Northern and Southern Districts of New Jersey.
``Northern District ``(a) The Northern District comprises the counties of Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, and Warren.
``Court for the Northern District shall be held at Newark.
``Southern District ``(b) The Southern District comprises the counties of Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Mercer, and Salem.
``Court for the Southern District shall be held at Camden and Trenton.''.
Judgeships.--The item relating to New Jersey in the table set forth in section 133(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``New Jersey: ``Northern............................................. 9 ``Southern............................................. 8''.
Bankruptcy Judgeships.--The item relating to New Jersey in the table set forth in section 152(a)(1) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``New Jersey: ``Northern............................................. 4 ``Southern............................................. 4''.
DISTRICT JUDGES, BANKRUPTCY JUDGES, MAGISTRATE JUDGES, UNITED STATES ATTORNEY, UNITED STATES MARSHAL, AND FEDERAL PUBLIC DEFENDER.
Transfer of District Judges.--(1) Any district judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, or Warren County shall, on or after such effective date, be a district judge for the Northern District of New Jersey.
Any district judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Mercer, or Salem County shall, on and after such effective date, be a district judge of the Southern District of New Jersey.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in a judgeship in either judicial district of New Jersey, the vacancy shall first be offered to those judges appointed before the enactment of this Act and in active service in the other judicial district of New Jersey at the time of the vacancy, and of those judges wishing to fill the vacancy, the judge most senior in service shall fill that vacancy.
In such a case, the President shall appoint a judge to fill the vacancy resulting in the district of New Jersey from which such judge left office.
Transfer of Bankruptcy and Magistrate Judges.--Any bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Hunterdon, Middlesex, Monmouth, Morris, Ocean, Passaic, Somerset, Sussex, Union, or Warren County shall, on or after such effective date, be a bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge, as the case may be, for the Northern District of New Jersey.
Any bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge of the District Court of New Jersey who is holding office on the day before the effective date of this Act and whose official duty station is in Atlantic, Burlington, Camden, Cape May, Cumberland, Gloucester, Mercer, or Salem County shall, on and after such effective date, be a bankruptcy judge or magistrate judge, as the case may be, of the Southern District of New Jersey.
United States Attorney, United States Marshal, and Federal Public Defender.-- (1) Those in office.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not affect the tenure of office of the United States attorney, the United States marshal, and the Federal Public Defender, for the District of New Jersey who are in office on the effective date of this Act, except that such individuals shall be the United States attorney, the United States marshal, and the Federal Public Defender, respectively, for the Northern District of New Jersey as of such effective date.
Appointments.--The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, a United States attorney and a United States marshal for the Southern District of New Jersey.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit shall appoint a Federal Public Defender for the Southern District of New Jersey.
Pending Cases Not Affected.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not affect any action commenced before the effective date of this Act and pending in the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey on such date.
Juries Not Affected.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not affect the composition, or preclude the service, of any grand or petit jury summoned, empaneled, or actually serving in the Judicial District of New Jersey on the effective date of this Act.
In General.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Appointments.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), the President and the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit may make the appointments under section 3(c)(2) at any time after the date of the enactment of this Act.