This Act may be cited as the ``Rights of the Child Act of 1997''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States is the only Western industrialized nation which has neither ratified nor become a party to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
During the 1990's, the United States had the worst child poverty rate among Western industrialized nations: one- quarter of America's children lived in poverty.
One in 10 infants living in the United States has no routine source of health care.
Forty percent of children in the United States are at risk of school failure.
An estimated 1,800,000 teenagers were victims of violent crimes in the United States in the early 1990's.
2,600,000 children were reported abused and neglected in 1991.
Approximately 144,000 babies will die in the United States, over the next 4 years, before their 1st birthday.
SUBMISSION OF UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD.
It is the sense of the Congress that the President should submit and seek the advice and consent of the Senate by December 31, 1998, to ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the United Nations with the support of the United States on November 29, 1989, and signed by Madeleine Albright acting as United States Delegate to the United Nations and on behalf of the United States Government on February 16, 1995.
CONSULTATION WITH THE STATES.
Prior to the submission under section 3, the Attorney General of the United States shall meet with the attorneys general of the States and territories of the United States for the purpose of determining their recommendations concerning any limitations in the form of reservations, declarations, statements, and understandings that should accompany a proposed resolution of ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION AND REPORT TO CONGRESS.
Establishment.--There is established an advisory commission concerning the economic, social, cultural, political, and civil rights of children.
Composition.--The commission shall be composed of 11 persons, appointed as provided under subsection (c), with experience, expertise, and concerns pertaining to the economic, social, cultural, political, and civil rights of children as well as individuals who are parents or legal guardians of children.
Appointment.--Not later than March 1, 1998, the commission of shall be appointed as follows: (1) 5 persons appointed by the President.
1 person appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 person appointed by the majority leader of the House of Representatives.
1 person appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
1 person appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
1 person appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services (or a designee of the Secretary).
Chairperson.--The President shall designate a chairperson of the commission.
Vacancies.--Vacancies in the commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Compensation.--Members of the commission shall serve without pay or other compensation.
Staff.--Such staff and administrative support as are necessary and appropriate shall be made available to the commission on a non- reimbursable basis by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Report.--Not later than September 1, 1998, the commission shall submit to the Congress a report with any recommendations agreed to by a majority of its members stipulating any limitations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child that are advisable to facilitate ratification.
Termination.--Ninety days after the submission of the report under subsection (h) the commission shall cease to exist.
INTERIM MEASURES IN SUPPORT OF INTERNATIONALLY-RECOGNIZED RIGHTS OF THE CHILD.
ILO.--In addition to such amounts as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 for a United States contribution to the International Labor Organization for the activities of the International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor.
UNCHR.--In addition to such amounts as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 for a United States contribution to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights for programs relating to bonded child labor that are carried out by the Subcommittee and Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery.
PROHIBITION ON IMPORTATION OF PRODUCTS MADE BY BONDED CHILD LABOR.
Prohibition.--No product manufactured or mined, in whole or in part, by bonded child labor shall be imported into the United States.
Regulation.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consulation with the Secretary of Labor, shall prescribe such regulations are are necessary and appropriate to carry out this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section the following terms have the following meanings: (1) The term ``bonded child labor'' means work or service exacted from a child confined against the child's will, either in payment for the debts of a parent, relative, or guardian, or drawn under false pretext.
The term ``child'' means an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE TO COUNTRIES THAT ALLOW CHILD PROSTITUTION AND SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN.
Prohibition.--United States assistance may not be provided to the government of a foreign country for a fiscal year unless the President certifies to the Congress for such fiscal year that such government has enacted, and is enforcing, laws against child prostitution and the sexual exploitation of children.
Waiver.--The prohibition on foreign assistance under subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to a foreign country if the President determines and notifies the Congress that providing such assistance for such country is in the national security interest of the United States.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``United States assistance'' means assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes).
Effective Date.--The prohibition on foreign assistance under subsection (a) shall apply with respect to fiscal year 1999 and subsequent fiscal years.