DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDED TO Medicare-eligible BENEFICIARIES UNDER TRICARE.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall enter into an agreement in order to carry out a demonstration project under which the Secretary of Health and Human Services reimburses the Secretary of Defense, on a capitated basis, from the Medicare Program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for certain health care services provided by the Secretary of Defense to Medicare-eligible military beneficiaries through the TRICARE Program.
Project Requirements.--(1)(A) The Secretary of Defense shall budget for and expend on health care services in each region in which the demonstration project is carried out an amount equal to the amount that the Secretary would otherwise budget for and expend on such services in the absence of the project.
The Secretary may not be reimbursed under the project for health care services provided to Medicare-eligible military beneficiaries in a region until the amount expended by the Secretary to provide health care services in that region exceeds the amount budgeted for health care services in that region under subparagraph (A).
The agreement between the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide that the cost to the Medicare Program of providing services under the project does not exceed the cost that the Medicare Program would otherwise incur in providing such services in the absence of the project.
The authority of the Secretary of Defense to carry out the project shall expire 3 years after the date of the commencement of the project.
Reports.--Not later than 14 months after the commencement of the demonstration project under subsection (a), and annually thereafter until the year following the year in which the project is terminated, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall jointly submit to Congress a report on the demonstration project.
The report shall include the following: (1) The number of Medicare-eligible military beneficiaries provided health care services under the project during the previous year.
An assessment of the benefits to such beneficiaries of receiving health care services under the project.
A description of the cost shifting, if any, among medical care programs of the Department of Defense that results from the project.
A description of the cost shifting, if any, from the Department to the Medicare Program that results from the project.
An analysis of the effect of the project on the following: (A) Access to the military medical treatment system, including access to military medical treatment facilities.
The availability of space and facilities and the capabilities of medical staff to provide fee-for- service medical care.
Established priorities for treatment of beneficiaries under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code.
The cost to the Department of providing prescription drugs to the beneficiaries described in subparagraph (C).
The quality of health care provided by the Department.
Health care providers and Medicare-eligible military beneficiaries in the communities in which the project is carried out.
An assessment of the effects of continuing the project on the overall budget of the Department for health care and on the budget of each military medical treatment facility.
An assessment of the effects of continuing the project on expenditures from the medicare trust funds under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
An analysis of the lessons learned by the Department as a result of the project.
Any other information that the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services jointly consider appropriate.
Review by Comptroller General.--Not later than December 31 of each year in which the demonstration project is carried out under this section, the Comptroller General shall determine and submit to Congress a report on the extent, if any, to which the costs of the Secretary of Defense under the TRICARE Program and the costs of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the Medicare Program have increased as a result of the project.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``Medicare-eligible military beneficiary'' means a beneficiary under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, who is entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
The term ``TRICARE Program'' means the managed health care program that is established by the Secretary of Defense under the authority of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, principally section 1097 of that title, and includes the competitive selection of contractors to financially underwrite the delivery of health care services under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services.