This Act may be cited as the ``Drug Kingpins Bankruptcy Act of 1999''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) It should be the policy of the United States to impose economic and financial sanctions on foreign international narcotics traffickers and their organizations.
Presidential Decision Directive 42, issued on October 21, 1995, ordered agencies of the executive branch of the United States Government to, inter alia, increase the priority and resources devoted to the direct and immediate threat international crime presents to national security, work more closely with other governments to develop a global response to this threat, and use aggressively and creatively all legal means available to combat international crime.
12978 of October 21, 1995, exercised the authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to effectively target and sanction four ``Specifically Designated Narcotics Traffickers'' and their organizations which operate from Colombia.
Similar sanctions should be applied to additional international foreign narcotics traffickers operating worldwide.
The purpose of this Act is to provide for the use of authorities in the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to sanction additional specially designated narcotics traffickers operating worldwide.
DESIGNATION OF CERTAIN FOREIGN INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS TRAFFICKERS.
Preparation of List of Names.--Not later than January 1, 2000, and not later than January 1 of each year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General, Director of Central Intelligence, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of State, shall submit to the Director of National Drug Control Policy a list of those individuals who play a significant role in international narcotics trafficking as of the date the list is submitted.
Review by Director of National Drug Control Policy.--Not later than February 1, 2000, and not later than February 1 of each year thereafter, the Director of National Drug Control Policy shall transmit to the President the list submitted that year to the Director under subsection (a) to the President, together with his recommendations for the inclusion in, or exclusion from, the list of specific individuals.
Exclusion of Certain Persons From List.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, neither the list described in subsections (a) and (b) nor the accompanying recommendations of the Director of National Drug Control Policy under subsection (b) shall include the name of any individual if the Director of Central Intelligence determines that the disclosure of that person's role in international narcotics trafficking could compromise United States intelligence sources or methods.
The Director of Central Intelligence shall advise the President when a determination is made to withhold an individual's identity under this subsection.
Designation of Individuals as Threats to the United States.-- The President shall determine not later than March 1 of each year whether or not to designate persons on the list transmitted to the President that year as persons constituting an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.
The President shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of any person designated under this subsection.
If the President determines not to designate any person on such list as such a threat, the President shall submit a report to Congress setting forth the reasons therefor.
Changes in Designations of Individuals.-- (1) Additional individuals designated.--If at any time after March 1 of a year, but prior to January 1 of the following year, the President determines that a person is playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking and has not been designated under subsection (d) as a person constituting an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States, the President may so designate the person.
The President shall notify the Secretary of the Treasury of any person designated under this paragraph.
Removal of designations of individuals.--Whenever the President determines that a person designated under subsection (d) or paragraph (1) of this subsection no longer poses an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States, the person shall no longer be considered as designated under that subsection.
References.--Any person designated under subsection (d) or (e) may be referred to in this Act as a ``specially designated narcotics trafficker''.
Finding.--Congress finds that a national emergency exists with respect to any individual who is a specially designated narcotics trafficker.
Blocking of Assets.--Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1702(b)) and in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this Act, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of designation of a person as a specially designated narcotics trafficker, there are hereby blocked all property and interests in property that are, or after that date, come within the United States, or that are, or after that date come, within the possession or control of any United States person, of-- (1) any specially designated narcotics trafficker; (2) any person who materially assists in, provides financial or technological support for, or provides goods or services in support of, the narcotics trafficking activities of a specially designated narcotics trafficker; and (3) any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General, Director of Central Intelligence, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of State, to be owned or controlled by, or to act for or on behalf of, a specially designated narcotics trafficker.
Prohibited Acts.--Except to the extent provided in section 203(b) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act or in any regulation, order, directive, or license that may be issued pursuant to this Act, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of designation of a person as a specially designated narcotics trafficker, the following acts are prohibited: (1) Any transaction or dealing by a United States person, or within the United States, in property or interests in property of any specially designated narcotics trafficker.
Any transaction or dealing by a United States person, or within the United States, that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate, subsection (b).
Law Enforcement and Intelligence Activities Not Affected.-- Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or otherwise limit the authorized law enforcement or intelligence activities of the United States, or the law enforcement activities of any State or subdivision thereof.
Implementation.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General, Director of Central Intelligence, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of State, is authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by the International Emergency Economic Powers Act as may be necessary to carry out this section.
The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to any other officer or agency of the United States Government.
Each agency of the United States shall take all appropriate measures within its authority to carry out this section.
Enforcement.--Violations of licenses, orders, or regulations under this Act shall be subject to the same civil or criminal penalties as are provided by section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705) for violations of licenses, orders, and regulations under that Act.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Entity.--The term ``entity'' means a partnership, association, corporation, or other organization, group, or subgroup.
Narcotics trafficking.--The term ``narcotics trafficking'' means any activity undertaken illicitly to cultivate, produce, manufacture, distribute, sell, finance, or transport, or otherwise assist, abet, conspire, or collude with others in illicit activities relating to, narcotic drugs, including, but not limited to, heroin, methamphetamine and cocaine.
Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual or entity.
United states person.--The term ``United States person'' means any United States citizen or national, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.
INITIAL LISTING OF SPECIALLY DESIGNATED NARCOTICS TRAFFICKERS.
Initial Designation.--For the purposes of this Act, and without regard to sections 4 and 5, the President shall, not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, designate as specially designated narcotics traffickers for purposes of this Act those persons listed in subsection (b) who have been indicted in the United States on narcotics trafficking charges, and whose extradition has been requested by, or for whom a provisional arrest warrant has been issued by, United States Government officials.
List.--The persons referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) Wei Hsueh-Kang, also known as Prasit Chiwinitparya, and Charchai Chiwinnitipanya, born on June 29, 1952, a resident of Myanmar.
Khun Sa, also known as Chang Chi-Fu, born on February 17, 1933, a resident of Myanmar.
Jose de Jesus Amezcua-Contreras, a citizen of Mexico, born on July 31, 1963.
Luis Ignacio Amezcua-Contreras, a citizen of Mexico, born on February 22, 1964.
Ramon Arellano-Felix, a citizen of Mexico, born on August 31, 1964.
Rafael Caro-Quintero, a citizen of Mexico, born on October 24, 1952.
Vicente Carrillo-Fuentes, a citizen of Mexico, born on October 16, 1962.
Oscar Malherbe De Leon, a citizen of Mexico, born on January 10, 1964.
Arturo Paez-Martinez, a citizen of Mexico, born on August 31, 1967.
Charles Miller, also known as Eustace O'Connor, a citizen of St. Kitts, born on March 29, 1960.
Lorquet Saint-Hilaire, a citizen of Haiti, born on March 23, 1969.
Jhon Raul Castro, a citizen of Colombia, born on September 5, 1963.
DENIAL OF VISAS TO AND INADMISSIBILITY OF SPECIALLY DESIGNATED NARCOTICS TRAFFICKERS.
Prohibition.--The Secretary of State shall deny a visa to, and the Attorney General may not admit to the United States-- (1) any specially designated narcotics trafficker; or (2) any alien who the consular officer or the Attorney General knows or has reason to believe-- (A) is a spouse or minor child of a specially designated narcotics trafficker; or (B) is a person described in paragraph (2) or (3) of section 5(b).
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply-- (1) where the Secretary of State finds, on a case-by-case basis, that the entry into the United States of the person is necessary for medical reasons; (2) upon the request of the Attorney General, Director of Central Intelligence, Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary of Defense; or (3) for purposes of the prosecution of a specially designated narcotics trafficker.