This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Benefits for Seniors Act of 2000''.
REPEAL OF 1993 INCREASE IN TAX ON SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 86(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to social security and tier 1 railroad retirement benefits) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``This paragraph shall not apply to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2000.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (3) of section 871(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``85 percent'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``50 percent''.
(A) Subparagraph (A) of section 121(e)(1) of the Social Security Amendments of 1983 (Public Law 98-21) is amended-- (i) by striking ``(A) There'' and inserting ``There''; (ii) by striking ``(i)'' immediately following ``amounts equivalent to''; and (iii) by striking ``, less (ii)'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
Paragraph (1) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended by striking subparagraph (B).
Paragraph (3) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B).
Paragraph (2) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended in the first sentence by striking ``paragraph (1)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
IMPROVEMENT OF CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR THE ELDERLY BY CONGRESSIONALLY APPOINTED REVIEW COMMITTEE.
Establishment of Consumer Price Index Review Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a review committee to be known as the Consumer Price Index Review Committee (in this section referred to as the ``Committee'').
Membership.--The Committee shall be composed of 15 members jointly appointed by the leadership of the Senate and the House of Representatives of whom-- (A) 11 shall be leading experts in the field of economics and, to the extent feasible, familiar with the issues related to the calculation of changes in the cost of living; and (B) 4 shall be representatives of individuals who have attained age 65.
Terms and vacancies.-- (A) Terms.--A member of the Committee appointed under paragraph (2) shall be appointed for the duration of the Committee.
Vacancies.-- (i) In general.--A vacancy on the Committee shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made and shall be subject to any conditions which applied with respect to the original appointment.
Filling unexpired term.--An individual chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the duration of the Committee.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Committee have been appointed, the Committee shall hold its first meeting.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Committee shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members appointed under paragraph (2).
Duties.-- (1) Study and development of implementation plan.-- (A) In general.--The Committee shall conduct a study-- (i) to improve the method for determining an index, to be known as the ``Consumer Price Index for the Elderly''; (ii) to make recommendations addressing the limitations of the method for determining the Experimental Consumer Price Index for the Elderly calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to ensure that the improved index accurately measures changes over time in expenditures for consumption that are typical for retirees in the United States who receive old-age and survivors insurance benefits under title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et sequentes); and (iii) to develop an implementation plan.
Study requirements.--The study described in subparagraph (A) shall include the following requirements: (i) The Consumer Price Index for the Elderly shall be based on an accurate market basket of goods and services that reflect a representative collection of typical purchases by the total retiree population in the United States who receive old-age and survivors insurance benefits under title II of such Act.
The Consumer Expenditure Survey used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to calculate the Experimental Consumer Price Index for the Elderly shall be re-designed and expanded to collect expenditure patterns representative of such total retiree population.
The areas and outlets priced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to calculate the Experimental Consumer Price Index for the Elderly shall be modified to reflect a representation of the places of purchase for such total retiree population.
The categories of items to be priced shall be selected to represent such total retiree population.
The prices collected shall adequately reflect the availability of discount prices for such total retiree population.
Any other limitations otherwise found to affect the accuracy of the Consumer Price Index for the Elderly shall be removed.
Additional study.--The Committee shall also study the method for determining an accurate consumer price index for individuals who receive disability insurance benefits under title II of such Act.
Report.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), not later than 1 year after the initial meeting of the Committee under subsection (a)(4), the Committee shall submit a report to Congress on the study conducted in accordance with paragraph (1).
Required approval.--The Committee shall not submit a report under subparagraph (A) unless the report has the approval of at least 9 members of the Committee.
Powers.-- (1) Hearings.--The Committee may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Committee considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this section.
Information from federal agencies.--The Committee may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Committee considers necessary to carry out this section, including the published and unpublished data and analytical products of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Committee, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Committee in a timely manner.
Postal services.--The Committee may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Committee may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Committee who is not otherwise an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Committee.
All members of the Committee who otherwise are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Committee.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson of the Committee may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Committee to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Committee.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Committee may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Committee without additional reimbursement (other than the employee's regular compensation), and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson of the Committee may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate 1 year after the date of the initial meeting of the Committee under subsection (a)(4).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Committee such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS PILOT PROGRAM TO TEST CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR THE ELDERLY.
Pilot Program.--The Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics shall establish a pilot program to test the accuracy of an operational index to be recommended by the Consumer Price Index Review Committee under section 3 and to be known as the ``Consumer Price Index for the Elderly'', which indicates changes over time in expenditures for consumption which are typical for retirees in the United States who receive old-age and survivors insurance benefits under title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et sequentes).
Duration of Pilot Program.--The pilot program shall commence with the first month that begins after the date of the submission of the report under section 3(b)(2) and shall continue through December 2003.
INTERIM APPLICATION OF CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR ALL URBAN CONSUMERS.
For cost-of-living computation quarters (as defined in section 215(i)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415(i)(1)(B)) occurring during the period that begins on January 1, 2001, and ends with the implementation of the Official Consumer Price Index for the Elderly under section 6(b), the Commissioner of Social Security, notwithstanding section 215(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415(i)) and any regulations promulgated thereunder, shall use the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers to calculate cost-of- living adjustments for benefits described in section 6(b)(1).
APPLICATION OF CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR THE ELDERLY.
Implementation.-- (1) Commissioner of bureau of labor statistics.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), not later than the fourth year that begins after the Consumer Price Index Review Committee submits the report required under section 3(b)(2), the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics shall prepare and publish monthly the Official Consumer Price Index for the Elderly based on the implementation plan and recommendations included in that report.
No implementation if congressional disapproval of committee report.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if a joint resolution is enacted, in accordance with paragraph (2), disapproving the report submitted by the Consumer Price Index Review Committee before the end of the 90-day period that begins on the date on which the Review Committee submits the report.
Exclusion of certain days.--For purposes of subparagraph (B) and paragraph (2), the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain shall be excluded from the computation of the period.
Congressional consideration.-- (A) Terms of the resolution.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution that is introduced within the period described in that paragraph and-- (i) that does not have a preamble; (ii) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves the report of the Consumer Price Index Review Committee regarding the implementation of the Consumer Price Index for the Elderly submitted on ________.
'', the blank space being filled in with the appropriate date; and (iii) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution disapproving the report of the Consumer Price Index Review Committee regarding the implementation of the Consumer Price Index for the Elderly.''.
Referral.--A resolution described in subparagraph (A) that is introduced-- (i) in the House of Representatives, shall be referred to the Committee on Ways and Means; and (ii) in the Senate, shall be referred to the Committee on Finance.
Discharge.--If a committee to which a resolution described in subparagraph (A) is referred has not reported such resolution by the end of the 60- day period beginning on the date on which the Consumer Price Index Review Committee submits the report required under section 3(b)(2), such committee shall be, at the end of such period, discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--On or after the third day after the date on which the committee to which a resolution described in subparagraph (A) has reported, or has been discharged from further consideration of such resolution, such resolution shall be considered in the same manner as a resolution is considered under subsections (d), (e), and (f) of section 2908 of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (10 United States Code 2687 note).
Use of Index.--For cost-of-living computation quarters (as defined in section 215(i)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415(i)(1)(B))) beginning on or after January 1 of the calendar year that begins after the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics first prepares and publishes the Official Consumer Price Index for the Elderly in accordance with subsection (a)(1), the Commissioner of Social Security shall-- (1) cease using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers to calculate cost-of-living adjustments for old-age and survivors insurance benefits payable under title II of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et sequentes) to any retiree or individual who has attained age 62; and (2) notwithstanding section 215(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415(i)) and any regulations promulgated thereunder, use the Official Consumer Price Index for the Elderly to calculate such adjustments.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Bureau of Labor Statistics such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.