This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Cities Act of 2009''.
CREATION OF AND ASSISTANCE FOR VIOLENT AND DRUG CRIME ZONES.
Title XXI of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14061 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subtitle: ``Subtitle E--Coordination With Federal Agencies to Curb Violent Crime ``SEC.
CREATION OF AND ASSISTANCE FOR VIOLENT AND DRUG CRIME ZONES.
Definitions.--In this section the following definitions shall apply: ``(1) Governor.--The term `Governor' means a Governor or other chief executive officer of a State or the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
Violent and drug crime zone.--The term `Violent and Drug Crime Zone' means a metropolitan area within a State or multiple States that is designated as having rates of homicides, violent felonies, sex offenses, drug and gang- related crimes that are high in proportion to the national average rates of such crimes, as determined by the most recent available data of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the National Incident Based Reporting System maintained by the uniform crime reporting program of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
For purposes of the previous sentence, rates of a crime for an area shall be treated as high in proportion to the national average rates of such crime if such rates for the area are greater than 5 times the national average rates.
State.--The term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
Violent and Drug Crime Zones.-- ``(1) Designation.--The Attorney General, after consultation with the Governor of each appropriate State and with relevant Federal agencies, may designate as a Violent and Drug Crime Zone, any specified area that is located within 1 or more States, based on the criteria for designation under paragraph (4).
Assistance and coordination.--In order to provide Federal assistance to Violent and Drug Crime Zones, the Attorney General shall, upon consultation with appropriate State and relevant local and Federal law enforcement agencies-- ``(A) establish a drug and violent crime intervention team in each Violent and Drug Crime Zone, which will consist of local, State, and relevant Federal law enforcement authorities, for the coordinated investigation, apprehension, and prosecution of criminal activity in such zone; ``(B) ensure the establishment of a Safe Cities Task Force described in subsection (c) for each Violent and Drug Crime Zone; ``(C) coordinate with appropriate Federal agencies the temporary reassignment of personnel to the intervention team established under subparagraph (A); ``(D) provide funding or create funding partnership opportunities with one or more States for the operation of such intervention teams; and ``(E) require reporting from such intervention teams to share intelligence and best practices.
Composition of drug and violent crime intervention teams.--Each drug and violent crime intervention team established pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) shall consist of agents and officers, where feasible, from-- ``(A) the Federal Bureau of Investigation; ``(B) the Drug Enforcement Administration; ``(C) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; and ``(D) other relevant Federal agencies, as determined by the Attorney General in consultation with local law enforcement agencies in the relevant area designated under paragraph (1).
Criteria for designation.--In considering an area for designation as a Drug and Violent Crime Zone under this section, the Attorney General shall consider-- ``(A) the current levels of homicides, violent crimes, sex crimes, and drug-related and gang-related crimes in the zone; ``(B) the extent to which State and local law enforcement agencies have committed and need additional resources to respond to the crimes described in subparagraph (A); ``(C) the extent to which a significant increase in the allocation of Federal resources would enhance local response to the crimes described in subparagraph (A); and ``(D) any other criteria deemed appropriate by the Attorney General.
Training and transfer of best practices.--Federal agency personnel who participate in a drug and violent crime intervention team under this subsection shall, as a condition of such participation, develop and submit to the Attorney General best practice reports.
The Attorney General shall provide for such best practice reports, as well as other intelligence and knowledge-transfer opportunities, to be shared with State and local law enforcement agencies to enable such agencies to replicate the best practices of the intervention teams.
Safe Cities Task Forces.-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be established, for each Violent and Drug Crimes Zone, a Safe Cities Task Force.
Membership.--Each Safe Cities Task Force, with respect to a Violent and Drug Crimes Zone, shall consist of not more than 8 members, including the Mayor involved, Chief of Police or equivalent, Governor of the applicable State, the city attorney (or equivalent) involved, and representatives from Federal law enforcement agencies as determined appropriate by the Attorney General.
Duties.--The duties of each Safe Cities Task Force shall include the following: ``(A) Oversight of funding expenditures related to the creation and work of the drug and violent crime intervention team for the zone involved.
Assistance with coordination of such intervention team.
Outreach to affected communities within the zone served by such intervention team, as needed.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED JUSTICE GRANTS FOR PROSECUTORS.
In General.--Section 31707 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 13867) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 2013 .
Increase in Prosecutors for Intervention Team Efforts.--Section 31702 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 14211) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) to fund programs that would increase the number of prosecutors available to work with efforts of drug and violent crime intervention teams under section 21501, as determined necessary by the Attorney General in consultation with appropriate Federal agencies and local law enforcement.''.
GRANTS TO STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TO ESTABLISH STATE- WIDE CRIME PREVENTION DATABASES.
Subtitle I of title XXXII of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
GRANTS TO STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TO ESTABLISH STATE-WIDE CRIME PREVENTION DATABASES.
Authority To Make Grants.--The Office of Justice Programs of the Department of Justice shall award grants, in accordance with such regulations as the Attorney General may prescribe, to State and local programs designed to establish and maintain a State-wide database to track criminals, arrests, prosecutions, and convictions.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.