This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Worker Protection Act of 1997''.
USE OF DESIGNATED HOLLOW-BORE NEEDLE DEVICES BY HOSPITALS UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.
Condition of Participation.--Section 1866(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395cc(a)(1)), as amended by section 4321(b) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, is amended-- (1) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (S) and inserting ``; and''; and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (S), the following new subparagraph: ``(T) except as provided in paragraph (4), in the case of a hospital or a critical access hospital, to use, when furnishing services to individuals through the use of a hollow-bore needle device, only such a device designated by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, under section 4 of the Health Care Worker Protection Act of 1997, as minimizing the risk of needlestick injury to health care workers.''.
Exceptions Authority.--Section 1866(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395cc(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) The Secretary may waive the requirement under paragraph (1)(T)-- ``(A) with respect to services furnished by a critical access hospital, ``(B) in the case of an act of self-administration of such services, and ``(C) in such other cases as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply to hospitals for services furnished through the use of a hollow-bore needle device on or after the first day of the fourth month that begins after the date on which the Commissioner of Food and Drugs designates classes of hollow-bore needle devices under section 4.
USE OF DESIGNATED HOLLOW-BORE NEEDLE DEVICES IN VETERANS HOSPITALS.
In General.--Section 7311 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by striking out paragraph (3); (2) by striking out subsection (d); (3) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (d); and (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) As part of the quality-assurance program, the Under Secretary for Health shall ensure that the Department in the provision of hospital care under this title uses, when furnishing services to individuals through the use of a hollow-bore needle device, only such a device designated by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, under section 4 of the Health Care Worker Protection Act of 1997, as minimizing the risk of needlestick injury to health care workers.
The Under Secretary may waive the requirement under paragraph (1) in the case of an act of self-administration of such services, and in such other cases as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to the provision of hospital care under such title furnished through the use of a hollow-bore needle device on or after the first day of the fourth month that begins after the date on which the Commissioner of Food and Drugs designates classes of hollow-bore needle devices under section 4.
DESIGNATION OF CLASSES OF HOLLOW-BORE NEEDLE DEVICES THAT MINIMIZE RISK OF NEEDLESTICK INJURY.
Designation of Classes of Devices.-- (1) Initial designation.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, in consultation with the advisory council described in subsection (b), shall designate classes of hollow-bore needle devices that minimize the risk of needlestick injury (as defined in subsection (c)).
Subsequent designation.--The Commissioner, in consultation with the advisory council described in subsection (b), shall periodically review and update classes of hollow- bore needle devices described in paragraph (1).
Advisory Council Described.--The advisory council described in this subsection is an advisory council established by the Commissioner and comprised of such representatives from consumer groups, health care workers (including at least one practicing registered nurse), and technical experts as the Commissioner determines appropriate.
Needlestick Injury Defined.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``needlestick injury'' means the parenteral introduction into the body of a health care worker of blood or other potentially infectious material by a hollow-bore needle device during the performance of duties of such worker.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for such education and training in the use of hollow-bore needle devices designated by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs under section 4, as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000, to remain available until expended, to carry out the education and training described in subsection (a).