This Act may be cited as the ``Individual Training Account Act of 1994''.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
Deduction Allowed.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction the amount paid in cash for the taxable year by or on behalf of such individual to an individual training account for the benefit of such individual.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum deduction.--The amount allowed as a deduction under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of-- ``(A) $2,000, or ``(B) the excess of $6,000 over the aggregate amount in all individual training accounts of the individual as of the close of the preceding taxable year.
The preceding sentence shall be applied separately for each individual.
No deduction before beneficiary attains age 18.--No deduction shall be allowed for any contribution to an individual training account established for the benefit of an individual who has not attained age 18 before the close of the taxable year for which such contribution is made.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Individual training account.--The term `individual training account' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying the qualified expenses of the individual for whose benefit the trust is maintained, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) Except in the case of a rollover contribution described in subsection (d)(3), no contribution will be accepted-- ``(i) unless it is in cash, or ``(ii) in excess of the amount allowed as a deduction under this section.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The interest of the individual in the balance of his account is nonforfeitable.
The assets of the trust shall not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Qualified expenses.--The term `qualified expenses' means-- ``(A) job training expenses, and ``(B) job-related relocation expenses.
Job training expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `job training expenses' means-- ``(i) tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(I) a student at an eligible educational institution, or ``(II) a worker in an applicable training program, ``(ii) fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for-- ``(I) courses of instruction at an eligible educational institution, or ``(II) for an applicable training program, and ``(iii) a reasonable allowance for meals and lodging while attending an eligible educational institution or an applicable training program.
Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' means-- ``(i) an institution of higher education, or ``(ii) a vocational school.
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' means the institutions described in section 1201(a) or 481(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Vocational school.--The term `vocational school' means an area vocational education school as defined in subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 521(4) of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act to the extent such school is located within any State (as defined in such section).
Applicable training program.--The term `applicable training program' means-- ``(i) any applicable program (as defined in section 314(g) of the Job Training Partnership Act), and ``(ii) any training program approved under section 236 of the Trade Act of 1974.
Denial of deduction for amounts paid from account.-- If any amount paid or distributed from an individual training account is not included in gross income by reason of being used to pay any qualified expense, such expense shall not be taken into account in determining the amount of any deduction under section 212, 217, or any other provision of this chapter.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of an individual training account shall be included in gross income of the payee or distributee for the taxable year in which the payment or distribution is received to the extent such amount is not used exclusively to pay the qualified expenses paid during such taxable year by the individual for whose benefit the account is established.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution paid during a taxable year to an individual training account to the extent that such contribution exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) if-- ``(A) such distribution is received on or before the day prescribed by law (including extensions of time) for filing such individual's return for such taxable year, ``(B) no deduction is allowed under subsection (a) with respect to such excess contribution, and ``(C) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in subparagraph (C) shall be included in the gross income of the individual for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Rollovers.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed out of a individual training account to the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained if the entire amount received (including money and any other property) is paid into another individual training account for the benefit of such individual not later than the 60th day after the day on which he received the payment or distribution.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--An individual training account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be an individual training account by reason of paragraph (2).
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Loss of exemption of account where individual engages in prohibited transaction.-- ``(A) In general.--If the individual for whose benefit an individual training account is established engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to the account, the account shall cease to be an individual training account as of the first day of the taxable year during which such transaction occurs.
Account treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any account ceases to be an individual training account by reason of subparagraph (A) as of the first day of any taxable year, paragraph (1) of subsection (d) shall apply as if there was a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day) and such distribution was not used to pay qualified expenses.
Effect of pledging account as security.--If, during any taxable year, the individual for whose benefit an individual training account is established uses the account or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used shall be treated as distributed to the individual so using such portion and not used to pay qualified expenses.
Additional Tax on Certain Amounts Included in Gross Income.-- ``(1) Distribution not used for qualified expenses.--In the case of any payment or distribution to which subsection (d)(1) applies, the tax liability of the payee or distributee under this chapter for the taxable year in which the payment or distribution is received shall be increased by an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the payment or distribution which is includible in the gross income of such payee or distributee for such taxable year.
Disqualification cases.--If an amount is includible in the gross income of an individual for a taxable year because such amount is required to be treated as a distribution under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (e), such individual's tax liability under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to 10 percent of such amount required to be treated as a distribution and included in his gross income.
Disability or death cases.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply if the payment or distribution is made after the individual for whose benefit the individual training account is maintained becomes disabled within the meaning of section 72(m)(7) or dies.
Distributions after age 59\1/2\.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply if the payment or distribution is made after the date the individual for whose benefit the individual training account is maintained attains age 59\1/2\.
Community Property Laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and if the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute an individual training account described in subsection (c)(1).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of an individual training account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''
Deduction Allowed in Arriving at Adjusted Gross Income.-- Subsection (a) of section 62 of such Code (relating to retirement savings) is amended by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph: ``(16) Individual training accounts.--The deduction allowed by section 220 (relating to individual training accounts).''
Tax on Excess Contributions.--Section 4973 of such Code (relating to tax on excess contributions to individual retirement accounts, certain section 403(b) contracts, and certain individual retirement annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``individual training accounts,'' after ``accounts,'' in the heading of such section, (2) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1) of subsection (a), (3) by redesignating paragraph (2) of subsection (a) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) an individual training account (within the meaning of section 220(c)(1)), or'', and (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Excess Contributions to Individual Training Accounts.--For purposes of this section, in the case of an individual training account, the term `excess contributions' means the amount by which the amount contributed for the taxable year to the account exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under section 220 for such taxable year.
For purposes of this subsection, any contribution which is distributed out of the individual training account in a distribution to which section 220(d)(2) applies shall be treated as an amount not contributed.''
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 of such Code (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Special rule for individual training accounts.--An individual for whose benefit an individual training account is established shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be an individual training account by reason of the application of section 220(e)(2)(A) to such account.
'', and (2) by inserting ``, an individual training account described in section 220(c)(1),'' in subsection (e)(1) after ``described in section 408(a)''.
Failure To Provide Reports on Individual Training Accounts.-- Section 6693 of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or on individual training accounts'' after ``annuities'' in the heading of such section, and (2) by adding at the end of subsection (a) the following new sentence: ``The person required by section 220(i) to file a report regarding an individual training account at the time and in the manner required by such section shall pay a penalty of $50 for each failure, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 220 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
The table of sections for chapter 43 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 4973 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Tax on excess contributions to individual retirement accounts, individual training accounts, certain 403(b) contracts, and certain individual retirement annuities.''
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 68 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 6693 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities or on individual training accounts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.