This Act may be cited as the ``Payoffs-for-Layoffs Corporate Welfare Elimination Act of 1997''.
PROHIBITION ON PAYMENTS UNDER DEFENSE CONTRACTS FOR RESTRUCTURING COSTS OF A DEFENSE CONTRACTOR MERGER OR ACQUISITION.
Prohibition.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense may be obligated or expended under section 2324 of title 10, United States Code, for payment of any restructuring cost associated with a merger or acquisition that is incurred by a contractor under contract with the Department of Defense.
Applicability.--(1) The prohibition in subsection (a) applies with respect to any merger or acquisition occurring on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In the case of a merger or acquisition that occurred before the date of the enactment of this Act, funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense may be used to process or pay a claim for restructuring costs associated with the merger or acquisition only if the relevant contract or advance agreement specifies that payment for such costs may be made under the contract or agreement using funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense.
Conforming Repeal.--Subsection (a) of section 818 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995 (Public Law 103-337; 10 United States Code 2324 note) is repealed.
Reports by Secretary of Defense.--Subsection (e) of such section is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking out ``and 1997'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000''; and (2) by adding at the end of paragraph (3) the following: ``(F) An analysis of the dollar amount of any windfalls achieved by the combining defense contractors which results from the reduction of overhead on fixed- price type contracts from the Department of Defense that existed before the business combination.
A list of each major weapons system purchased by the Department of Defense since July 21, 1993, for which actual prices have actually been reduced that are attributable to the contractors' restructuring efforts.
The total number of pending restructuring proposals submitted to the Department of Defense as of the date of the report and the total dollar amount of the requests for restructuring costs contained in those proposals.''.
Comptroller General Report.--Subsection (g)(3) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The report shall include an estimate and detailed description of the net effect on the Federal budget of reimbursing defense contractors for their merger- related restructuring costs, including the following: ``(A) The payment by the Department of Defense of restructuring costs resulting from business combinations of defense contractors.
The reduction of Federal tax revenues from unemployment resulting from business combinations of defense contractors who have been reimbursed for their merger-related restructuring costs.
The increase in Federal expenditures in other Federal adjustment programs from unemployment resulting from business combinations of defense contractors who have been reimbursed for their merger-related restructuring costs, including food stamps, housing and energy assistance, and any other programs the Comptroller General determines that unemployed persons are likely to use at a rate higher than employed persons.
The increase in Federal grants of cash and in-kind assistance to States and local communities that have experienced significant layoffs or facility relocation (or both) resulting from the business combination, that are attributable to losses in the State and local tax base and increased the use of State and local government services similar to those described in subparagraph (C).
The effect of reduced competition resulting from business combinations on the prices the Department of Defense pays for military equipment and services.''.
Definitions.--Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `windfall' means the savings, either actually realized or anticipated, by the combining defense contractors as a result of reducing overhead through merger- related restructuring which are foregone by the Government because certain defense contracts are fixed-price type contracts that existed before the business combination and cannot be adjusted to reflect the contractor's reduced overhead.
The term `significant layoffs' means a situation in which the number of layoffs exceed 500 full-time equivalent employees or in which one of the combining defense contractors previously represented the fifth largest employer or greater in the relevant State or local community.