Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Prevention of School Violence Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Students have a right to be safe and secure in their persons while attending school.
While America's schools are among the safest places to be on a day-to-day basis, the recent tragic and sudden acts of violence in some of our Nation's schools, including the incidents in Pearl, Mississippi; Paducah, Kentucky; Jonesboro, Arkansas; Springfield, Oregon; Edinboro, Pennsylvania; Fayetteville, Tennessee; and Littleton, Colorado, remind us that no school and no community can be complacent in their efforts to make their schools even safer and in doing so provide a high quality learning environment for their students.
There is an increasing and urgent need to better understand the causes of violence committed by students and to identify those initiatives and strategies that are effective in preventing acts of violence in our schools.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE PREVENTION OF SCHOOL VIOLENCE.
There is established a Commission to be known as the ``National Commission on the Prevention of School Violence'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Appointment.-- (1) Generally.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members as follows: (A) Three individuals shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House.
Three individuals shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One individual shall be appointed by the Secretary of Education.
One individual shall be appointed by the Attorney General.
One individual shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Consultation by appointing officials.--The appointing officials shall consult with each other on their appointments to assure the qualifications set forth in subsection (b) are met.
Qualifications.-- (1) Generally.--Each of the individuals appointed under subsection (a) shall be-- (A) a nationally recognized individual prominently acknowledged by that individual's peers, through publication, awards, or other such honors, as having expertise in fields related to child and adolescent behavior; (B) an individual with expertise and experience in dealing with at-risk children and adolescents; or (C) an individual with expertise and experience in school safety and violence issues.
Special qualifications.--The expertise of each individual appointed shall relate to the impact of these issues on producing a high quality learning experience.
The panel shall include a parent and a recent high school graduate from a school where a recent violent incident has occurred.
The panel shall include professionals with expertise in issues dealing with violent and delinquent youth, juvenile justice, or the impact of media and entertainment on children and adolescents.
Such professionals shall be representative of the fields of psychology, psychiatry, mental health, social work, school safety, school counseling, behavioral science, juvenile justice; the impact of media and entertainment on children and adolescents.
Whenever possible, preference shall be given to those who are also parents.
Consultation.--In the course of carrying out their responsibilities, the members of the Commission shall consult-- (1) experts from education, such as school administrators, teachers, counselors, and principals; (2) experts from the criminal justice field, such as law enforcement officers, judges, prosecutors, and juvenile probation officers; (3) behavioral scientists with experience with violent or delinquent youth; (4) organizations or research facilities with expertise in school violence and safety issues; (5) school safety experts such as school security officials; (6) school psychologists with experience in identifying youth at risk of violence; (7) organizations with experience in dealing with at risk youth; (8) members of the public who come in contact with at risk youth; (9) public health officials who have studied violence as a public health problem; (10) statisticians who have studied youth and interpersonal violence; (11) criminologists; (12) students and parents; and (13) other experts in the field of school violence and school safety issues.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairperson.
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson will assume the duties of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Appointments.--All appointments under subsection (a) shall be made within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
In the event that an officer authorized to make an appointment under subsection (a) has not made such appointment within such 30 days, the appointment may be made for such officer as follows: (1) the Chairman of the Committee on Education and the Workforce may act under such subsection for the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (2) the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee on Education and the Workforce may act under such subsection for the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; (3) the Chairman of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources may act under such subsection for the Majority Leader of the Senate; and (4) the Ranking Minority Member of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources may act under such subsection for the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Voting.--Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to one vote, which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of Additional Pay.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service to the extent funds are available for such expenses.
Initial Meeting.--The initial meeting of the Commission shall occur within 40 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Specific Findings and Recommendations.--The Commission shall study incidents of school violence.
To the extent feasible, the Commission shall interview the perpetrators of school shootings, members of their families, their friends, and associates, teachers, guidance counselors, and other professionals who can provide insight into the perpetrators experiences, feelings, and expressions.
The Commission shall make findings and specific recommendations regarding the following: (1) The extent, patterns, and root of the problem surrounding violence in and around schools, at school events, and on the way to and from school.
The key factors relating to school violence, including the characteristics of both perpetrator and victim, as well as their families and communities; the relationship between perpetrator and victim; social interactions; family dynamics; and the impact of entertainment, media, and cultural influences.
Successful approaches to preventing school violence, including such programs as early identification of troubled children, anger management, conflict resolution, and problem solving.
Recommendations to parents, educators, communities, and government entities as to those programs and strategies that will best prevent school violence and ensure the safety of students, faculty, and others, and lead to a high quality learning environment.
Final Report.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Commission shall submit to the President and to the Congress, not later than 1 year after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, a report which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, including the Commission's recommendations for administrative and legislative action that the Commission considers advisable.
Majority vote required for recommendations.--Any recommendation described in paragraph (1) shall be made by the Commission to the President and to the Congress only if such recommendation is adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Commission who are present and voting.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, as the Commission may find advisable.
Rules and Regulations.--The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish the Commission's procedures and to govern the manner of the Commission's operations, organization, and personnel.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.-- (1) Information.--The Commission may request from the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality such information as the Commission may require for the purpose of this Act.
Each such agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the exceptions set forth in section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act), furnish such information to the Commission, upon request made by the Chairperson of the Commission.
Facilities and services, personnel detail authorized.-- Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (A) make any of the facilities and services of such agency or instrumentality available to the Commission; and (B) detail any of the personnel of such agency or instrumentality to the Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, to assist the Commission in carrying out the Commission's duties under this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contracting.--The Commission, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, may enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge the Commission's duties under this Act.
Staff.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, and to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, the Chairperson of the Commission shall have the power to appoint, terminate, and fix the compensation (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, or of any other provision, or of any other provision of law, relating to the number, classification, and General Schedule rates) of an Executive Director, and of such additional staff as the Chairperson deems advisable to assist the Commission, at rates not to exceed a rate equal to the maximum rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
There are authorized to be appropriated to pay any expenses of the Commission such sums as may be necessary not to exceed $650,000.
Any sums appropriated for such purposes are authorized to remain available until expended, or until one year after the termination of the Commission pursuant to section 7, whichever occurs first.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 60 days after the date on which the Commission is required to submit its final report in accordance with section 4(b).