This Act may be cited as the ``Improvement of Information Access Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) A well-informed citizenry is essential for the well- being of a democratic society.
Access to Government information is essential for citizens who seek to make the Federal Government accountable for its actions.
The public should have timely, complete, equitable, and affordable access to Government information.
Federal agencies should use modern information technology for the benefit of citizens of the United States.
Government information is a national resource that should be treated as a public good.
Government information is a valuable economic asset that belongs to the public.
Taxpayers pay for the creation, collection, and organization of Government information and should not be required to pay excessive fees to receive and use that information.
It is unnecessarily difficult for citizens to provide Federal agencies with comments and suggestions on Federal information policies.
As a result, many Federal agencies do not take into account the public interest in the information resources they manage.
Federal agencies have been slow in developing standards for record and file formats, software query command structures, and other important topics that will make Government information easier to obtain and use.
Many Federal agencies do not provide timely access to Government information products and services at reasonable costs.
IMPROVED PUBLIC ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT INFORMATION.
In General.--Title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 41--INFORMATION DISSEMINATION POLICIES AND PRACTICES ``Sec.
Ensuring public access to Government information products and services.
Ensuring public access to Government information products and services ``(a) Each executive department, military department, and independent establishment shall prepare by not later than February 1 of each year, and make freely available to the public upon request and at no charge, a report which describes the information dissemination policies and practices of the department or establishment, including-- ``(1) plans of the department or establishment to introduce new information products and services or discontinue old ones; ``(2) efforts of the department or establishment to develop or implement standards for file and record formats, software query command structures, user interfaces, and other matters that make information easier to obtain and use; ``(3) progress of the department or establishment in creating and disseminating comprehensive indexes and bibliographies of information products and services, including coordinated efforts conducted with other agencies; ``(4) the methods to be used by the public for accessing information, including the modes and outlets available to the public; ``(5) provisions for protecting access to records stored with technologies that are superseded or obsolete; ``(6) methods used to make the public aware of information resources, services, and products; and ``(7) a summary of the comments received from the public under subsection (b) in the year preceding the report, and the response of the department or establishment to those comments.
(1) Not later than February 1 of each year, each executive department, military department, and independent establishment shall publish in the Federal Register, and provide in such other manner as will notify users of information of the department or establishment, a notice of-- ``(A) the availability of the report prepared under subsection (a); and ``(B) a period of not less than 90 days for submission by the public of comments regarding the information dissemination policies and practices of the department or establishment, including comments regarding-- ``(i) the types of information the department or establishment collects and disseminates; ``(ii) the methods and outlets the department or establishment uses to store and disseminate information; ``(iii) the prices charged by the department or establishment, or such outlets, for the information; and ``(iv) the validity, reliability, timeliness, and usefulness to the public of the information.
Comments received under this subsection by a department or independent establishment shall be available for inspection to the public.
Each year the department or establishment shall provide a reasonable opportunity for dialogue between responsible agency officials and interested members of the public, including through hearings and informal forums, regarding both proposed and existing policies, procedures, and mechanisms for disseminating information under this section and for otherwise implementing this section.
Before discontinuing an information product or service, an agency shall-- ``(1) publish in the Federal Register, or provide by other means adequate to inform users of information of the agency, a notice of a period of not less than 120 days for submission by the public of comments regarding that discontinuation; ``(2) include in that notice an explanation of the reasons for the discontinuation; and ``(3) consider comments received pursuant to the notice.
Each agency shall-- ``(1) disseminate information in diverse modes and through appropriate outlets that will reinforce statutory requirements for depository distribution, as well as offering other channels of distribution, with adequate documentation software, indexes, or other resources that will permit and broaden public access to Government information; ``(2) disseminate information in a manner that ensures the timeliness, usefulness, and reliability of the information for the public; ``(3) store and disseminate information products and services in standardized record formats; and ``(4) use depository libraries, national computer networks, and other distribution channels that improve and assure free or low-cost public access to Government information.
(1) Except as specifically authorized by statute, an agency may not-- ``(A) charge to depository libraries the costs of distributing information products and services; ``(B) charge more than the incremental cost of distributing an information product or service regardless of channels utilized by the agency; or ``(C) charge any royalty or other fee for any use or redissemination of Government information.
For purposes of this subsection, the incremental cost of distributing an information product or service does not include any portion of the cost of collecting, organizing, or processing information disseminated through the product or service.
(1) The Archivist of the United States and the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall jointly issue and periodically revise model performance standards under which agencies shall be encouraged to provide access to public records.
Standards issued under this subsection shall include the establishment of a period within which an agency, upon request, shall provide by mail a copy of any decision, rule, notice, docket filing, press release, or other public document of the agency.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``41.
Government Information Products and Services.......... 4101''.
STANDARDS FOR ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.
The Archivist of the United States and the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall jointly issue model performance standards for providing access to agency records under section 4101(f) of title 44, United States Code (as added by section 3), by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.