This Act may be cited as the ``Lowey-DeLauro Emergency Infrastructure Jobs Act''.
STATE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL REVOLVING FUNDS.
Title VI of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1381-1387) is amended by inserting at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EMERGENCY ECONOMIC STIMULATION PROGRAM.
In General.--In order to provide a short-term stimulus to the economy of the United States, the Administrator shall make capitalization grants to each State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section.
Such grants shall be made in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this title unless otherwise provided in this section.
Schedule of Grant Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--The schedule of grant payments for grants made under this section shall be as provided under section 601 except that such payments shall be made in semiannual installments instead of quarterly installments.
First installment.--The first semiannual installment shall be equal to 40 percent of the amount of funds allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section and shall be paid to the State not later than the 30th day following the date on which funds are appropriated pursuant to this section.
Second installment.--The second semiannual installment shall be equal to 60 percent of the amount of such allotted funds and shall be paid to the State not later than the 180th day following such appropriation date.
Capitalization Grant Agreements.-- ``(1) Specific requirements.-- ``(A) Existing requirements.--Except for the specific requirements set forth in paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 602(b), the specific requirements set forth in such section shall apply to capitalization grants made from funds appropriated pursuant to this section.
For purposes of this section, the reference to quarterly grant payments in paragraph (7) of such section shall be treated as a reference to semiannual grant payments.
Additional requirements.-- ``(i) Number of agreements.--The Administrator shall enter into an agreement under section 602(b) with a State with respect to each of the semiannual payments to be made to the State under this section.
First agreement.--The Administrator shall enter into the agreement with respect to the first semiannual payment to be made to the State under this section only after-- ``(I) the State has entered into binding commitments to provide assistance in accordance with the requirements of this title in fiscal year 1993 in an amount equal to 40 percent of the funds allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to section 607 for fiscal year 1993; and ``(II) the State has established to the satisfaction of the Administrator that it will enter into binding commitments to provide assistance in accordance with the requirements of this title in an amount equal to 40 percent of the amount allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section within 6 months after the date of such appropriation.
Second agreement.--The Administrator shall enter into the agreement with respect to the second semiannual payment to be made to the State under this section only after-- ``(I) the State has entered into binding commitments to provide assistance in accordance with the requirements of this title in fiscal year 1993 in an amount equal to 100 percent of the funds allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to section 607 for fiscal year 1993 (including amounts counted with respect to the meeting of the requirement of clause (ii)(I) by the State); ``(II) the State has entered into binding commitments to provide assistance in accordance with the requirements of this title of 40 percent of the funds allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section; and ``(III) the State has established to the satisfaction of the Administrator that it will enter into binding commitments to provide assistance in accordance with the requirements of this title in an amount equal to the remaining 60 percent of the funds allotted to the State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section within 1 year after the date of such appropriation.
Waiver of matching fund requirement.--Notwithstanding section 602(b), a State shall not be required to deposit in its State water pollution control revolving fund an amount equal to at least 20 percent of the total amount of capitalization grants made with funds appropriated pursuant to this section.
Allotment Period.--Notwithstanding section 604(c), sums allotted to a State from funds appropriated pursuant to this section shall be available for obligation by the State in accordance with the time periods set forth in clauses (ii)(II) and (iii)(III) of subsection (c)(1)(B), respectively.
The amount of such allotment which is not obligated by the State in accordance with such time periods shall be immediately deposited in the Treasury of the United States.
Types of Assistance.--In addition to the types of assistance authorized by section 603(d), a State may use not to exceed 50 percent of the funds allotted to it from amounts appropriated pursuant to this section to subsidize not to exceed 90 percent of the principal portion of the amount of debt service required to be paid by an entity referred to in section 603(c) if such principle subsidy will be financed from interest earned on funds allotted to the State from amounts so appropriated, if such debt service is being incurred for a project eligible for assistance under this title, and if the State determines that such entity would be financially unable to carry out such project without such subsidy.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to funds authorized to be appropriated by section 607, there is authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of this title $3,000,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.''.
SUPPLEMENTAL AUTHORIZATION FOR GRANTS UNDER SECTION 306(a)(2) OF THE CONSOLIDATED FARM AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ACT.
Supplemental Authorization.--In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Agriculture for grants under section 306(a)(2) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act not to exceed $300,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.
Waiver of Annual Dollar Limitation.--The Secretary of Agriculture may use amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to make grants under section 306(a)(2) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act, notwithstanding the dollar limitation specified in such section 306(a)(2).
Allocation and Availability of Funds.--All amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be allocated to the States in accordance with section 1940.582 (except subsection (i)) and section 1940.587 (except subsection (i)) of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations (January 1, 1992, edition), and all such amounts shall be available to the Secretary of Agriculture, upon the enactment of this section, for States to obligate on an annual basis.
Reserved Funds to be Used for Technical Assistance and Training Grants.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall use the amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) of this section that are reserved pursuant to section 306(a)(16)(C) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act, for grants under section 306(a)(16)(A) of such Act.