This Act may be cited as the ``Great Falls Preservation and Redevelopment Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the Great Falls Historic District in the State of New Jersey is an area of historical significance as an early site of planned industrial development, and has remained largely intact, including architecturally significant structures; (2) the Great Falls Historic District is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and has been designated a National Historic Landmark; (3) the Great Falls Historic District is within a half hour drive of New York City, and within two hours of Philadelphia, Hartford, New Haven, and Wilmington; (4) the District was originally established by the Society of Useful Manufactures, an organization whose leaders included a number of historically renowned individuals, including Alexander Hamilton; and (5) the Great Falls Historic District has been the subject of a number of studies which have shown that the District possesses a combination of historic significance and natural beauty worthy of and uniquely situated for preservation and redevelopment.
The purpose of this Act is to preserve and interpret for the educational and inspirational benefit of the public, the contribution to our national heritage of certain historic and cultural -l-a-n-d-s-, -w-a-t-e-r-w-a-y-s lands and edifices of the Great Falls Historic District with emphasis on harnessing this unique urban environment for its educational and recreational value, as well as to enhance economic and cultural redevelopment within the District.
GREAT FALLS HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the city of Paterson in the county of Passaic in the State of New Jersey the Great Falls Historic District.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the District shall be the boundaries as specified for the Great Falls Historic District listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements in accordance with this Act.
In expending moneys appropriated pursuant to this Act, the Secretary may make grants to and enter into cooperative agreements with State or local government agencies or nonprofit entities for each of the following: (1) The preparation of a plan for the development of historic, architectural, natural, cultural, and interpretive resources within the District.
The plan shall include each of the following: (A) An evaluation of-- (i) the existing condition of historic and architectural resources; and (ii) the environmental and flood hazard conditions within the District.
Recommendations for-- (i) rehabilitating, reconstructing, and adaptively reusing such historic and architectural resources; (ii) preserving viewsheds, focal points, and streetscapes; (iii) establishing gateways to the District; (iv) establishing and maintaining parks and public spaces; -(-v-) -r-e-s-t-o-r-i-n-g-, -i-m-p-r-o-v-i-n-g-, -a-n-d -d-e-v-e-l-o-p-i-n-g -r-a-c-e-w-a-y-s -a-n-d -a-d-j-a-c-e-n-t -a-r-e-a-s-; -(-v-i-) (v) developing public parking areas; -(-v-i-i-) (vi) improving pedestrian and vehicular circulation within the District; -(-v-i-i-i-) (vii) improving security within the District, with an emphasis on preserving historically significant structures from arson; and -(-i-x-) (viii) establishing a visitor's center.
Implementation of projects approved by the Secretary pursuant to the Plan.
Restoration, Maintenance, and Interpretation.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the owners of properties within the District of historical or cultural significance as determined by the Secretary, pursuant to which the Secretary may mark, interpret, improve, restore, and provide technical assistance with respect to the preservation and interpretation of such properties.
Such agreements shall contain, but need not be limited to, provisions that the Secretary shall have the right of access at reasonable times to public portions of the property for interpretive and other purposes, and that no changes or alterations shall be made in the property except by mutual -a-g-r-e-e-m-e-n-t-.
agreement, and with the approval of the Federal agency with regulatory jurisdiction over the property in question, if applicable.
Capital Projects.--(1) Application for funds for capital projects and improvements under this Act shall be submitted to the Secretary and shall include a description of how the project proposed to be funded will further the purposes of the District.
In making such funds available, the Secretary shall give consideration to projects which provide a greater leverage of Federal funds.
Any payment made shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purposes of this Act, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States of reimbursement of all funds made available to such project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``District'' means the Great Falls Historic District established by section 4.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this Act not more than-- (1) $3,000,000 for capital projects; (2) $250,000 for planning; and (3) $50,000 for technical assistance.
Funds made available pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not exceed 50 percent of the total costs of the project to be funded.
The authority to expend funds under this Act shall expire 5 years from the date of enactment.
Passed the House of Representatives April 13, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.