This Act may be cited as the ``National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Authorization Act of 1994''.
For the purposes of this Act, the term-- (1) ``Act of 1890'' means the Act entitled ``An Act to increase the efficiency and reduce the expenses of the Signal Corps of the Army, and to transfer the Weather Bureau of the Department of Agriculture'', approved October 1, 1890 (26 United States Statutes at Large 653); and (2) ``Act of 1947'' means the Act entitled ``An Act to define the functions and duties of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and for other purposes'', approved August 6, 1947 (33 United States Code 883a et sequentes).
TITLE I--NOAA ATMOSPHERIC AND SATELLITE PROGRAMS SEC.
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE OPERATIONS AND RESEARCH.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out the operations and research activities of the National Weather Service under law, $526,277,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to National Weather Service operations and research specified by the Act of 1890, the Act of 1947, and any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include meteorological, hydrological, and oceanographic public warnings and forecasts, as well as applied research in support of such warnings and forecasts.
PUBLIC WARNING AND FORECAST SYSTEMS.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to improve its public warning and forecast systems under law, $160,599,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to public warning and forecast systems specified by the Act of 1890, the Act of 1947, and any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include the development, acquisition, and implementation of major public warning and forecast systems.
CLIMATE AND AIR QUALITY RESEARCH.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out its climate and air quality research activities under law, $139,023,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to climate and air quality research specified by the Act of 1890, the Act of 1947, and any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include interannual and seasonal climate research, long-term climate and air quality research, high performance computing, elementary education programs to augment global observation systems, and the National Climate Program.
Climate and Global Change.--Of the sums authorized under subsection (a), $84,012,000 for fiscal year 1995 are authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of studying climate and global change.
Such program shall augment and integrate existing programs of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and shall include global observations, monitoring, and data and information management relating to the study of changes in the Earth's climatic system, fundamental research on critical oceanic and atmospheric processes, and climate prediction and diagnostics.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out its atmospheric research activities under law, $47,020,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Money appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to atmospheric research specified by the Act of 1890 and by any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include research for developing improved observation and prediction capabilities for atmospheric processes, as well as solar-terrestrial services and research.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out its satellite observing systems activities under law, $366,201,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to data and information services specified by the Act of 1890 and by any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include spacecraft procurement, launch, and associated ground station system changes involving polar orbiting and geostationary environmental satellites and land remote-sensing satellites, as well as the operation of such satellites.
DATA AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out its data and information services activities under law, $35,087,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall be used to fund those activities relating to data and information services specified by the Act of 1890 and by any other law involving such activities.
Such activities include climate data services, ocean data services, geophysical data services, environmental data services, and information services.
TITLE II--NOAA OCEAN AND COASTAL PROGRAMS SEC.
Mapping, Charting, and Geodesy.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out mapping, charting, and geodesy activities (including geodetic data collection and analysis) under the Act of 1947 and any other law involving those activities, $54,012,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Observation and Assessment.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out observation and assessment activities-- (1) under the Act of 1947 and any other law involving those activities, $68,546,000 for fiscal year 1995; and (2) under title II of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1441 et sequentes) $13,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Coastal Ocean Program.--Of the sums authorized under subsection (b)(1), $11,433,000 for fiscal year 1995 are authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of conducting a Coastal Ocean Program.
Such program shall augment and integrate existing programs of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and shall include efforts to improve predictions of fish stocks to better conserve and manage living marine resources, to improve predictions of coastal ocean pollution to help correct and prevent degradation, and to improve predictions of coastal hazards to protect human life and personal property.
OCEAN AND GREAT LAKES RESEARCH.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out ocean and Great Lakes research activities under the Act of 1947, the Act of 1890, and any other law involving those activities, $18,527,000 for fiscal year 1995.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out its undersea research activities under law, $18,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall only be used to fund the ongoing operations of existing undersea research centers.
TITLE III--NOAA MARINE FISHERY PROGRAMS SEC.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Marine Fisheries Program Authorization Act (Public Law 98-210; 97 United States Statutes at Large 1409) is amended-- (1) in section 2(a)-- (A) by striking ``and'' immediately after ``1992'' and inserting a comma; and (B) by inserting immediately before the period at the end ``, $51,092,000 for fiscal year 1995''; (2) in section 3(a)-- (A) by striking ``and'' immediately after ``1992'' and inserting a comma; and (B) by inserting immediately before the period at the end ``, $14,198,000 for fiscal year 1995''; and (3) in section 4(a)-- (A) by striking ``and'' immediately after ``1992'' and inserting a comma; and (B) by inserting immediately before the period at the end ``, $17,089,000 for fiscal year 1995''.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS SEC.
Executive Direction and Administrative Activities.-- (1) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out executive direction and administrative activities (including management, administrative support, provision of retired pay of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration commissioned officers, and policy development) under the Act entitled ``An Act to clarify the status and benefits of commissioned officers of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and for other purposes'', approved December 31, 1970 (33 United States Code 857-1 et seq.
), and any other law involving those activities, $81,944,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Of the sums authorized under this subsection $1,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated for the purpose of conducting the study under section 404.
Acquisition, Construction, Maintenance, and Operation of Facilities.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, for acquisition, construction, maintenance, and operation of facilities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under any law involving those activities, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Marine Services.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out marine services activities (including ship operations, maintenance, and support) under the Act of 1947 and any other law involving those activities, $62,599,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Aircraft Services.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out aircraft services activities (including aircraft operations, maintenance, and support) under the Act of 1890 and any other law involving those activities, $14,680,000 for fiscal year 1995.
CONVEYANCE OF NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE LABORATORY AT GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS.
Conveyance Required.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Commerce shall convey to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the property comprising the National Marine Fisheries Service laboratory located on Emerson Avenue in Gloucester, Massachusetts.
Terms.--A conveyance of property under paragraph (1) shall be made-- (A) without payment of consideration; and (B) subject to the terms and conditions specified under subsections (b) and (c).
Conditions for Transfer.-- (1) In general.--As a condition of any conveyance of property under this section, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall assume full responsibility for maintenance of the property for as long as the Commonwealth retains the right and title to that property.
Continued use of property by nmfs.--The Secretary may enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts under which the National Marine Fisheries Service is authorized to occupy existing laboratory space on the property conveyed under this section, if-- (A) the term of the memorandum of understanding is for a period of not longer than 5 years beginning on the date of enactment of this Act; and (B) the square footage of the space to be occupied by the National Marine Fisheries Service does not conflict with the needs of, and is agreeable to, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Reversionary Interest.--All right, title, and interest in and to all property conveyed under this section shall revert to the United States on the date on which the Commonwealth of Massachusetts uses any of the property for any purpose other than the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Division of Marine Fisheries resource management program.
In General.--Notwithstanding section 3302(b) and (c) of title 31, United States Code, and subject to subsection (b) all amounts received by the United States in settlement of, or judgment for, damage claims arising from the October 9, 1992, allision of the vessel ZACHERY into the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration research vessel DISCOVERER-- (1) shall be retained as an offsetting collection in the Fleet Modernization, Shipbuilding, and Conversion account of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; (2) shall be deposited in that account upon receipt by the United States Government; and (3) shall be available only for obligation for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration vessel repairs.
Limitation.--Not more than $518,757.09 of the amounts referred to in subsection (a) may be deposited into the Fleet Modernization, Shipbuilding, and Conversion account pursuant to this section.
STUDY OF NOAA CORPS.
Within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall contract with the National Research Council to examine and report to the Secretary and the Congress on the responsibilities and activities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Corps (hereinafter referred to as the ``Corps'') in supporting the missions of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
In particular, the study shall-- (1) examine future requirements for a uniformed service in operating the fleet and aircraft of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, conducting hydrographic surveys, managing national marine sanctuaries, conducting oceanic and atmospheric research, and carrying out other responsibilities and activities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
examine the role of the Corps in the fleet replacement and modernization program; (3) evaluate and compare the costs of services provided by the Corps and civilian employees in similar positions; and (4) assess the availability of trained civilian employees to carry out identified activities in a cost effective manner that are currently the responsibility of the Corps.
WEATHER REPORTING STATIONS FOR PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND.
Installation.--To provide more comprehensive weather information to ensure the safety of fishermen and tank vessels and to protect the resources of Prince William Sound from potential oil spills, the Secretary of Commerce may expend $340,000 to acquire, construct, and install weather reporting stations in Prince William Sound, Alaska, as follows: (1) In the vicinity of Seal Rocks, to acquire and install a weather buoy capable of measuring and reporting wind speed and direction, barometric pressure, wave height and period, and air temperature.
On the existing tower at Bligh Reef, to acquire and install a weather instrument capable of measuring and reporting wind speed and direction.
At Potato Point, to relocate the existing anemometer to a more exposed location in order to provide more accurate information.
At the Hinchinbrook Lighthouse site, to acquire and install an anemometer.
Maintenance.--The Secretary of Commerce may expend $160,000 in each of fiscal years 1995 and 1996 to maintain the equipment identified in subsection (a).
Activities of the contractor, including the purchase, transportation, receiving, and installation of property and materials, on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration pursuant to the modernization of the National Weather Service as set forth in Public Law 102-567, are hereby expressly exempted from taxation in any manner of form by any State, county, municipality, or any subdivision thereof.
CLEANUP OF NOAA FACILITIES.
Section 201 of the Act of November 2, 1966 (Public Law 89-702; 80 United States Statutes at Large 1091), formerly known as the Fur Seal Act of 1966, (16 United States Code 1161), is amended by adding at the end the following sentence: ``To the maximum extent feasible, the Secretary shall carry out his duties under this Act through contracts, compacts, or memoranda of agreement with the entities on the Pribilof Islands entitled to receive conveyance of lands by this Act.''.
Section 205 of that Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) The Secretary is authorized to clean up the dumps, debris, storage tanks, property, hazardous conditions, and contaminants which the Federal Government abandoned or conveyed to entities of the Pribilof Islands.
The Secretary is authorized to execute contracts or agreements, including agreements on a reimbursable basis with the State of Alaska or local governments, and to provide financial and technical assistance and training requested by said entities, in order to obtain their services in carrying out any of the Secretary's responsibilities under this Act.''.