BONNEVILLE LOCK AND DAM, COLUMBIA RIVER, OREGON AND WASHINGTON.
Project Modification.-- (1) In general.--The project for Bonneville Lock and Dam, Columbia River, Oregon and Washington, authorized by the Act of August 20, 1937 (50 United States Statutes at Large 731), and modified by section 83 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1974 (88 United States Statutes at Large 35), is further modified to authorize the Secretary of the Army (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') to convey to the city of North Bonneville, Washington, at no further cost to the city, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the following: (A) Any municipal facilities, utilities fixtures, and equipment for the relocated city, and any remaining lands designated as open spaces or municipal lots not previously conveyed to the city, specifically, Lots M1 through M15, M16 (the ``community center lot''), M18, M19, M22, M24, S42 through S45, and S52 through S60.
The ``school lot'' described as Lot 2, block 5, on the plat of relocated North Bonneville.
Parcels 2 and C, but only upon the completion of any environmental response actions required under applicable law.
That portion of Parcel B lying south of the existing city boundary, west of the sewage treatment plant, and north of the drainage ditch that is located adjacent to the northerly limit of the Hamilton Island landfill, provided the Secretary determines, at the time of the proposed conveyance, that the Department of the Army has taken all action necessary to protect human health and the environment.
Such portions of Parcel H which can be conveyed without a requirement for further investigation, inventory, or other action by the Department of the Army under the provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act.
Such easements as the Secretary deems necessary for-- (i) sewer and water line crossings of relocated Washington State Highway 14; and (ii) reasonable public access to the Columbia River across those portions of Hamilton Island that remain under the ownership of the United States.
Time period for conveyances.--The conveyances referred to in paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(B), (1)(E), and (1)(F)(i) shall be completed within 180 days after the United States receives the release referred to in paragraph (4).
All other conveyances shall be completed expeditiously, subject to any conditions specified in the applicable subsection.
Purpose.--The purpose of the conveyances authorized by paragraph (1) is to resolve all outstanding issues between the United States and the city of North Bonneville.
Acknowledgment of payment; release of claims relating to relocation of city.--As a prerequisite to such conveyances, the city of North Bonneville shall execute an acknowledgment of payment of just compensation and shall execute a release of any and all claims for relief of any kind against the United States growing out of the relocation of the city of North Bonneville, or any prior Federal legislation relating thereto, and shall dismiss, with prejudice, any pending litigation, if any, involving such matters.
Release by attorney general.--Upon receipt of the city's acknowledgment and release referred to in paragraph (4), the Attorney General of the United States shall dismiss any pending litigation, if any, arising out of the relocation of the city of North Bonneville, and execute a release of any and all rights to damages of any kind under the February 20, 1987, judgment of the United States Claims Court, including any interest thereon.
Acknowledgment of entitlements; release by city of claims under this subsection.--Within 60 days after the conveyances authorized by paragraph (1) (other than subparagraph (F)(ii)) have been completed, the city shall execute an acknowledgment that all entitlements under such paragraph have been completed and shall execute a release of any and all claims for relief of any kind against the United States arising out of this subsection.
Effects on city.--Beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the city of North Bonneville, or any successor in interest thereto, shall-- (A) be precluded from exercising any jurisdiction over any lands owned in whole or in part by the United States and administered by the United States Army Corps of Engineers in connection with the Bonneville project; and (B) be authorized to change the zoning designations of, sell, or resell Parcels S35 and S56, which are presently designated as open spaces.
Repeal.--Section 9147 of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 1993 (106 United States Statutes at Large 1940-1941) is repealed.