This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Interest Checking Act of 1998''.
INTEREST-BEARING TRANSACTION ACCOUNTS AUTHORIZED FOR ALL BUSINESSES.
Section 2 of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any depository institution may permit the owner of any deposit or account on which interest or dividends are paid to make up to 24 transfers per month, for any purpose, to another account of the owner in the same institution.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent an account offered pursuant to this subsection from being considered a transaction account (as defined in section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)) for purposes of such Act.''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO SAVINGS AND DEMAND DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS AT DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.
NOW Accounts Authorized for All Businesses.--Section 2 of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
WITHDRAWALS BY NEGOTIABLE OR TRANSFERABLE INSTRUMENTS FOR TRANSFERS TO THIRD PARTIES.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any depository institution (as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) may permit the owner of any deposit or account to make withdrawals from such deposit or account by negotiable or transferable instruments for the purpose of making payments to third parties.''.
Repeal of Prohibition on Payment of Interest on Demand Deposits.-- (1) Federal reserve act.--Section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 371a) is amended by striking subsection (i).
Home owners' loan act.--The 1st sentence of section 5(b)(1)(B) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 United States Code 1464(b)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``savings association may not--'' and all that follows through ``(ii) permit any'' and inserting ``savings association may not permit any''.
Federal deposit insurance act.--Section 18 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1828) is amended by striking subsection (g).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2004.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON RESERVES AT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS.
In General.--Section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) Earnings on reserves.-- ``(A) In general.--Balances maintained at a Federal reserve bank by or on behalf of a depository institution to meet the reserve requirements of this subsection applicable with respect to such depository institution shall receive earnings to be paid by the Federal reserve bank at least once each calendar quarter at a rate or rates not to exceed the general level of short term interest rates.
Regulations relating to payments and distribution.--The Board may prescribe regulations concerning-- ``(i) the payment of earnings in accordance with this paragraph; ``(ii) the distribution of such earnings to the depository institutions which maintain balances at such banks or on whose behalf such balances are maintained; and ``(iii) the responsibilities of depository institutions, Federal home loan banks, and the National Credit Union Administration Central Liquidity Facility with respect to the crediting and distribution of earnings attributable to balances maintained, in accordance with subsection (c)(1)(B), in a Federal reserve bank by any such entity on behalf of depository institutions which are not member banks.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.-- (1) Section 19(b) of federal reserve act.--Section 19(b)(4) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(4)) is amended by striking subparagraph (C).
Section 19(c) of federal reserve act.--Section 19(c)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``subsection (b)(4)(C)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)''.
INCREASED FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FLEXIBILITY IN SETTING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS.
Section 19(b)(2) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``the ratio of 3 per centum'' and inserting ``a ratio not greater than 3 percent (and which may be zero)''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``and not less than 8 per centum,'' and inserting ``(and which may be zero),''.