ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT FOR EMPLOYER EXPENSES FOR CERTAIN ON- SITE DAY-CARE FACILITIES.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
EMPLOYER ON-SITE DAY-CARE FACILITY CREDIT.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the employer on-site day-care facility credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified investment in property placed in service during such taxable year as part of a qualified day-care facility.
Limitation.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any qualified day-care facility shall not exceed $150,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified investment.--The term `qualified investment' means the amount paid or incurred to acquire, construct, rehabilitate, or expand property-- ``(A) which is to be used as part of a qualified day-care facility, and ``(B) with respect to which a deduction for depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable.
Such term includes only amounts properly chargeable to capital account.
Qualified day-care facility.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified day-care facility' means a facility-- ``(i) operated by an employer to provide dependent care assistance for enrollees, at least 30 percent of whom are dependents of employees of employers to which a credit under subsection (a) with respect to the facility is allowable, ``(ii) the principal use of which is to provide dependent care assistance described in clause (i), ``(iii) located on the premises of such employer, ``(iv) which meets the requirements of all applicable laws and regulations of the State or local government in which it is located, including, but not limited to, the licensing of the facility as a day-care facility, and ``(v) the use of which (or the eligibility to use) does not discriminate in favor of employees who are highly compensated employees (within the meaning of section 414(q)).
Multiple employers.--With respect to a facility jointly operated by more than 1 employer, the term `qualified day-care facility' shall include any facility located on the premises of 1 employer and within a reasonable distance from the premises of the other employers.
Recapture of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--If, as of the close of any taxable year, there is a recapture event with respect to any qualified day- care facility, then the tax of the taxpayer under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the applicable recapture percentage, and ``(B) the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years which would have resulted if the qualified on-site day-care expenses of the taxpayer with respect to such facility had been zero.
Applicable recapture percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the applicable recapture percentage shall be determined from the following table: The applicable recapture ``If the recapture event percentage is: occurs in: Years 1-3...................................... 100 Year 4......................................... 85 Year 5......................................... 70 Year 6......................................... 55 Year 7......................................... 40 Year 8......................................... 25 Years 9 and 10................................. 10 Years 11 and thereafter........................ 0.
Years.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), year 1 shall begin on the first day of the taxable year in which the qualified day-care facility is placed in service by the taxpayer.
Recapture event defined.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `recapture event' means-- ``(A) Cessation of operation.--The cessation of the operation of the facility as a qualified day-care facility.
Change in ownership.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), the disposition of a taxpayer's interest in a qualified day-care facility with respect to which the credit described in subsection (a) was allowable.
Agreement to assume recapture liability.--Clause (i) shall not apply if the person acquiring such interest in the facility agrees in writing to assume the recapture liability of the person disposing of such interest in effect immediately before such disposition.
In the event of such an assumption, the person acquiring the interest in the facility shall be treated as the taxpayer for purposes of assessing any recapture liability (computed as if there had been no change in ownership).
Special rules.-- ``(A) Tax benefit rule.--The tax for the taxable year shall be increased under paragraph (1) only with respect to credits allowed by reason of this section which were used to reduce tax liability.
In the case of credits not so used to reduce tax liability, the carryforwards and carrybacks under section 39 shall be appropriately adjusted.
No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under subpart A, B, or D of this part.
No recapture by reason of casualty loss.--The increase in tax under this subsection shall not apply to a cessation of operation of the facility as a qualified day-care facility by reason of a casualty loss to the extent such loss is restored by reconstruction or replacement within a reasonable period established by the Secretary.
Special Allocation Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Allocation in case of multiple employers.--In the case of multiple employers jointly operating a qualified day- care facility, the credit allowable by this section to each such employer shall be its proportionate share of the qualified on-site day-care expenses giving rise to the credit.
Pass-thru in the case of estates and trusts.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
Allocation in the case of partnerships.--In the case of partnerships, the credit shall be allocated among partners under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
No Double Benefit.-- ``(1) Reduction in basis.--For purposes of this subtitle-- ``(A) In general.--If a credit is determined under this section with respect to any property, the basis of such property shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so determined.
Certain dispositions.--If during any taxable year there is a recapture amount determined with respect to any property the basis of which was reduced under paragraph (1), the basis of such property (immediately before the event resulting in such recapture) shall be increased by an amount equal to such recapture amount.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `recapture amount' means any increase in tax (or adjustment in carrybacks or carryovers) determined under subsection (d).
Other deductions and credits.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed under any other provision of this chapter with respect to the amount of the credit determined under this section.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (A) by striking out ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (7), (B) by striking out the period at the end of paragraph (8), and inserting in lieu thereof a comma and ``plus'', and (C) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(9) the employer on-site day-care facility credit determined under section 45A.''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Employer on-site day-care facility credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.