This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Homeland Security Interoperable Communications Act'' or the ``DHS Interoperable Communications Act''.
INCLUSION OF INTEROPERABLE COMMUNICATIONS CAPABILITIES IN RESPONSIBILITIES OF UNDER SECRETARY FOR MANAGEMENT.
Section 701 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 341) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4) of subsection (a), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, including policies and directives to achieve and maintain interoperable communications among the components of the Department''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Interoperable Communications Defined.--In this section, the term `interoperable communications' means the ability of components of the Department to communicate with each other as necessary, utilizing information technology systems and radio communications systems to exchange voice, data, and video in real time, as necessary, for acts of terrorism, daily operations, planned events, and emergencies.''.
In General.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary for Management of the Department of Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a strategy, which shall be updated as necessary, for achieving and maintaining interoperable communications (as such term is defined in subsection (d) of section 701 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as added by section 2 of this Act) among the components of the Department of Homeland Security, including for daily operations, planned events, and emergencies, with corresponding milestones, that includes, at a minimum the following: (1) An assessment of interoperability gaps in radio communications among the components of the Department, as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Information on efforts and activities, including current and planned policies, directives, and training, of the Department since November 1, 2012, to achieve and maintain interoperable communications among the components of the Department, and planned efforts and activities of the Department to achieve and maintain such interoperable communications.
An assessment of obstacles and challenges to achieving and maintaining interoperable communications among the components of the Department.
Information on, and an assessment of, the adequacy of mechanisms available to the Under Secretary for Management to enforce and compel compliance with interoperable communications policies and directives of the Department.
Guidance provided to the components of the Department to implement interoperable communications policies and directives of the Department.
The total amount of funds expended by the Department since November 1, 2012, and projected future expenditures, to achieve interoperable communications, including on equipment, infrastructure, and maintenance.
Dates upon which Department-wide interoperability is projected to be achieved for voice, data, and video communications, respectively, and interim milestones that correspond to the achievement of each such mode of communication.
Supplementary Material.--Together with the strategy required under subsection (a), the Under Secretary for Management shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate information on any intra-agency effort or task force that has been delegated certain responsibilities by the Under Secretary relating to achieving and maintaining interoperable communications among the components of the Department by the dates referred to in paragraph (9) of subsection (a), and on who, within each such component, is responsible for implementing policies and directives issued by the Under Secretary to so achieve and maintain such interoperable communications.
Not later than 220 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and biannually thereafter, the Under Secretary for Management shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the status of efforts, since the issuance of the strategy required under section 3, to implement such strategy, including the following: (1) Progress on each interim milestone referred to in paragraph (9) of subsection (a) toward achieving and maintaining interoperable communications among the components of the Department.
Information on any policies, directives, guidance, and training established by the Under Secretary.
An assessment of the level of compliance, adoption, and participation among the components of the Department with the policies, directives, guidance, and training established by the Under Secretary to achieve and maintain interoperable communications among such components.
Information on any additional resources or authorities needed by the Under Secretary.
Passed the House of Representatives July 8, 2014.
Attest: KAREN L. HAAS, Clerk.