This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Health Equity Act of 2001''.
APPROVAL OF UP TO 4 STATE WAIVERS TO ALLOW TITLE XXI ALLOTMENTS TO BE USED FOR INCREASING THE ENROLLMENT OF MEDICAID CHILDREN.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Child.--With respect to a State, the term ``child'' has the meaning given such term for purposes of the State medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
Child health assistance.--The term ``child health assistance'' has the meaning given that term in section 2110(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397jj(a)).
Enhanced fmap.--The term ``enhanced FMAP'' has the meaning given that term in section 2105(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1397ee(b)).
Federal medical assistance percentage.--The term ``Federal medical assistance percentage'' has the meaning given that term in section 1905(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396d(b)).
Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' has the meaning given that term in section 2110(c)(5) of such Act (42 United States Code 1397jj(c)(5)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State child health plan.--The term ``State child health plan'' has the meaning given that term under section 2110(c)(7) of such Act (42 United States Code 1397jj(c)(7)).
Approval of Certain Waivers.--The Secretary shall approve not more than 4 waiver applications under which the Secretary shall pay to a State that the Secretary determines satisfies the requirements described in subsection (c) the payment authorized under subsection (d).
Requirements.--The requirements described in this subsection are the following: (1) SCHIP income eligibility.--The State has a State child health plan that (whether implemented under title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act)-- (A) has the highest income eligibility standard permitted under title XXI of such Act as of January 1, 2001; (B) subject to paragraph (2), does not limit the acceptance of applications for children; and (C) provides benefits to all children in the State who apply for and meet eligibility standards on a statewide basis.
No waiting list imposed.--With respect to children whose family income is at or below 200 percent of the poverty line, the State does not impose any numerical limitation, waiting list, or similar limitation on the eligibility of such children for child health assistance under such State plan.
Additional requirements.--The State has implemented at least 4 of the following policies and procedures (relating to coverage of children under titles XIX and title XXI of the Social Security Act): (A) Uniform, simplified application form.--With respect to children who are eligible for medical assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A) of that Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)), the State uses the same uniform, simplified application form (including, if applicable, permitting application other than in person) for purposes of establishing eligibility for benefits under titles XIX and XXI of that Act.
Elimination of asset test.--The State does not apply any asset test for eligibility under section 1902(l) or title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(l), 1397aa et sequentes) with respect to children.
Adoption of 12-month continuous enrollment.-- The State provides that eligibility shall not be regularly redetermined more often than once every year under title XXI of such Act or for children described in section 1902(a)(10)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)).
Same verification and redetermination policies; automatic reassessment of eligibility.--With respect to children who are eligible for medical assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)), the State provides for initial eligibility determinations and redeterminations of eligibility using the same verification policies (including with respect to face-to-face interviews), forms, and frequency as the State uses for such purposes under title XXI of that Act, and, as part of such redeterminations, provides for the automatic reassessment of the eligibility of such children for assistance under titles XIX and XXI.
Outstationing enrollment staff.--The State provides for the receipt and initial processing of applications for benefits under title XXI of such Act and for children under title XIX of that Act at facilities defined as disproportionate share hospitals under section 1923(a)(1)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396r-4(a)(1)(A)) and Federally-qualified health centers described in section 1905(l)(2)(B) of that Act (42 United States Code 1396d(l)(2)(B)) consistent with section 1902(a)(55) of that Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(55)).
Payment Authorized.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act, or any other provision of law, with respect to a State with a waiver approved under this section that satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) (and that otherwise has a State child health plan approved under title XXI of the Social Security Act), the Secretary shall pay to the State from its allotment under section 2104 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397dd) an amount for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2002) determined under subparagraph (D) as follows: (A) Base expenditure amount.--The Secretary shall determine the total amount of expenditures for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act in the State for children described in paragraph (2) for fiscal year 1995.
Current expenditure amount.--The Secretary shall determine the total amount of expenditures for medical assistance under title XIX of such Act in the State for children described in paragraph (2) for the fiscal year involved.
Increased expenditures.--The Secretary shall determine the number (if any) by which the total amount determined under subparagraph (B) exceeds the total amount determined under subparagraph (A).
Bonus amount.--The amount determined under this subparagraph for a fiscal year is equal to the product of the following: (i) The total amount determined under subparagraph (C).
The difference between the enhanced FMAP and the Federal medical assistance percentage for that State for the fiscal year involved.
Children described.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the children described in this paragraph are-- (A) children who are eligible and enrolled for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act; and (B) children who-- (i) would be described in subparagraph (A) but for having family income that exceeds the highest income eligibility level applicable to such individuals under the State plan; and (ii) would be considered disabled under section 1614(a)(3)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)(3)(C)) (determined without regard to the reference to age in that section but for having earnings or deemed income or resources, as determined under title XVI of such Act for children) that exceed the requirements for receipt of supplemental security income benefits.
Order of title xxi payments.--With respect to a State with a waiver approved under this section, payments to the State under section 2105(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397ee(a)) for a fiscal year shall, notwithstanding paragraph (2) of such section, be made in the following order: (A) First, for expenditures for items described in paragraph (1)(A) of section 2105(a) of such Act.
Second, for expenditures for items described in paragraph (1)(B) of such section.
Third, for the payment authorized under subsection (d)(1) of this section.
Fourth, for expenditures for items described in paragraph (1)(C) of section 2105(a) of the Social Security Act.
Fifth, for expenditures for items described in paragraph (1)(D) of such section.