This Act may be cited as the ``National Aviation Research and Competitiveness Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) for every dollar increase in shipments of United States aircraft internationally, the United States economy output increases by an estimated $2.30; (2) for every $1,000,000,000 of aircraft shipments internationally, nearly 35,000 jobs are created; (3) many of the advanced aviation technologies developed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Defense have application in security, safety, capacity, communications, and air traffic control; (4) a decrease in military aviation programs will have a negative impact on civil aviation programs; (5) research programs at the Federal Aviation Administration have potential applications in both civil and military aviation; (6) joint technology development programs among the Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation Administration, and industry would allow for transferring skills and technologies from the defense to the civilian aviation sector and would allow for the transfer back to defense, when necessary; and (7) such joint programs could allow for the Department of Defense contribution to the programs to be phased out over 5 years, which would allow the defense industry to make the transfer to the civilian aviation sector and produce needed aviation technology.
JOINT AVIATION RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Administrator and the Secretary shall jointly establish a program for the purpose of conducting research on aviation technologies that have application to both military and civil aviation vehicles and airports and that enhance United States competitiveness.
Such program shall include research on-- (1) next-generation satellite communications, including global positioning satellites; (2) advanced airport and airplane security; (3) environmentally compatible technologies, including technologies that limit or reduce noise and air pollution; and (4) advanced aviation safety programs.
Contracts and Grants.--Contracts and grants entered into under the program established under subsection (a) shall be administered using procedures developed jointly by the Secretary and the Administrator.
These procedures should include an integrated acquisition policy for contract and grant requirements and for technical data rights that are not an impediment to joint programs among the Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation Administration, and industry.
JOINT AVIATION RESEARCH PLAN.
Requirement.--Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator and the Secretary, in consultation with the advisory committee, shall prepare and transmit to Congress a national aviation research plan setting forth the research and development that the Administrator and the Secretary consider necessary to advance aviation technologies over the 5-year period beginning in fiscal year 1993.
Objectives of Plan.--The objectives of the plan prepared under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) selected programs that jointly enhance public and private aviation technology development; (2) an opportunity for private defense contractors to be involved in transition activities to the civilian sector; and (3) the transfer of Federal Government-developed technologies to the private sector to promote economic strength and competitiveness.
Contents of Plan.--The plan prepared under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) for the first year, detailed objectives and estimates of the schedule, cost, and manpower levels for each research project, and a description of the scope and content of each major contract or grant; (2) for the second through fifth years, estimates of the total cost of each major project for such year and a list of all major research projects which may be required to meet the objectives; (3) a 5-year schedule for the decrease of Federal contribution and corresponding increase in private sector contributions for the research and development program; and (4) the portion of the Federal contribution that each Federal agency will contribute.
Annual Update.--The plan prepared under subsection (a) shall be updated annually, to reflect changes in global aviation technologies and United States competitiveness.
Establishment.--Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator and the Secretary shall establish an Joint Aviation Research Advisory Committee.
Purposes.--The purposes of the advisory committee shall be-- (1) to provide advice and recommendations to the Administrator and the Secretary regarding needs, objectives, approaches, content, and accomplishments with respect to the aviation research program established under section 3; and (2) to advise the Administrator and the Secretary on the preparation of the aviation research plan under section 4, including annual updates thereto.
Membership.--The advisory committee shall be composed of not more than 20 members, to be appointed jointly by the Administrator and the Secretary, from among persons who are not employees of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Department of Defense and who are especially qualified to serve on the advisory committee by virtue of their education, training, or experience.
In appointing members of the advisory committee, the Administrator and the Secretary shall ensure that universities, corporations, associations, industry, and other government agencies are represented.
The majority of the members of the advisory committee shall be representatives of industry.
Chairperson.--The Administrator and the Secretary shall designate one member of the advisory committee as the chairperson, who shall be qualified in both military and civil aviation research, and in the applications of such research.
Subordinate Committees.--The Administrator and the Secretary, or the advisory committee, may establish subordinate committees to the advisory committee to provide advice and recommendations on specific areas of research conducted under this Act.
Administrative and Support Services.--The Administrator shall provide support staff and, on the request of the advisory committee, such information, administrative services, and supplies as the Administrator determines are necessary for the advisory committee to carry out its purposes.
Termination.--Section 14(a)(2)(B) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
; relating to the termination of advisory committees) shall not apply to the advisory committee.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration; (2) the term ``advisory committee'' means the Joint Aviation Research Advisory Committee established under section 5; and (3) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Defense.