SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Green Jobs and Infrastructure Act of 2009''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--CLEAN TECHNOLOGY MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM Sec.
Clean technology manufacturing incentive program.
TITLE II--ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY VEHICLES MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM Sec.
Advanced technology vehicles manufacturing incentive program.
TITLE III--ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION BLOCK GRANTS Sec.
Energy efficiency and conservation block grants.
TITLE IV--GREEN ENERGY JOBS Sec.
Clean Energy Service Corps.
In this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
TITLE I--CLEAN TECHNOLOGY MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM SEC.
CLEAN TECHNOLOGY MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
Loans.--The Secretary shall provide loans to manufacturers to help finance the cost of-- (1) reequipping, expanding, or establishing (including applicable engineering costs) a manufacturing facility in the United States to produce clean technology products and the significant component parts of those products, including-- (A) wind turbines; (B) solar energy products; (C) fuel cells; (D) advanced batteries and storage devices; (E) biomass engines; (F) geothermal equipment; (G) ocean energy equipment; (H) carbon capture and storage; (I) energy efficiency products, including appliances and products that are used to increase energy efficiency by at least 30 percent over a baseline product (and significant components of the appliances and products), subject to the condition that the parts shall be integral to the overall efficiency of the end product; and (J) products for retrofitting a manufacturing facility to improve industrial processes and create greater energy efficiency through the use of technologies, including-- (i) combined heat and power systems; (ii) natural gas pressure recovery; (iii) advanced cogeneration; (iv) gasification; (v) anaerobic digestion; and (vi) landfill gas recovery; and (2) improving the energy-efficiency of the industrial processes of the manufacturers other than through the production of products and component parts described in paragraph (1)(J).
Period of Availability.--A loan under subsection (a) shall apply to-- (1) facilities and equipment placed in service before December 30, 2012; and (2) clean technology retooling costs, retrofitting costs, worker training costs, and other costs described in subsection (a) incurred during the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending on December 30, 2020.
Direct Loan Program.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, subject to the availability of appropriated funds, the Secretary shall carry out a program to provide a total of not more than $50,000,000,000 in loans to eligible individuals and entities (as determined by the Secretary) for the costs of activities described in subsection (a).
Application.--An applicant for a loan under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including a written assurance that the wages and benefits that will be provided to each individual that is employed by the applicant (including a contractor or subcontractor) in carrying out activities described in subsection (a) are at least equal to the average in the area, as determined by the Secretary.
Selection of eligible projects.--The Secretary shall select eligible projects to receive loans under this subsection in cases in which, as determined by the Secretary, the loan recipient-- (A) has a viable market for the product or component described in subsection (a); (B) will provide sufficient information to the Secretary for the Secretary to ensure that the qualified investment is expended efficiently and effectively; (C) will provide such information as the Secretary may request to demonstrate that the qualified investment will preserve or create jobs; and (D) has met such other criteria as may be established and published by the Secretary.
Rates, terms, and repayment of loans.--A loan provided under this subsection-- (A) shall have an interest rate that, as of the date on which the loan is made, is equal to the cost of funds to the Department of the Treasury for obligations of comparable maturity; (B) shall have a term equal to the lesser of-- (i) the projected life, in years, of the eligible project to be carried out using funds from the loan, as determined by the Secretary; and (ii) 25 years; (C) may be subject to a deferral in repayment for not more than 5 years after the date on which the eligible project carried out using funds from the loan first begins operations, as determined by the Secretary; (D) shall be made by the Federal Financing Bank; and (E) shall be repaid in full if the loan recipient moves production of activities described in subsection (a) outside of the United States during the term of the loan.
Fees.--Administrative costs shall be no more than $100,000 or 10 basis point of the loan.
Priority.--In making loans to manufacturers under this section, the Secretary-- (1) shall give priority to those facilities that are located in regions with the highest unemployment rates; and (2) may provide awards or loan to facilities that are idle.
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall coordinate with the Secretary of Commerce in carrying out the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program established under sections 25 and 26 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k, 278l).
Funding.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, on October 1, 2009, and on each October 1 thereafter through October 1, 2012, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary for the cost of loans and loan guarantees to carry out this section such sums as are necessary to provide the amount of loans authorized under subsection (c)(1), to remain available until expended.
Receipt and acceptance.--The Secretary shall be entitled to receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out this section the funds transferred under paragraph (1), without further appropriation.
TITLE II--ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY VEHICLES MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM SEC.
ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY VEHICLES MANUFACTURING INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
Section 136 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (42 United States Code 17013) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``30 percent'' and inserting ``80 percent''; and (2) in subsection (i)-- (A) by striking ``(i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There'' and inserting the following: ``(i) Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--There''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Mandatory funding.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary for the cost of awards and loans to carry out this section $1,000,000,000, to remain available until expended.
Receipt and acceptance.--The Secretary shall be entitled to receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out this section the funds transferred under subparagraph (A), without further appropriation.''.
TITLE III--ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION BLOCK GRANTS SEC.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION BLOCK GRANTS.
Section 548 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (42 United States Code 17158) is amended by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) Mandatory Funding.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Green Jobs and Infrastructure Act of 2009, on October 1, 2009, and on each October 1 thereafter through October 1, 2011, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary to carry out the program $10,000,000,000, to remain available until expended.
Receipt and acceptance.--The Secretary shall be entitled to receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out the program the funds transferred under paragraph (1), without further appropriation.
Allocation of grants funds.--Of the amount of funds made available for grants under the program for a fiscal year under this subsection-- ``(A) 49 percent of the amount shall be distributed using the definition of eligible unit of local government-alternative 1 in section 541(3)(A); and ``(B) 49 percent of the amount shall be distributed using the definition of eligible unit of local government-alternative 2 in section 541(3)(B).''.
TITLE IV--GREEN ENERGY JOBS SEC.
CLEAN ENERGY SERVICE CORPS.
Section 122(a) of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12572(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (15) as paragraph (16); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (14) the following: ``(15) A Clean Energy Service Corps program in which-- ``(A) participants-- ``(i) encourage or promote clean energy technologies; or ``(ii) enable communities and nonprofit organizations to assist business owners and households in matters relating to clean energy technologies, and in becoming more energy efficient; and ``(B) priority is provided for programs that enroll corps participants who will be trained for careers that promote a sustainable economy.''.
Section 171(e)(8) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2916(e)(8)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), respectively, and indenting appropriately; and (2) by striking ``(8)'' and all that follows through ``of which--'' and inserting the following: ``(8) Funding.-- ``(A) Mandatory funding.-- ``(i) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Green Jobs and Infrastructure Act of 2009, out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary to carry out this subsection $625,000,000, to remain available until expended.
Receipt and acceptance.--The Secretary shall be entitled to receive, shall accept, and shall use to carry out this subsection the funds transferred under clause (i), without further appropriation.
Discretionary funding.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $125,000,000 for fiscal year 2010 and each subsequent fiscal year.
Allocation.--Of the amount available under subparagraph (A) or (B) for a fiscal year--''.