This Act may be cited as the ``Ensuring Veterans' Resiliency Act''.
PILOT PROGRAM FOR REPAYMENT OF EDUCATIONAL LOANS FOR CERTAIN PSYCHIATRISTS OF VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out a pilot program to repay a loan of an individual described in subsection (b) that-- (1) was used by the individual to finance education regarding psychiatric medicine, including education leading to an undergraduate degree and education leading to the degree of doctor of medicine or of doctor of osteopathy; and (2) was obtained from a governmental entity, private financial institution, school, or other authorized entity, as determined by the Secretary.
Eligible Individuals.--To be eligible to obtain a loan repayment under this section, an individual shall-- (1) either-- (A) be licensed or eligible for licensure to practice psychiatric medicine in the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs; or (B) be enrolled in the final year of a residency program leading to a specialty qualification in psychiatric medicine that is approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education; and (2) as determined appropriate by the Secretary, demonstrate a commitment to a long-term career as a psychiatrist in the Veterans Health Administration, including by requiring a set number of years of obligated service.
Selection.--The Secretary shall select not less than 10 individuals described in subsection (b) to participate in the pilot program for each year in which the Secretary carries out the pilot program.
Loan Repayments.-- (1) Amounts.--Subject to the limits established by paragraph (2), a loan repayment under this section may consist of payment of the principal, interest, and related expenses of a loan obtained by an individual described in subsection (b) for all educational expenses (including tuition, fees, books, and laboratory expenses) relating to a degree described in subsection (a)(1).
Limit.--For each year of obligated service that an individual agrees to serve in an agreement described in subsection (b)(2), the Secretary may pay not more than $60,000 on behalf of the individual.
Breach.-- (1) Liability.--An individual who participates in the pilot program under subsection (a) who fails to satisfy the commitment described in subsection (b)(2) shall be liable to the United States, in lieu of any service obligation arising from such participation, for the amount which has been paid or is payable to or on behalf of the individual under the program, reduced by the proportion that the number of days served for completion of the service obligation bears to the total number of days in the period of obligated service of the individual.
Repayment period.--Any amount of damages which the United States is entitled to recover under this subsection shall be paid to the United States within the one-year period beginning on the date of the breach of the agreement.
Prohibition on Simultaneous Eligibility.--An individual who is participating in any other program of the Federal Government that repays the educational loans of the individual may not participate in the pilot program under subsection (a).
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the pilot program terminates under subsection (g), the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report on the pilot program.
The report shall include the overall effect of the pilot program on the psychiatric workforce shortage of the Veterans Health Administration, the long-term stability of such workforce, and overall workforce strategies of the Veterans Health Administration that seek to promote the physical and mental resiliency of all veterans.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry out this section, including standards for qualified loans and authorized payees and other terms and conditions for the making of loan repayments.
Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program shall expire on the date that is three years after the date on which the Secretary commences the pilot program.
COMPTROLLER GENERAL STUDY ON PAY DISPARITIES OF PSYCHIATRISTS OF VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION.
Study.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study of pay disparities among psychiatrists of the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The study shall include-- (1) an examination of laws, regulations, practices, and policies, including salary flexibilities, that contribute to such disparities; and (2) recommendations with respect to legislative or regulatory actions to improve equity in pay among such psychiatrists.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date on which the Comptroller General completes the study under subsection (a), the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report containing the results of the study.