EXPENSING AND RAPID AMORTIZATION FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION EXPENDITURES.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXPENSING AND RAPID AMORTIZATION FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION EXPENDITURES.
Treatment As Expenses.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the taxpayer, qualified environmental remediation expenditures which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year in connection with a trade or business shall be treated as expenses which are not chargeable to capital account.
The expenditures so treated shall be allowed as a deduction.
Limitation.--The amount treated under paragraph (1) as an expense with respect to any qualified contaminated site shall not exceed $500,000 for all taxable years.
Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (6), (7), and (8) of section 179(d) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
60-Month Amortization of Remaining Environmental Remediation Expenditures.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the taxpayer, qualified environmental remediation expenditures-- ``(A) which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer in connection with his trade or business, and ``(B) which are not treated as expenses under subsection (a), may be treated as deferred expenses.
Amortization of deferred expenses.--In computing taxable income, such deferred expenses shall be allowed as a deduction ratably over such period of not less than 60 months as may be selected by the taxpayer (beginning with the month in which the taxpayer pays or incurs such expenditures).
Such deferred expenses shall be treated as expenditures which are properly chargeable to capital account for purposes of section 1016(a)(1) (relating to adjustments to basis of property).
Certain Persons Not Eligible.--A taxpayer shall not be eligible for the treatment under this section with respect to any qualified contaminated site if-- ``(1) at any time on or before the date of the enactment of this section such taxpayer was the owner or operator of any business on such site, ``(2) at any time before, on, or after such date of enactment such taxpayer-- ``(A) had (by contract, agreement, or otherwise) arranged for the disposal or treatment of any hazardous materials at such site or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal or treatment of any hazardous materials at such site, or ``(B) had accepted any hazardous materials for transport to such site, or ``(3) the taxpayer is related to any taxpayer referred to in paragraph (1) or (2).
Qualified Environmental Remediation Expenditures.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified environmental remediation expenditure' means any amount (otherwise chargeable to capital account) which is paid or incurred by the taxpayer for environmental remediation with respect to any qualified contaminated site which is owned by the taxpayer.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified contaminated site.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified contaminated site' means any site if the appropriate agency certifies that at least 1 of the following environmental conditions is present on such site: ``(i) A release or threatened release of any hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.
Any storage tanks which contain any hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.
Any illegal disposal of solid waste.
Such term shall not include any site listed on the National Priorities List under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
Appropriate agency.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the appropriate agency is-- ``(i) the agency of the State in which the site is located which is designated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for purposes of this paragraph, or ``(ii) if the agency described in clause (i) designates an agency of the local government in which the site is located for purposes of this paragraph, such local government agency.
Hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.--Any substance, waste, or material shall be treated as a hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance if it is so treated under-- ``(A) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes), ``(B) the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), or ``(C) any State or local environmental law or ordinance.
The following materials shall in any event be treated as such a substance: petroleum or crude oil or any derivative thereof, friable asbestos or any asbestos containing material, polychlorinated biphenyls, or urea formaldehyde foam insulation.
Environmental remediation.--The term `environmental remediation' means-- ``(A) removal or remediation activity, including soil and ground water remediation, ``(B) restoration of natural, historic or cultural resources at the site, or the mitigation of unavoidable losses of such resources incurred in connection with the remediation or response activity, ``(C) health assessments or health effects studies, ``(D) environmental investigations, ``(E) remediation of off-site contamination caused by activity on the site, and ``(F) any other costs reasonably required by reason of the environmental conditions of the site, including demolition of existing contaminated structures, site security, and permit fees necessary for remediation.
Related person.--Persons shall be treated as related to each other if such persons are treated as a single employer under the regulations prescribed under section 52(b) or such persons bear a relationship to each other specified in section 267(b) or 707(b).
Land and Other Property.--This section shall not apply to any expenditure for-- ``(1) the acquisition or improvement of land, or ``(2) the acquisition or improvement of property of a character which is subject to the allowance under section 167 (relating to allowance for depreciation, etc.)
or section 611 (relating to allowance for depletion); except that, for purposes of this section, allowances under section 167, and allowances under section 611, shall be treated as expenditures.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (14) of section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``, or under section 198(b) (relating to qualified environmental remediation expenditures),'' after ``expenditures)''.
Subparagraph (C) of section 1245(a)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 193'' and inserting ``193, or 198''.
Subparagraph (C) of section 1245(a)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 194'' and inserting ``194, or 198''.
The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Expensing and rapid amortization for certain environmental remediation expenditures.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.