Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) there are situated in the State of Tennessee the sites of several key Civil War battles, campaigns, and engagements; (2) certain sites, battlefields, structures, and areas in Tennessee are collectively of national significance in the history of the Civil War; (3) the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission, established by Congress in 1991, identified 38 sites in Tennessee as significant; (4) the preservation and interpretation of these sites will make an important contribution to the understanding of the heritage of the United States; (5) the preservation of Civil War sites within a regional framework requires cooperation among local property owners and Federal, State, and local government entities; and (6) partnerships between Federal, State, and local governments and their regional entities, and the private sector, offer the most effective opportunities for the enhancement and management of the Civil War battlefields and related sites located in Tennessee.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve, conserve, and interpret the legacy of the Civil War in Tennessee; (2) to recognize and interpret important events and geographic locations representing key Civil War battles, campaigns, and engagements in Tennessee; (3) to recognize and interpret the effect of the Civil War on the civilian population of Tennessee during the war and postwar reconstruction period; and (4) to create partnerships among Federal, State, and local governments and their regional entities, and the private sector to preserve, conserve, enhance, and interpret the battlefields and associated sites associated with the Civil War in Tennessee.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``national heritage area'' means the Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area as designated pursuant to section 3.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``compact'' means the compact approved under section 4.
The term ``management plan'' means the management plan submitted under section 5.
TENNESSEE CIVIL WAR HERITAGE AREA.
Designation.--Upon publication by the Secretary in the Federal Register of notice that a compact regarding the Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area has been approved by the Secretary in accordance with this Act, there shall be designated the Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area.
Boundaries.--The Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area shall be comprised of areas of the State of Tennessee depicted on the map entitled ``Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area''.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service.
Administration.--The national heritage area shall be administered in accordance with the compact and the management plan.
Compact.--The compact referred to in section 3(a) shall include information relating to the objectives and management of the area proposed for designation as a national heritage area.
Such information shall include (but not be limited to) each of the following: (1) A delineation of the boundaries of the proposed National Heritage Area.
A discussion of the goals and objectives of the proposed national heritage area, including an explanation of the approach, proposed by the partners referred to in paragraph (4), to conservation and interpretation of resources.
An identification and description of the management entity that will administer the proposed national heritage area.
A list of the initial partners to be involved in developing and implementing the management plan for the proposed national heritage area, and a statement of the financial commitment of the partners.
A description of the role of the State of Tennessee.
Preparation of and Actions Called For in Compact.--The compact shall be prepared with public participation.
Actions called for in the compact shall be likely to be initiated within a reasonable time after designation of the proposed national heritage area and shall ensure effective implementation of the State and local aspects of the compact.
Approval and Disapproval of Compacts.--(1) The Secretary, in consultation with the Governor of Tennessee, shall approve or disapprove the proposed compact not later than 90 days after receiving such compact.
If the Secretary disapproves a proposed compact, the Secretary shall advise, in writing, the reasons for the disapproval and shall make recommendations for revisions of the proposed compact.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a proposed revision to such a compact within 90 days after the date on which the revision is submitted to the Secretary.
Management Plans.--A management plan submitted under this Act for the national heritage area shall present comprehensive recommendations for the conservation, funding, management, and development of the area.
The management plan shall-- (1) be prepared with public participation; (2) take into consideration existing Federal, State, county, and local plans and involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations in the area; (3) include a description of actions that units of government and private organizations are recommended to take to protect the resources of the area; (4) specify existing and potential sources of funding for the conservation, management, and development of the area; and (5) include the following, as appropriate: (A) An inventory of the resources contained in the national heritage area, including a list of property in the area that should be conserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of the natural, cultural, or historic significance of the property as it relates to the themes of the area.
A recommendation of policies for resource management that consider and detail the application of appropriate land and water management techniques, including (but not limited to) the development of intergovernmental cooperative agreements to manage the historical, cultural, and natural resources and the recreational opportunities of the area in a manner consistent with the support of appropriate and compatible economic viability.
A program, including plans for restoration and construction, for implementation of the management plan by the management entity specified in the compact for the area and specific commitments, for the first 5 years of operation of the plan, by the partners identified in the compact.
An analysis of means by which Federal, State, and local programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act.
An interpretive plan for the National Heritage Area.
Management Entities.--The management entity for the national heritage area shall do each of the following: (1) Develop and submit to the Secretary a management plan not later than three years after the date of the designation of the area as a national heritage area.
Give priority to the implementation of actions, goals, and policies set forth in the compact and management plan for the area, including-- (A) assisting units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations-- (i) in conserving the national heritage area; (ii) in establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the area; (iii) in developing recreational opportunities in the area; (iv) in increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical, and cultural resources of the area; (v) in the restoration of historic buildings that are located within the boundaries of the area and relate to the themes of the area; and (vi) in ensuring that clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs identifying access points and sites of interest are put in place throughout the area; and (B) consistent with the goals of the management plan, encouraging economic viability in the affected communities by appropriate means.
In developing and implementing the management plan for the area, consider the interests of diverse units of government, businesses, private property owners, and nonprofit groups within the geographic area.
Conduct public meetings at least quarterly regarding the implementation of the management plan for the area.
Clearing House.--The Congress recognizes the Center for Historic Preservation at Middle Tennessee State University as the clearing house for the Tennessee Civil War Heritage Area.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Secretary of the Interior.--The Secretary-- (1) may provide technical assistance to units of government and private nonprofit organizations regarding feasibility studies and the compact and, upon request of the management entity for the national heritage area, regarding the management plan and its implementation; (2) may not, as a condition of the award of technical assistance under this section, require any recipient of such technical assistance to enact or modify land use restrictions; and (3) may not make limitations on fishing, hunting, or trapping a condition for the approval of the compact or the determination of eligibility for technical assistance under this section.
Duties of Other Federal Agencies.--Any Federal entity conducting any activity directly affecting the national heritage area shall consider the potential effect of the activity on the management plan for the area and shall consult with the Governor of Tennessee with respect to the activity to minimize the adverse effects of the activity on the area.
Lack of Effect on Authority of Governments.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify, enlarge, or diminish any authority of the Federal, State, or local governments to regulate any use of land as provided for by law or regulation.
Lack of Zoning or Land Use Powers of Entity.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to grant powers of zoning or land use to any management entity for the national heritage area.
Fish and Wildlife.--The designation of the national heritage area shall not diminish the authority of the State of Tennessee to manage fish and wildlife, including the regulation of fishing and hunting within such area.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.