This Act may be cited as the ``Work Incentive and Self-Sufficiency Act of 1996''.
RETURN-TO-WORK PROGRAM FOR SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY INCOME BENEFICIARIES.
SSDI Work Incentive Threshold.-- (1) In general.--Section 223(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 423(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an individual's disability insurance benefit for any month shall be reduced by such individual's excess earnings under rules similar to the rules under section 203, except that-- ``(i) for purposes of section 203(f)(3), an individual's excess earnings for a taxable year shall be 50 percent of the individual's earnings for such year in excess of the product of the applicable exempt amount and the number of months in such year; and ``(ii) for purposes of section 203(f)(8)(D), the applicable exempt amount for any taxable year ending after 1996 shall be $500 for each month of such year.
In the case of an individual who is a blind or disabled individual who is receiving benefits under this section and title XVI, such individual's benefits under this section shall be reduced under subparagraph (A) only after the individual's benefits under title XVI are reduced in the same manner.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 223(a)(2) of such Act is amended by striking ``section 202(q)'' and inserting ``paragraph (3), section 202(q),''.
Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1611(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1382(b)) are each amended by striking ``The benefit'' and inserting ``Except as provided in section 223(a)(3)(B), the benefit''.
Repeal of Trial Work Period and Extended Period of Eligibility.-- (1) Subsection (c) of section 222 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 422) is repealed.
Section 223(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 423(a)(1)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``subject to subsection (e), the termination month'' and inserting ``the third month following the month in which his disability ceases''; and (B) by striking the second sentence.
Section 223 of such Act (42 United States Code 423) is amended by striking subsection (e).
Section 202(d)(1)(G)(i) (42 United States Code 402(d)(1)(G)(i)) is amended to read as follows: ``(i) the third month following the month in which his disability ceases,''.
Section 202(d)(6)(E) (42 United States Code 402(d)(6)(E)) is amended by striking ``the termination month (as defined in paragraph (1)(G)(i)), subject to section 223(e)'' and inserting ``the third month following the month in which his disability ceases''.
Section 202(e)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 402(e)(1)) is amended-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``subject to section 223(e),''; and (B) by striking the second sentence and inserting ``For purposes of the preceding sentence, the termination month for any individual shall be the third month following the month in which her disability ceases.''.
Section 202(f)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 402(f)(1)) is amended-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``subject to section 223(e),''; and (B) by striking the second sentence and inserting ``For purposes of the preceding sentence, the termination month for any individual shall be the third month following the month in which his disability ceases.''.
CONTINUED ELIGIBILITY FOR MEDICARE BENEFITS FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS WHOSE ANNUAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME DOES NOT EXCEED $15,000.
Section 226(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 426(b)) is amended by striking the last 2 sentences thereof and inserting the following: ``For purposes of this subsection, an individual who is no longer eligible for cash benefits under section 223, after the application of subsection (a)(3) thereof, and whose entitlement to benefits or status as a qualified railroad retirement beneficiary as described in paragraph (2) has subsequently terminated, shall be deemed to be entitled to such benefits or to occupy such status (notwithstanding the termination of such entitlement or status) for the period of consecutive months throughout all of which the physical or mental impairment, on which such entitlement or status was based, continues, and until such individual's annual adjusted gross income exceeds $15,000.''.
MEDICARE BUY-IN PROVISIONS FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE EXHAUSTED OTHER ENTITLEMENT AND FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE NOT OTHERWISE ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICARE BENEFITS.
Change in Payment for Hospital Insurance Benefits for Disabled Individuals Who Have Exhausted Other Entitlement.--Section 1818A(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i-2a(d)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2)(i) The amount of an individual's monthly premium for any calendar year under this section shall be equal to the lesser of-- ``(I) 10 percent of such individual's adjusted gross income for the preceding calendar year; or ``(II) the amount of the premium determined under section 1818(d).
The provisions of subsections (e) and (f) of section 1818 (relating to premiums) shall apply to individuals enrolled under this section in the same manner as such provisions apply to individuals enrolled under that section.''.
Hospital Insurance Benefits for Disabled Individuals Who Are Not Otherwise Eligible.--Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 1818A the following new section: ``hospital insurance benefits for disabled individuals who are not otherwise eligible ``Sec.
Every individual who-- ``(1) has not attained the age of 65; ``(2) would have been entitled to benefits under this part under section 226(b) except that such individual's earnings exceeded the substantial gainful activity amount (as defined in section 223(d)(4)); ``(3)(i) continues to have the disabling physical or mental impairment on the basis of which the individual would have been found to be under a disability or to have been a disabled qualified railroad retirement beneficiary, or (ii) is blind (within the meaning of section 216(i)(1)); and ``(4) is not otherwise entitled to benefits under this part, shall be eligible to enroll in the insurance program established by this part.
(1) An individual may enroll under this section only in such manner and form as may be prescribed in regulations, and only during an enrollment period prescribed in regulations.
There shall be a general enrollment period during the period beginning on January 1 and ending on March 31 of each year (beginning with 1997).
(1) The period (in this subsection referred to as a ``coverage period'') during which an individual is entitled to benefits under the insurance program under this part shall begin, for an individual who enrolls under subsection (b), on the first day of the month following the month in which the individual so enrolls.
An individual's coverage period under this section shall continue until the individual's enrollment is terminated as follows: ``(A) As of the month following the month in which the Secretary provides notice to the individual that the individual no longer meets the condition described in subsection (a)(3).
As of the month following the month in which the individual files notice that the individual no longer wishes to participate in the insurance program established by this part.
As of the month before the first month in which the individual becomes eligible for hospital insurance benefits under section 226(a) or 226A.
As of a date, determined under regulations of the Secretary, for nonpayment of premiums.
The regulations under subparagraph (D) may provide a grace period of not longer than 90 days, which may be extended to not to exceed 180 days in any case where the Secretary determines that there was good cause for failure to pay the overdue premiums within such 90-day period.
Termination of coverage under this section shall result in simultaneous termination of any coverage affected under any other part of this title.
The provisions of subsections (h) and (i) of section 1837 apply to enrollment and nonenrollment under this section in the same manner as they apply to enrollment and nonenrollment and special enrollment periods under section 1818.
(1)(A) Premiums for enrollment under this section shall be paid to the Secretary at such times, and in such manner, as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe, and shall be deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
(i) Subject to clause (ii), such premiums shall be payable for the period commencing with the first month of an individual's coverage period and ending with the month in which the individual dies or, if earlier, in which the individual's coverage period terminates.
Such premiums shall not be payable for any month in which the individual is eligible for benefits under this part pursuant to section 226(b).
The provisions of section 1818A(d)(2) shall apply to individuals enrolled under this section in the same manner as they apply to individuals enrolled under that section.''.
Premium for Supplementary Medical Insurance Benefits for Disabled Individuals Who Have Exhausted Other Entitlement and for Disabled Individuals Who Are Not Otherwise Eligible.-- (1) In general.--Section 1839 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395r) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (e), the monthly premium for each individual who is-- ``(A) eligible for enrollment under this part because such individual is eligible for benefits under part A under section 1818A or 1818B; and ``(B) enrolled under this part, shall be an amount determined under paragraph (2).
The amount of monthly premium for each individual described under paragraph (1) shall be established by the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration based on the individual's adjusted gross income, and determined over a sliding scale-- ``(A) beginning at 50 percent of the monthly actuarial rate for enrollees age 65 and over, as determined under subsection (a)(1) and applicable to such month, for individuals who have the minimum level of adjusted gross income established for eligibility under section 1818A; and ``(B) ending at 100 percent of the monthly actuarial rate for enrollees age 65 and over, as determined under subsection (a)(1) and applicable to such month, for individuals required to pay a monthly premium under section 1818A at the level established under section 1818(d).''.
Initial open enrollment and secondary payor requirements for disabled individuals who are not otherwise eligible.-- (A) Initial open enrollment.--Section 1837(g) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395p(g)) is amended-- (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2)(B); (ii) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and''; and (iii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) in the case of an individual who satisfies subsection (f) by reason of entitlement to enroll for benefits under section 1818B, the Secretary shall establish by regulation such individual's initial enrollment period.''.
Secondary payor.--Section 1862(b)(1)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395y(b)(1)(B)(i)) is amended by inserting ``or entitled to enroll for benefits under this title under section 1818B'' after ``section 226(b)''.
MEDICARE/MEDICAID INTEGRATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Description of Projects.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct demonstration projects under this section to demonstrate the manner in which States may use funds from the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act and the Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act (in this section referred to as the ``Medicare and Medicaid programs'') for the purpose of providing a more cost-effective full continuum of care for delivering services to meet the needs of chronically-ill elderly and disabled beneficiaries who are eligible for items and services under such programs, through integrated systems of care, with an emphasis on case management, prevention, and interventions designed to avoid institutionalization whenever possible.
The Secretary shall use funds from the amounts appropriated for the Medicare and Medicaid programs to make the payments required under subsection (d)(1).
Option to participate.--A State may not require an individual eligible to receive items and services under the Medicare and Medicaid programs to participate in a demonstration project under this section.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall make payments in accordance with subsection (d) for the conduct of demonstration projects that provide for integrated systems of care in accordance with subsection (a).
Not more than 10 demonstration projects shall be conducted under this section.
Applications.--Each State, or a coalition of States, desiring to conduct a demonstration project under this section shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including an explanation of a plan for evaluating the project.
The Secretary shall approve or deny an application not later than 90 days after the receipt of such application.
Payments.-- (1) In general.--For each calendar quarter occurring during a demonstration project conducted under this section, the Secretary shall pay to each entity designated under paragraph (3) an amount equal to the Federal capitated payment rate determined under paragraph (2).
Federal capitated payment rate.--The Secretary shall determine the Federal capitated payment rate for purposes of this section based on the anticipated Federal quarterly cost of providing care to chronically-ill elderly and disabled beneficiaries who are eligible for items and services under the Medicare and Medicaid programs and who have elected to participate in a demonstration project under this section.
Designation of entity.-- (A) In general.--Each State, or coalition of States, shall designate entities to directly receive the payments described in paragraph (1).
Requirement.--A State, or a coalition of States, may not designate an entity under subparagraph (A) unless such entity meets the quality, solvency, and coverage standards applicable to providers of items and services under the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
State payments.--Each State conducting, or in the case of a coalition of States, participating in a demonstration project under this section shall pay to the entities designated under paragraph (3) an amount equal to the product of (A) 100 percent minus the applicable Federal medical assistance percentage (as defined in section 2122(e) of the Social Security Act) for the State, and (B) the expenditures under the project attributable to the Medicaid program for items and services provided to chronically-ill elderly and disabled beneficiaries who have elected to participate in the demonstration.
Budget neutrality.--The aggregate amount of Federal payments to entities designated by a State, or coalition of States, under paragraph (3) for a fiscal year shall not exceed the aggregate amount of such payments that would otherwise have been made under the Medicare and Medicaid programs for such fiscal year for items and services provided to beneficiaries under such programs but for the election of such beneficiaries to participate in a demonstration project under this section.
Duration.-- (1) In general.--The demonstration projects conducted under this section shall be conducted for a 5-year period, subject to annual review and approval by the Secretary.
Termination.--The Secretary may, with 90 days' notice, terminate any demonstration project conducted under this section that is not in substantial compliance with the terms of the application approved by the Secretary under this section.
Oversight.--The Secretary shall establish quality standards for evaluating and monitoring the demonstration projects conducted under this section.
Such quality standards shall include reporting requirements which contain the following: (1) A description of the demonstration project.
An analysis of beneficiary satisfaction under such project.
An analysis of the quality of the services delivered under the project.
A description of the savings to the Medicare and Medicaid programs as a result of the demonstration project.
REPEAL OF MEDICARE AND MEDICAID COVERAGE DATA BANK.
In General.--Section 13581 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 is hereby repealed.
Application of the Social Security Act.--The Social Security Act shall be applied and administered as if section 13581 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (and the amendments made by such section) had not been enacted.
The amendments made by sections 2, 3, and 4 shall apply with respect to taxable years ending after 1996.