SECTION 1. INTERNATIONAL CLEAN TECHNOLOGY FUND.
In General.--The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286- 286oo) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.--The Secretary of the Treasury may contribute on behalf of the United States $400,000,000 to a fund which meets the requirements of subsection (b) (in this section referred to as the `Fund').
Requirements.--The requirements of this subsection are as follows: ``(1) Administration.--The Fund is established and administered by the Bank.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Fund is to promote accelerated deployment in developing countries of technologies designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by providing funds, primarily through multilateral development banks to promising projects in developing countries.
Coordination with the united nations framework on climate change.-- ``(A) In general.--The Bank is required to operate the Fund in a manner that is fully consistent and supportive of the United Nations Framework on Climate Change (in this paragraph referred to as the `UNFCCC').
Termination of operations.--The Bank is required to take necessary steps to conclude the operations of the Fund (including by not entering into new agreements for contributions to the Fund) on the commencement of operations of an international clean technology fund provided for the UNFCCC, unless the UNFCCC provides for continuation of the operations.
Authority to hold undisbursed funds in interest- bearing accounts.--Pending disbursement from the Fund of amounts provided under this section, the Bank has the authority to hold the amounts in interest-bearing accounts of the Fund.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are appropriated not more than $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2009.
Support of Zero Carbon and Cleaner Technologies.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall seek to ensure that-- ``(1) the priorities of the Fund include supporting `zero carbon' technologies, and improvements in energy efficiency in existing infrastructure that demonstrate an ability to be transformational in support of a country's path toward low carbon development; ``(2) the disbursement of amounts in the Fund demonstrate a preference for `zero carbon' technologies; and ``(3) funding from the Fund is provided to close the gap between higher cost, cleaner technologies and lower cost technologies.
Coordination With the International Clean Energy Foundation.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall seek to ensure that the duties and activities of the Fund are complementary to the duties and activities of the International Clean Energy Foundation as established by the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (Public Law 110-140).''.
Report to the Congress.--Within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Congress a report on the operations of any fund to which amounts made available under section 64 of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act are provided, including a description of-- (1) any projects for which amounts have been disbursed from the fund; (2) the effects expected by the Secretary of each such project on the overall greenhouse gas emissions from the country in which the project is being carried out; (3) the criteria and methodology used to determine the eligibility of proposed projects for funding from the fund; (4) the progress made in commencing operations of the fund, including any remaining obstacles to the operations; and (5) any project for which amounts have been disbursed from the fund which support coal or coal-related technologies, and a justification for support for the project from the fund, including a description of-- (A) the transformational nature of the project; (B) how the project is consistent with the national low carbon strategy of the country involved; (C) the degree to which the project reduced GHG emissions; and (D) the degree to which the technology was a higher cost technology relative to other available technologies.
Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that small and medium-sized enterprises-- (1) are an important source of technological innovation and economic development globally; (2) can and should play an important role in the dissemination and implementation of innovative clean technologies in developing countries; and (3) should be supported through any fund referred to in subsection (b).
USE OF GREENHOUSE GAS ACCOUNTING BY THE MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS.
Title XIII of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 26m-262m-7) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
USE OF GREENHOUSE GAS ACCOUNTING BY THE MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall seek to ensure that each multilateral development bank (as defined in section 1701(c)(4)) adopts and implements Greenhouse Gas (GHG) accounting in analyzing the benefits and costs of all projects for which funding is sought from the bank.
Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that adopting and implementing GHG accounting includes-- ``(1) calculating net carbon flows; ``(2) establishing uniform calculation techniques, with provision for modification as professional standards evolve; ``(3) making public the calculation techniques and the calculations; ``(4) adopting and making public a uniform carbon charge rate which appropriately reflects the global social cost of a unit of carbon emissions; and ``(5) performing carbon GHG accounting, including a full carbon charge for each project, defined as the net carbon flow multiplied by the carbon charge rate.