NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPACE.
Establishment of Academy.--The Administrator shall establish a National Academy of Space for the instruction and preparation of selected individuals for service in a space-related capacity in the employ of the United States or a United States corporation.
The Academy shall consist of a program of instruction leading to baccalaureate degrees in science, mathematics, and engineering at not less than 6 nor more than 10 universities selected under subsection (b)(3), with uniform curriculum criteria established by the Board, in conjunction with the Director.
The Academy shall establish a permanent headquarters within 85 miles of an existing National Aeronautics and Space Administration facility for its administrative staff and for use by the Board.
Board.-- (1) Membership.--The Administrator shall appoint a Board of the National Academy of Space (in this section referred to as the ``Board'') consisting of a broadly representative group of scientists, engineers, educators, and businessmen representing space-related industries, along with the president of each university selected under paragraph (3).
Functions.--The Board shall-- (A) develop an exam for secondary students testing knowledge in science, mathematics, and engineering, or select an exam from among existing national exams, and annually administer such exam; (B) establish uniform curriculum criteria for Member Institutes; (C) provide for the placement at one of the Member Institutes of students awarded scholarships under this section at the Academy; (D) administer the awarding of such scholarships; and (E) establish a placement program to assist recipients of awards under this section in obtaining positions described in subsection (k)(1)(A).
Selection of universities for academy.--The Board shall select not less than 6 nor more than 10 State universities that are regional in scope and that have outstanding degree programs in science, mathematics, and engineering to be designated as Member Institutes of the Academy.
The selections shall come from universities that have applied to the Board and that have demonstrated the willingness and capability to provide room, in a separate dormitory or portion of a dormitory, and board to scholarship winners and to offer the Academy's uniform curriculum.
Results of Exam.--The Board shall annually certify the top 10 scorers in each congressional district on the exam developed or selected under subsection (b)(2)(A), and award to the top 2 scorers in each State, and to the top scorer in each district who is not one of the top 2 scorers in the State, a scholarship under this section.
Scholarships Authorized.--(1) The Board shall establish a scholarship program for students to attend the Academy who are willing to commit themselves to service described in subsection (k).
A student who satisfies the requirements of subsection (f)(1) may receive a scholarship for a period of 1 academic year of undergraduate study at the Academy.
A student who satisfies the requirements of subsection (f)(2) may receive additional scholarships, each awarded for a period of 1 academic year, in order to complete his or her undergraduate course of study to a maximum of 3 such additional awards.
The individuals awarded scholarships under this section shall be referred to as the ``Space Corps''.
Disbursal of Scholarship Proceeds.--Scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of students who receive scholarships under this section to the institutions of higher education at which the students are enrolled.
No scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of a student unless the student is enrolled at an institution of higher education.
Eligibility.-- (1) Initial eligibility.--Only individuals who are-- (A) citizens or nationals of the United States, or aliens lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence; (B) majoring in the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering; and (C) enrolled in an institution of higher education as a full-time undergraduate student (as determined by the institution of higher education), shall be eligible for awards under this section.
Requirements for continuation awards.--A student who has received a scholarship under this section may receive a continuation award under subsection (d)(3) for a subsequent academic year of undergraduate education if the student-- (A) maintains a high level of academic achievement, as determined in accordance with the regulations of the Administrator; (B) continues to major in one of the physical, life, or computer sciences, mathematics, or engineering; and (C) continues to be enrolled at an institution of higher education as a full-time undergraduate student (as determined by the institution).
Waiver of Full-Time Attendance Requirement.--The Administrator may waive the full-time attendance requirements in this section in unusual circumstances.
Failure To Meet Eligibility Requirements.--In the event that the student fails to meet the requirements of this section, the student's eligibility to receive further scholarships (or scholarship proceeds) under this section shall be suspended in accordance with the regulations of the Administrator.
Reinstatement or Eligibility.--The Administrator shall determine circumstances under which eligibility of a scholarship recipient under this section may be reinstated if the recipient seeks to reenter school after an interruption of schooling for personal reasons, including, but not limited to, pregnancy, child-rearing, and other family responsibilities.
Scholarship Amount.-- (1) Amount of award.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amount of a scholarship awarded under this section shall cover the full tuition and fees of the student at the Academy.
Adjustments for insufficient appropriations.--In the event that funds available in a fiscal year are insufficient to fully fund all awards under this section, the amount paid to each student shall be reduced proportionately.
Service Requirement.-- (1) Space scholarships.--Each recipient of an award under this section shall, as a condition of the receipt of such award, agree to complete 4 years of-- (A) service in a space-related capacity in the employ of the United States or any corporation or other entity, organized under the laws of the United States or of a State of the United States, at least 50 percent of which is owned by United States nationals, and which is engaged in space-related research or endeavor; (B) postgraduate education in physical, life, or computer science, mathematics, or engineering at an institution of higher education; or (C) a combination of service and education described under subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Repayment obligation.--As part of the agreement required under paragraph (1), each recipient shall agree, in the event of failure to complete the service obligation described in paragraph (1), to repay an amount equal to-- (A) the total amount of awards received by such individual under this section; plus (B) the interest on such amounts which would be payable if at the time the amounts were received the amounts were loans bearing interest at the maximum legal prevailing rate, as determined by the Treasurer of the United States.
Such repayment shall be made within 1 year after the recipient has ceased to perform the service obligation described in paragraph (1).
Exceptions.--The Administrator may provide for the partial or total waiver or suspension of any service obligation or payment by an individual under this section in the same manner as is permitted under section 558 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 with respect to scholarships under subpart 1 of part D of title V of the Higher Education Act of 1965, except that pregnancy, child-rearing, or comparable family responsibilities shall also be grounds for deferral.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- (1) $9,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, of which $5,000,000 shall be for the establishment of a permanent headquarters for the Academy pursuant to section 1(a); (2) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; (3) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1998; (4) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and (5) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; (2) the term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and (3) the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and any other Commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States represented in the Congress by a Member or Delegate.