This Act may be cited as the ``Landmine Use Moratorium Act of 1995''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) On September 26, 1994, the President declared it to be a goal of the United States to eventually eliminate antipersonnel landmines.
On December 15, 1994, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution sponsored by the United States which calls for international efforts toward the eventual elimination of antipersonnel landmines.
According to the Department of State, there are an estimated 80,000,000 to 110,000,000 unexploded landmines in 62 countries, and millions of additional mines were laid in 1994.
Antipersonnel landmines are routinely used against civilian populations and kill and maim an estimated 26,000 people each year, or approximately 70 people each day.
The Secretary of State has noted that landmines have been called ``slow-motion weapons of mass destruction''.
There are hundreds of varieties of antipersonnel landmines, ranging from the simple $2 type to the more complex self-destructing type, all of which are incapable of distinguishing between civilians and combatants.
CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS CONVENTION REVIEW.
Implementation of United States Goal.--The President shall, at the 1995 review conference, actively support proposals to modify Protocol II to the 1980 Conventional Weapons Convention to implement as rapidly as possible the goal of the United States of the eventual elimination of antipersonnel landmines.
1995 Review Conference.--The 1995 review conference referred to in subsection (a) is the international conference sponsored by the United Nations to be held from September 25, 1995, through October 13, 1995, to review the 1980 Conventional Weapons Convention (CWC), including Protocol II to that convention, relating to landmines.
1980 Conventional Weapons Convention.--For purposes of this section, the term ``1980 Conventional Weapons Convention'' means the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed To Be Excessively Injurious or To Have Indisciminate Effects, together with the protocols relating thereto, done at Geneva on October 10, 1980.
MORATORIUM ON USE OF ANTIPERSONNEL LANDMINES.
United States Moratorium.--(1) During the one-year period beginning three years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United States Government shall not use antipersonnel landmines.
The moratorium under paragraph (1) does not apply to the use of antipersonnel landmines along internationally recognized national borders within a perimeter marked area that is monitored by military personnel and protected by adequate means to ensure the exclusion of civilians.
If the President determines, before the end of such one-year period, that the governments of other nations are implementing moratoriums similar to the moratorium by the United States under paragraph (1), the President may extend the period of that moratorium for such additional period as the President considers appropriate.
Other Nations.--The President shall actively encourage the governments of other nations to join the United States in solving the global landmine crisis by implementing, as an interim step toward the eventual elimination of antipersonnel landmines moratoriums on the use of antipersonnel landmines similar to the United States moratorium under subsection (a).
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to discourage the proliferation of antipersonnel landmines.
Prohibition.--The United States Government shall not sell, license for export, or transfer any defense article or service to any foreign government which the President determines sells, exports, or transfers antipersonnel landmines.
Waiver Authority.--The President may waive the applicability of the prohibition in subsection (b) to a foreign government if the President determines that there exists an emergency which makes it vital to the interest of the United States for the President to waive such prohibition.
Any such waiver may not take effect until the President transmits to Congress, in writing, notice of such waiver and the reasons for the waiver.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``antipersonnel landmine'' means any munition that-- (1) is placed under, on, or near the ground or other surface area; (2) is delivered by artillery, rocket, mortar, or similar means or dropped from an aircraft; and (3) is designed, constructed, or adapted to be detonated or exploded by the presence, proximity, or contact of a person.