This Act may be cited as the ``Surface Transportation Board Improvement Act of 1999''.
SCOPE OF AUTHORITY; EMPLOYEE PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENTS.
Scope of Authority.--Section 11321 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a)(1) The authority of the Board under this subchapter is exclusive.
A rail carrier or corporation participating in or resulting from a transaction approved by or exempted by the Board under this subchapter may carry out the transaction, own, and operate property, and exercise control or franchises acquired through the transaction without the approval of a State authority.
Subject to paragraph (3), a rail carrier, corporation, or person participating in an approved or exempted transaction described in paragraph (1) is exempt from State and municipal laws to the extent that the laws regulate combinations, mergers, or consolidations of rail carriers, as necessary to permit that rail carrier, corporation, or person to-- ``(A) carry out the transaction; and ``(B) hold, maintain, and operate property, and exercise control or franchises acquired through the transaction.
(A) If a purchase and sale, a lease, or a corporate consolidation or merger is involved in a transaction described in paragraph (1), the carrier, or corporation may carry out the transaction only with the assent of a majority, or the number required under applicable State law, of the votes of the holders of the capital stock of that corporation entitled to vote.
To meet the requirements of this paragraph-- ``(i) a vote referred to in subparagraph (A) shall occur at a regular meeting, or special meeting called for that purpose, of the stockholders referred to in that subparagraph; and ``(ii) the notice of the meeting shall indicate its purpose.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) The Board shall not, under any circumstances, have the authority under this subchapter to-- ``(1) break, modify, alter, override, or abrogate, in whole or in part, any provision of any collective bargaining agreement or implementing agreement made between the rail carrier and an authorized representative of the employees of the rail carrier under the Railway Labor Act (45 United States Code 151 et seq.
); or ``(2) provide the authority described in paragraph (1) to any other person, carrier or corporation.''.
Employee Protective Arrangements.--Section 11326 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a)(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, when approval is sought for a transaction under sections 11324 and 11325, the Board shall require the rail carrier to provide a fair arrangement at least as protective of the interests of employees who are affected by the transaction as the terms imposed under section 11347 of this title, as in effect on the day before December 29, 1995.
The arrangement and the order approving a transaction referred to in paragraph (1) shall be subject to the following conditions: ``(A) The employees of the affected rail carrier shall not be in a worse position related to their employment as a result of the transaction during the 6-year period beginning on the date on which the employee is adversely affected by an action taken by the affected rail carrier as a result of the transaction (or if an employee was employed for a lesser period of time by the rail carrier before the action became effective, for that lesser period).
(i) The rail carrier and the authorized representatives of the rail carrier's employees shall negotiate under the Railway Labor Act any arrangement regarding the selection of forces or assignment of employees caused by the Board's order of approval under sections 11324 or 11325.
Arbitration of the proposed arrangement may only occur if both parties agree to that process.
The Board shall not intervene in the negotiations or arbitration under this subparagraph unless requested to do so by both parties involved.
The Board shall not, under any circumstances, have the authority under this subchapter to-- ``(I) break, modify, alter, override, or abrogate, in whole or in part, any provision in any collective bargaining agreements or implementing agreements made between the rail carrier and an authorized representative of its employees under the Railway Labor Act; or ``(II) provide the authority described in subclause (I) to any other person, carrier, or corporation.
Beginning on the date of the enactment of the Surface Transportation Board Improvement Act of 1999, this subsection shall apply to any transaction proposed by a rail carrier under conditions previously imposed by the former Interstate Commerce Commission or the Surface Transportation Board under-- ``(A) section 5(2)(f) of the Interstate Commerce Commission Act before October 1, 1978; ``(B) section 11347 of this title, before December 29, 1995; or ``(C) this section.