ENHANCEMENT OF MANAGEMENT OF PROVISION OF SPECIALIZED TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION FOR DISABLED VETERANS.
Disabled Veterans.--Paragraph (1) of section 1706(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``(including veterans with spinal cord dysfunction, blindness, amputations, and mental illness)'' and inserting ``(including veterans with spinal cord dysfunction, blindness, traumatic brain injury, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance abuse disorder, and serious chronic mental illness, and veterans in need of prosthetics and sensory aids)''.
Organization of Capacity for Treatment and Rehabilitation.-- Paragraph (1) of that section is further amended-- (1) by inserting after ``ensure that the Department'' the following: ``, and each geographic service area and medical center of the Veterans Health Administration,''; and (2) in subparagraph (B)-- (A) by inserting after ``capacity of the Department'' the following: ``, including each such service area and medical center,''; and (B) by striking ``nationwide,'' and inserting ``nationwide and in each such service area,''.
Reports on Maintenance of Capacity.--Paragraph (2) of that section is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(2)''; (2) in subparagraph (A), as so designated-- (A) by striking ``April 1, 1999, April 1, 2000, and April 1, 2001'' and inserting ``April 1 each year''; and (B) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``during the preceding year''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(B) In order to ensure the accuracy of the reports under this paragraph, the Secretary shall-- ``(i) utilize uniform standards nationwide in the documentation of workload and cost data, adjusted for inflation; and ``(ii) carry out a quarterly assessment, through the directors of the geographic service areas of the Veterans Health Administration, of the capacity of such service areas, and of each medical center in such service areas, to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans within distinct programs or facilities of the Department.
The Inspector General of the Department shall, on an annual basis, conduct an audit of each geographic service area of the Veterans Health Administration in order to ensure that the Secretary complied with paragraph (1) in such service area during the preceding year.
The Inspector General shall also review each report of the Secretary under subparagraph (A) in order to determine the accuracy of such report.
Not later than June 1 each year, the Inspector General shall submit to the committees referred to in subparagraph (A) a report on the results of the audit conducted by the Inspector General under subparagraph (C), and the review conducted by the Inspector General under subparagraph (D), in such year.
Each report shall include the results of such audit and review and any other findings that the Inspector General considers appropriate.''.
Job Performance Standards.--(1) Paragraph (3) of that section is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (B), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, including positions of the directors of the medical centers, and positions of the directors of the geographic service areas, of the Veterans Health Administration''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(D) The Under Secretary for Health shall, on an annual basis, conduct a job performance evaluation of each employee in a position described in subparagraph (B) with respect to the job performance of such employee in carrying out the requirements of paragraph (1).
Each job performance evaluation shall cover the fiscal year ending in the year preceding such job performance evaluation, and shall be conducted using the standards for job performance prescribed under subparagraph (A).
Not later than 90 days after completing all job performance evaluations required for a fiscal year under subparagraph (D), the Secretary shall submit to the committees referred to in paragraph (2)(A) a report on the job performance evaluations.
The report for a fiscal year shall include the following: ``(i) The job performance evaluation of each employee subject to evaluation during the fiscal year, stated utilizing each standard for job performance under subparagraph (A) applicable to such employee.
An overall evaluation of the job performance of each such employee.''.
The Under Secretary for Health of the Department of Veterans Affairs shall prescribe the standards of job performance required by section 1706(b)(3) of title 38, United States Code, as amended by paragraph (1)(A), not later than January 30, 2002.
Not later than April 1, 2002, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report setting forth the standards of job performance prescribed under section 1706(b)(3) of title 38, United States Code, as amended by paragraph (1)(A).
Determination of Scope of Capacity.--Section 1706(b) of that title is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4)(A) For purposes of this subsection, the capacity of the Department, of each geographic service area of the Veterans Health Administration, and of each medical center of the Administration to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans (including veterans described in paragraph (1)) within distinct programs or facilities of the Department shall be determined by the Secretary utilizing a formula, to be prescribed by the Secretary, that addresses the following: ``(i) The number, and job responsibility, of the full-time equivalent employees providing specialized treatment or rehabilitative services for such veterans in such programs or facilities.
The number of staffed beds dedicated to specialized treatment or rehabilitative services for such veterans in such programs or facilities.
The number of veterans served by each such program or facility.
The number of units of service provided veterans by each such program or facility, including the number of inpatient and residential days of care and the number of outpatient visits.
The amounts expended in providing specialized treatment or rehabilitative services for such veterans through dedicated programs utilizing specialized staff.
The formula under subparagraph (A) may not use patient outcome data to measure the capacity of the Department to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans.