SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Preserving Access to Healthcare (PATH) Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Temporary non-application of Medicare phased-out indirect medical education adjustment factor.
Delay in implementation of Medicaid outpatient hospital services regulation.
Delay in phase out of the Medicare hospice budget neutrality adjustment factor.
Treatment of certain Medicaid family demonstration project.
Delay in implementation of certain provisions relating to Medicare rural health clinics and federally qualified health centers.
Mandatory State use of National Correct Coding Initiative.
Medicaid Improvement Fund technical correction.
Funding for the Medicare Improvement Fund.
TEMPORARY NON-APPLICATION OF MEDICARE PHASED-OUT INDIRECT MEDICAL EDUCATION ADJUSTMENT FACTOR.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, during the period beginning on October 1, 2008, and ending on March 31, 2009, section 412.322 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, shall be applied without regard to paragraph (c) of such section.
No Effect on Subsequent Periods.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed as having any effect on the application of section 412.322 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations, after March 31, 2009.
DELAY IN IMPLEMENTATION OF MEDICAID OUTPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES REGULATION.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, during the 6-month period that begins on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not finalize or otherwise implement provisions contained in the proposed rule published on September 28, 2007, on pages 55158 through 55166 of volume 72, Federal Register (relating to parts 440 and 447 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations).
DELAY IN PHASE OUT OF THE MEDICARE HOSPICE BUDGET NEUTRALITY ADJUSTMENT FACTOR.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including the provisions contained in the final rule published on August 8, 2008, on pages 46464 through 46522 of volume 73, Federal Register (relating to part 418 of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not phase out or eliminate the budget neutrality adjustment factor in the Medicare hospice wage index prior to April 1, 2009.
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN MEDICAID FAMILY DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administer of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and upon the request of the State of California, shall extend approval, and full Federal financial participation, of the State's Medicaid family planning demonstration project, which was approved under a waiver pursuant to section 1115 of the Social Security Act, until June 30, 2009, under the eligibility requirements and processes that were in place for such project as of the date before the first extension period for such project.
DELAY IN IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO MEDICARE RURAL HEALTH CLINICS AND FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTERS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not, prior to April 1, 2009, take any action (through promulgation of regulation, issuance of regulatory guidance, or other administrative action) to-- (1) finalize or otherwise implement provisions contained in the proposed rule published on June 27, 2008, on pages 36696 through 36719 of volume 73, Federal Register, that relate to-- (A) decertifying rural health clinics under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act that are determined to no longer be in nonurbanized areas; and (B) changes in the payment methodology for rural health clinics and federally qualified health centers under the Medicare program as described in sections 405.2410 and 405.2466(b)(1)(iii) of title 42, Code of Federal Regulations; or (2) promulgate or implement any rule or provisions similar to the provisions described in paragraph (1).
MANDATORY STATE USE OF NATIONAL CORRECT CODING INITIATIVE.
In General.--Section 1903(r) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(r)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(B)-- (A) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in clause (iii), by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) effective for claims filed on or after October 1, 2009, incorporate compatible methodologies of the National Correct Coding Initiative administered by the Secretary (or any successor initiative to promote correct coding and to control improper coding leading to inappropriate payment) and such other methodologies of that Initiative (or such other national correct coding methodologies) as the Secretary identifies in accordance with paragraph (3);''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Not later than September 1, 2009, the Secretary shall do the following: ``(A) Identify those methodologies of the National Correct Coding Initiative administered by the Secretary (or any successor initiative to promote correct coding and to control improper coding leading to inappropriate payment) which are compatible to claims filed under this title.
Identify those methodologies of such Initiative (or such other national correct coding methodologies) that should be incorporated into claims filed under this title with respect to items or services for which States provide medical assistance under this title and no national correct coding methodologies have been established under such Initiative with respect to title XVIII.
Notify States of-- ``(i) the methodologies identified under subparagraphs (A) and (B) (and of any other national correct coding methodologies identified under subparagraph (B)); and ``(ii) how States are to incorporate such methodologies into claims filed under this title.
Submit a report to Congress that includes the notice to States under subparagraph (C) and an analysis supporting the identification of the methodologies made under subparagraphs (A) and (B).''.
Extension for State Law Amendment.--In the case of a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes) which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation in order for the plan to meet the additional requirements imposed by the amendment made by subsection (a)(1)(C), the State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet these additional requirements before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of the session is considered to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
MEDICAID IMPROVEMENT FUND TECHNICAL CORRECTION.
In General.--Section 1941(b)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 7002(b) of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2008, is amended by inserting ``each of'' after ``for''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2008 (Public Law 110-252).
FUNDING FOR THE MEDICARE IMPROVEMENT FUND.
Section 1898(b)(1) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 7002(a) of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2008 (Public Law 110- 252) and as amended by section 188(a)(2) of the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-275) and by section 6 of the QI Program Supplemental Funding Act of 2008, is amended by striking ``$2,290,000,000'' and inserting ``$2,590,000,000''.