This Act may be cited as the ``Kids and Terrorism Preparedness Act''.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL AND RESCUE SERVICES FOR CHILDREN.
In General.--Section 1910(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300w-9(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``may make grants to States or accredited schools of medicine in States to support a program of demonstration projects for the expansion and improvement of emergency medical services for children'' and inserting ``may make grants to, or enter into contracts with, States, local government entities, Indian tribes, accredited schools of medicine, and nonprofit children's hospitals to improve emergency medical services for children who need treatment for trauma or critical care''; (2) by inserting before the first period the following: ``, including injury prevention activities and data collection''; (3) by striking ``3-year'' and inserting ``4-year''; and (4) by striking ``4th'' and inserting ``5th''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $45,000,000 to carry out section 1910 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300w-9).
APPROPRIATE MEDICINES FOR CHILDREN IN THE FACE OF BIOTERRORISM.
Meetings.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the Director of the National Institutes of Health, and the heads of other appropriate Federal entities, shall convene meetings with drug manufacturers, biotechnology manufacturers, and medical device manufacturers to formulate a plan for the development of new, and enhancement of existing, countermeasures (including diagnostics, drugs, vaccines, biologics, and medical devices) that may be appropriate to prevent and treat children who are exposed to biological agents and chemical, radiological, or nuclear toxins.
Notice of Products and Referrals.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall give public notice of the products (including diagnostics, drugs, vaccines, biologics, and medical devices) that should be studied with respect to children, in response to bioterrorist threats.
Contracts, Grants, and Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall award contracts, grants, or cooperative agreements to manufacturers described in subsection (a), and other entities with the appropriate capacity and expertise, to conduct needed studies relating to children.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section for fiscal year 2002.
Section 501(m) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290aa(m)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``2.5 percent'' and inserting ``5 percent''; and (B) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following: ``(2) Condition.--A condition of paragraph (1) is that 2.5 percent of the funds subject to paragraph (1) may only be available for the provision of emergency mental health and substance abuse treatment and prevention services to children who are directly affected by terrorist acts.''.
CRISIS RESPONSE GRANTS TO ADDRESS CHILDREN'S NEEDS.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after section 319G (42 United States Code 247d-7) the following: ``SEC.
CRISIS RESPONSE GRANTS TO ADDRESS CHILDREN'S NEEDS.
In General.--The Secretary may award grants to eligible entities described in subsection (b) to enable such entities to increase the coordination and development of bioterrorism preparedness efforts relating to the needs of children.
Eligibility.--To be an eligible entity under this subsection, an entity shall-- ``(1) be a State, political subdivision of a State, a consortium of 2 or more States or political subdivisions of States, a public or private non-profit agency or organization, or other organization that serves children as determined appropriate by the Secretary; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--An entity shall use amounts received under a grant under this section to carry out activities for the coordination and development of bioterrorism preparedness efforts relating to the physical- and health-related needs of children.
Funding.--The Secretary may use amounts appropriated under the 2001 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Recovery from and Response to Terrorist Attacks on the United States (Public Law 107- 38) to carry out this section.