This Act may be cited as the ``Renovate and Enhance Veterans' Meeting Halls and Posts Act of 2010'' or the ``REVAMP Act of 2010''.
COMPETITIVE GRANTS TO VETERANS SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS FOR FACILITY REHABILITATION.
Grants.--Section 107 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5307) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Competitive Grants to Veterans Service Organizations for Facility Rehabilitation.-- ``(1) Authority.--Using the amounts made available under section 106(a)(4) in each fiscal year for grants under this subsection, the Secretary shall make grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible veterans service organizations for use for repairs and rehabilitation of existing facilities of such organizations.
Eligible veterans service organizations.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `eligible veterans service organization' means-- ``(A) an entity that is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(19)) and is organized on a local or area basis; and ``(B) a local or area chapter, post, or other unit of a national, regional, Statewide, or other larger entity of which local or area chapters, posts, or units are members, that is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(19)).
Such term does not include any such national, regional, Statewide, or other larger entity.
Limitations.-- ``(A) Amount.--No eligible veterans service organization may receive grant amounts under this subsection, from the amounts made available for any single fiscal year, in an amount exceeding the lesser of-- ``(i) the cost of the proposed repair or rehabilitation; or ``(ii) $200,000.
Timing.--Any eligible veterans service organization that receives grant amounts under this subsection from amounts made available for a fiscal year shall be ineligible for any grant from any amounts made available for such grants for any of the succeeding 5 fiscal years.
Applications.--Applications for assistance under this subsection may be submitted only by eligible veterans service organizations, and shall be in such form and in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary shall establish.
Such applications shall include a plan for the proposed repair or rehabilitation activities to be conducted using grant amounts under this subsection.
Selection; criteria.--The Secretary shall select applications to receive grants under this subsection pursuant to a competition and based on criteria for such selection, which shall include-- ``(A) the extent of need for such assistance; ``(B) the quality of the plan proposed for repair or rehabilitation of the facility involved; ``(C) the capacity or potential capacity of the applicant to successfully carry out the plan; and ``(D) such other factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Prohibition of construction or acquisition.--No amounts from a grant under this subsection may be used for the construction or acquisition of a new facility.''.
Funding.--Subsection (a) of section 106 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5306(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and (3)'' and inserting ``(3), and (4)''; (2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) For each fiscal year, after reserving amounts under paragraphs (1) and (2) and allocating amounts under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall allocate $50,000,000 (subject to sufficient amounts remaining after such reservations and allocation) for grants under section 107(g).''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out sections 106(a)(4) and 107(g) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as added by the amendments made by this section, not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.