This Act may be cited as the ``Office of Indian Women and Families Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that: (1) The primary responsibilities of the Bureau of Indian Affairs are to encourage and assist Indian people to manage their own affairs under the trust relationship between Indians and the Federal Government, and to facilitate, with maximum involvement of Indian people, full development of their human and natural resource potential.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs coordinates its activities with Indian tribal governments, Federal agencies and departments, and other organizations and groups who share similar interests and programs related to Indians.
Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs and projects impact directly and significantly on the lives of America's Indian people.
The unique roles and responsibilities of Indian women contribute culturally, socially, and economically to the well- being of Indian people, but these contributions are often not fully realized and are undervalued and overlooked within the policies, program, and projects of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Indian children have special educational and social service needs to prepare them for traditional tribal responsibilities and nontribal social and employment opportunities.
The particular responsibilities, contributions, and needs of Indian women and families can and should be taken into account to improve Bureau of Indian Affairs policy formulation and program operations for the direct benefit of Indian women and families and Indian people as a whole.
Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs and projects, including its coordination and liaison with other Federal, State, and local entities, can be more responsive and enhanced when Indian women and families are considered an integral element of the process as well as contributors to the success of these policies, programs, and projects.
There is a need for an Office of Indian Women and Families in the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the purpose of encouraging and promoting the participation and integration of Indian women and families into Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs, projects, and activities, thereby improving the effectiveness of its mandate and the status and lives of Indian women and families.
The purposes of this Act are: (1) To identify and integrate the issues related to Indian women and families into all Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs, projects, and activities.
To establish an office to serve as a focal point for all Federal Government policy issues affecting Indian women and families for purposes of both economic and social development.
To collect data related to the specific roles, concerns, and needs of Indian women, and Indian families, and use such data to support policy, program, and project implementation throughout all offices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other Federal agencies, and to monitor the impacts of these policies, programs and projects.
To enhance the economic and social participation of Indian women and families in all levels of planning, decisionmaking, and policy development within the Bureau of Indian Affairs, its area offices, and tribal governments and reservations.
To conduct research and collect relevant studies relating to special needs of Indian women and families.
To develop pilot programs and projects to strengthen activities of the Bureau of Indian Affairs involving Indian women and families, and serve as models for future endeavors and planning.
To ensure a liaison with other Federal departments and agencies, State and local governments, tribally controlled community colleges, other academic institutions, any public or private organizations, and tribal governments that serve Indian peoples.
To ensure training endeavors for Bureau of Indian Affairs offices and agencies at the national, area, and local levels to ensure Bureau personnel and any other beneficiaries of Bureau and other governmental programs understand the purposes and policies of the office established by this Act.
To develop policy-level programs, with the assistance of the Assistant Secretary and other senior-level personnel of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, to ensure that systems, directives, management strategies and other related methodologies are implemented to meet the purposes of this Act.
To strengthen the role of Indian women and families by developing and ensuring culturally appropriate policies and programs.
To encourage other actions that serve to more fully integrate Indian women and families as participants in and agents for change in the Federal policy and program activities of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Indian woman'' means a woman who is a member of an Indian tribe.
The term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 United States Statutes at Large 688), which is recognized as eligible for special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF INDIAN WOMEN AND INDIAN FAMILIES.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department of the Interior the ``Office of Indian Women and Families'' (hereinafter referred to as the ``Office'').
Director.--The Office shall be under the management of a director (hereinafter referred to as the ``Director''), who shall be appointed by the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.
The Director shall report directly to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.
Compensation.--The Director shall be compensated at the rate prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
Tenure.--The Director shall serve at the discretion of the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.
Vacancy.--A vacancy in the position of Director shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Duties.--The Director shall administer the Office and carry out the purposes and functions of this Act.
The Director shall take such action as may be necessary in order to integrate Indian women and family issues into the Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs, projects and activities.
It shall be the function of the Office to develop a Policy Paper for Indian women and families to articulate the objectives of the Office, to serve as a guideline for systematically integrating Indian women and families issues into the Bureau of Indian Affairs policies, programs, projects, and activities, and to establish and detail indicators and benchmarks for measuring the success of the Office.
Establishment of a Policy Task Force.--The Director, in consultation with the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs, shall establish a temporary policy task force on Indian women and families.
Membership.--Members of the task force shall be appointed by the Director.
The task force shall include representatives from Federal agencies and departments, relevant Indian organizations, State agencies and organizations, Indian tribal governments, institutions of higher education, and nongovernmental and private sector organizations and institutions.
Functions.--The policy task force shall: (1) Ensure that the Policy Paper for Indian women and families prepared by the Bureau of Indian Affairs articulates a set of goals, objectives, management strategies, and monitoring systems for the improvement of all Federal programs, including programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, designed to improve the quality of life of Indian women and families.
Recommend a permanent policy mechanism to be established in the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the continuous monitoring and refinement of policy and programs designed to improve the quality of life of Indian women and families.
Recommend a permanent policy mechanism to be established in the Bureau of Indian Affairs for the purpose of collecting and disseminating to Congress and the public information and other data relevant to the progress of the policy and programs designed to improve the quality of life of Indian women and families.
Termination.--The task force shall terminate upon the expiration of 14 months following the date of the enactment of this Act.
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF INDIAN AFFAIRS.
The Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs shall: (1) Ensure that the Office receives adequate resources to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Ensure that senior-level staff members and other employees of the Bureau of Indian Affairs are participants in and responsible for assisting in carrying out the purposes of this Act relating to the improvement of policies and programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Indian Affairs, shall, on or before March 15 of each of the 2 calendar years next following the calendar year in which this Act is enacted, and biennially thereafter, report to Congress on the progress of achieving the purposes of this Act.
Such report shall include, but not be limited to, information relative to the current status of progress of the Bureau of Indian Affairs' policy on Indian women and Indian families in fulfilling its objectives, programs and projects, including how well the Bureau of Indian Affairs has operationally integrated the issue of Indian women and families into its overall policies, programs, projects and activities.
Such report shall include a review of data gathered to assess and improve the quality of life of Indian women and families, including specific recommendations to improve the education, health, employment, economic, housing, social, and other services within the Bureau of Indian Affairs relating to Indian women and families.
Commencing with fiscal year 1994, and each fiscal year thereafter, there are authorized to be appropriated for carrying out the provisions of this Act, $2,000,000.