This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf Coast Conservation Corps Act of 2010''.
Congress finds the following: (1) On April 20, 2010, the mobile offshore drilling unit Deepwater Horizon, operated by BP, P.L.C.
(in this Act referred to as ``BP''), exploded and sank, triggering the oil spill that is the worst environmental disaster in the history of the United States.
Since then, BP has been unsuccessful in stemming the discharge of oil into the Gulf of Mexico, currently estimated at a rate of up to 60,000 barrels of oil per day.
Many who live in the area of the Gulf of Mexico are dependent on the Gulf for their livelihoods.
The fishing industry, including seafood processing and related wholesale and retail businesses, supports over 200,000 jobs with related economic activity of $5,500,000,000.
As of May 25, 2010, commercial and recreational fishing were prohibited within a 54,096 square-mile area, approximately 22 percent of Federal waters of the Gulf Exclusive Economic Zone.
The tourist industry contributed 620,000 jobs and over $9,000,000,000 in wages to the Gulf region.
The oil spill will require a dedicated and trained workforce working over an extended period of time to clean up and restore the damage.
Contracts and cooperative agreements between Federal agencies and State and local governments and other entities empower communities and are cost-effective tools that provide positive social and environmental benefits.
The use of such contracts and agreements should be encouraged as a means to rehabilitate public land affected or altered by the BP oil spill, and enhance and maintain environmentally important land and water.
Joint collaborations between the Federal agencies, private businesses, and local, State, and Federal service and conservation corps are particularly beneficial, as the collaborations provide the opportunity to prepare for productive lives while engaged in meaningful and educational public service opportunities, and the public with cost-saving human resources to assist in conserving, maintaining, and protecting public land.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to create a Gulf Coast Conservation Corps to perform rehabilitation and enhancement projects in any area of the Gulf of Mexico affected by the oil discharged as a result of the explosion on and sinking of the mobile offshore drilling unit Deepwater Horizon by creating a workforce to collect the oil discharged, and restore affected wildlife and damaged ecosystems, in such areas; (2) to create jobs in the Gulf of Mexico region that offer unemployed individuals a chance to obtain skills and experience so that they are better equipped to gain productive employment related to environmental restoration; and (3) to provide such individuals the opportunity to serve their communities and the Country.
GULF COAST CONSERVATION CORPS.
Establishment.--There is established the Gulf Coast Conservation Corps (in this Act referred to as the ``Corps''), which shall be administered by the President and shall carry out rehabilitation and enhancement projects described in subsection (b).
Rehabilitation and Enhancement Projects.--The President, through the Corps, shall hire individuals that meet the requirements described in subsection (c) to carry out rehabilitation and enhancement projects involving the construction, maintenance, cleaning, and restoration (including the restoration of wildlife and plantlife) in any area of the Gulf of Mexico affected by the oil discharged as a result of the explosion on and sinking of the mobile offshore drilling unit Deepwater Horizon.
Participants.-- (1) In general.--To be selected as a participant in the Corps, an individual-- (A) shall be otherwise unemployed; (B) shall be a citizen or legal permanent resident of the United States; (C) shall be physically capable of performing the work required by the specific project, subject to any reasonable accommodations that may be made for such individual in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act; and (D) shall not be enrolled as a full-time student in any institution of higher education, vocational or job training school or program and may not prematurely terminate such enrollment to obtain employment under this Act.
No displacement of existing employees or positions of permanent employment.--Individuals participating in the Corps whose positions are funded under this Act may not displace other employees whose positions are not funded under this Act.
Compensation.--Individuals participating in the Corps shall be compensated at the same rates, including periodic increases, as employees who are similarly situated in similar occupations and who have similar training, experience, and skills, and such rates shall be in accordance with applicable law, but in no event less than the higher of the rate specified in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 206(a)(1)) or the applicable State or local minimum wage law.
Not federal employees.--Individuals participating in the Corps shall not be considered employees of the Federal Government.
Authorized Uses of Funds.--In administering the Corps, the President may carry out the following: (1) Enter into a contract or cooperative agreement with-- (A) any local, State, or Federal service or conservation corps, including a service or conservation corps carried out by the Corporation for National and Community Service under the national service laws; (B) a department of natural resources, agriculture, or marine (or an equivalent department) of any State; or (C) a nongovernmental or private organization; or (D) any other agency or organization that may assist the President in administering the Corps.
Provide the Corps with technical assistance, administrative support, and assistance in training participants.
Monitor and evaluate the Corps to ensure that the Corps is in compliance with the requirements of this Act.
Consult with international authorities on the best methods and practices for carrying out the projects described in subsection (b).
Carry out research and development activities to determine the best methods and practices for carrying out the projects described in subsection (b).
FUNDING FROM OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND.
The cost of carrying out this Act shall be treated as removal costs for purposes of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (33 United States Code 2701 et sequentes), including section 1012 of that Act (33 United States Code 2712; relating to the use of amounts in the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund).
In this Act: (1) In general.--The terms ``discharge''; ``oil''; and ``removal'' have the meanings given the terms in section 1001 of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (33 United States Code 2701).
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
National service laws.--The term ``national service laws'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12511).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 and 2012.