This Act may be cited as the ``National Resource Governance Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) energy prices have risen dramatically, leading to significant harm to particular sectors of the economy; (2) an affordable domestic energy supply is vital to the continued growth and vitality of our Nation's economy; (3) an uninterrupted supply of oil and other energy is necessary to protect the United States national security interests; and (4) the United States continued dependence on foreign sources of energy, particularly on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), for the majority of its petroleum and energy needs is harmful to our national security and will not guarantee lower fuel prices and protect our economy.
There is established the National Energy Self-Sufficiency Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Duties.--The duties of the Commission are-- (1) to investigate and study issues and problems relating to issues involving the importation of and dependence on foreign sources of energy; (2) to evaluate proposals and current arrangements with respect to such issues and problems with the goal of seeking out ways to make the United States self-sufficient in the production of energy by the year 2010; (3) to explore whether alternate sources of energy such as ethanol, solar power, electricity, natural gas, coal, hydrogen, wind energy, and any other forms of alternative power sources should be considered, including other potential and actual sources; (4) to investigate the affordability of oil exploration and drilling in areas which currently are not being used for drilling, whether because of the cost of doing so, because of current law, or because of environmental regulation that may prohibit such drilling; (5) to appear at any congressional oversight hearing before the proper congressional oversight committee to testify as to the progress and operation of the Commission and its findings; (6) to consider tax credits and other financial incentives, along with expanded drilling in areas such as the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and offshore, to help promote and establish the viability and research of alternative forms of energy and domestic oil exploration; (7) to prepare and submit to the Congress and the President a report in accordance with section 9; and (8) to take into account the adverse environmental impact of its proposals.
Limitation.--This Act shall not permit the Commission to recommend an increase in taxes or other revenues or import restrictions on oil or other commodities.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by the President, 1 of whom shall be designated as chairman by the President.
2 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
1 member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
2 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Term.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Quorum.--5 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may conduct meetings.
Appointment Deadline.--The first appointments made under subsection (a) shall be made within 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
First Meeting.--The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the chairman and shall be held within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Vacancy.--A vacancy on the Commission resulting from the death or resignation of a member shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Continuation of Membership.--If any member of the Commission who was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress or as an officer or employee of a government leaves that office, or if any member of the Commission who was not appointed in such a capacity becomes an officer or employee of a government, the member may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the 90-day period beginning on the date the member leaves that office or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Pay.-- (1) Nongovernment employees.--Each member of the Commission who is not otherwise employed by the United States Government shall be entitle to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which he or she is engaged in the actual performance of duties as a member of the Commission.
Government employees.--A member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the United States Government shall serve without additional compensation.
Travel.--Members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.-- (1) Appointment.--The chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The chairman of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of that title.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Meetings.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such time and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission or a member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department, agency, or court information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the chairman of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency or chief judge of a Federal court shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Facilities and Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such facilities and support services as the Commission may request.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of a Federal department or agency may make any of the facilities or services of the agency available to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Expenditures and Contracts.--The Commission or, on authorization of the Commission, a member of the Commission may make expenditures and enter into contracts for the procurement of such supplies, services, and property as the Commission or member considers appropriate for the purposes of carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Such expenditures and contracts may be made only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments and agencies of the United States.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
The Commission shall submit to the Congress and the President a report not later than 2 years after the date of its first meeting.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislative or administrative action as it considers appropriate.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 30 days after the date on which it submits its report under section 9.
There is authorized to be appropriated $3,500,000 to carry out this Act for each fiscal year for the duration of the Commission.