TRANSFER BY CERTAIN MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF PORTION OF ENTITLEMENT TO EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE MONTGOMERY GI BILL.
In General.--Chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 3020 as section 3020A; and (2) by inserting after section 3019 the following new section 3020: ``Sec.
Transfer of entitlement to basic educational assistance: certain members of the Armed Forces agreeing to additional service ``(a) In General.--Subject to the provisions of this section, an individual described in subsection (b) who is entitled to basic educational assistance under this subchapter may transfer to one or more of the dependents specified in subsection (c) a portion of such individual's entitlement to such assistance, subject to the limitation under subsection (d).
Eligible Individuals.--An individual referred to in subsection (a) is any member of the Armed Forces who-- ``(1) has completed at least six years of service in the Armed Forces; and ``(2) enters into an agreement to serve at least four more years as a member of the Armed Forces.
Eligible Dependents.--An individual referred to in subsection (a) may transfer entitlement to basic educational assistance under this section as follows: ``(1) To the individual's spouse.
To one or more of the individual's children.
To a combination of the individuals referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2).
Limitation on Months Transferable.--The total number of months of entitlement to basic educational assistance transferable by an individual under this section may not exceed the lesser of-- ``(1) the number of months equal to one quarter of the aggregate number of months of basic educational assistance to which the individual is entitled under this subchapter (as determined under section 3013 of this title); or ``(2) the number of months of entitlement to basic educational assistance which remain unused by the individual at the time of transfer under this section.
Designation of Transferee.--An individual transferring an entitlement to basic educational assistance under this section shall-- ``(1) designate the dependent or dependents to whom such entitlement is being transferred; ``(2) designate the number of months of such entitlement to be transferred to each such dependent; and ``(3) specify the period for which the transfer shall be effective for each dependent designated under paragraph (1).
Time for Transfer; Revocation and Modification.--(1) Subject to the time limitation for use of entitlement under section 3031 of this title, an individual entitled to transfer basic educational assistance under this subchapter may transfer such entitlement at any time, without regard to whether the individual is a member of the Armed Forces when the transfer is executed.
(A) An individual transferring entitlement under this section may modify or revoke at any time the transfer of any unused portion of the entitlement so transferred.
The modification or revocation of the transfer of entitlement under this paragraph shall be made by the submittal of written notice of the action to both the Secretary concerned and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Additional Administrative Matters.--(1) The use of any entitlement to basic educational assistance transferred under this section shall be charged against the entitlement of the individual making the transfer at the rate of one month for each month of transferred entitlement that is used.
Except as provided under subsection (f)(2) and subject to paragraphs (5) and (6), a dependent to whom entitlement is transferred under this section is entitled to basic educational assistance under this subchapter in the same manner and at the same rate as the individual from whom the entitlement was transferred.
The monthly rate of educational assistance payable to a dependent to whom entitlement is transferred under this section shall be the monthly rate payable under sections 3105 and 3022 of this title at the time of the use of such entitlement by the dependent.
The death of an individual transferring an entitlement under this section shall not affect the use of the entitlement by the dependent to whom the entitlement is transferred.
Notwithstanding section 3031 of this title, a child to whom entitlement is transferred under this section may not use any entitlement so transferred after attaining the age of 26 years.
The administrative provisions of this chapter (including the provisions set forth in section 3034(a)(1) of this title) shall apply to the use of entitlement transferred under this section, except that the dependent to whom the entitlement is transferred shall be treated as the eligible veteran for purposes of such provisions.
The purposes for which a dependent to whom entitlement is transferred under this section may use such entitlement shall include the pursuit and completion of the requirements of a secondary school diploma (or equivalency certificate).
Overpayment.--(1) In the event of an overpayment of basic educational assistance with respect to a dependent to whom entitlement is transferred under this section, the dependent and the individual making the transfer shall be jointly and severally liable to the United States for the amount of the overpayment for purposes of section 3685 of this title.
Except as provided in paragraph (3), if an individual transferring entitlement under this section fails to complete the service agreed to by the individual under subsection (b)(2) in accordance with the terms of the agreement of the individual under that subsection, the amount of any transferred entitlement under this section that is used by a dependent of the individual as of the date of such failure shall be treated as an overpayment of basic educational assistance under paragraph (1).
Paragraph (2) shall not apply in the case of an individual who fails to complete service agreed to by the individual-- ``(A) by reason of the death of the individual; or ``(B) for a reason referred to in section 3011(a)(1)(A)(ii)(I) of this title.
Construction With Other Transfer Authority.--The authority of an individual to transfer entitlement to basic educational assistance under this section is in addition to the authority, if any, of the individual to transfer entitlement to basic educational assistance under section 3020A of this title.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations for purposes of this section.
Such regulations shall specify the manner and effect of an election to modify or revoke a transfer of entitlement under subsection (f)(2) and shall specify the manner of the applicability of the administrative provisions referred to in subsection (g)(6) to a dependent to whom entitlement is transferred under this section.
Secretary Concerned Defined.--Notwithstanding section 101(25) of this title, in this section, the term `Secretary concerned' means-- ``(1) the Secretary of the Army with respect to matters concerning the Army; ``(2) the Secretary of the Navy with respect to matters concerning the Navy or the Marine Corps; ``(3) the Secretary of the Air Force with respect to matters concerning the Air Force; and ``(4) the Secretary of Defense with respect to matters concerning the Coast Guard, or the Secretary of Transportation when it is not operating as a service in the Navy.''.
Source of Funds for Increased Usage.--(1) Section 3035(b)(4) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or 3020A'' after ``section 3020''.
Section 2006(b)(2)(D) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or 3020A'' after ``section 3020''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 30 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 3020 and inserting the following new items: ``3020.
Transfer of entitlement to basic educational assistance: certain members of the Armed Forces agreeing to additional service.
Transfer of entitlement to basic educational assistance: members of the Armed Forces with critical military skills.