This Act may be cited as the ``Private Mortgage Insurance Consumer Protection Act''.
NOTIFICATION OF CANCELLATION RIGHTS FOR PRIVATE MORTGAGE INSURANCE.
In General.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 United States Code 1631 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 125 the following new section: ``SEC.
NOTIFICATION OF CANCELLATION RIGHTS FOR PRIVATE MORTGAGE INSURANCE.
Notice of Right or Lack of Right To Cancel.--If a consumer is required to obtain and maintain private mortgage insurance as a condition for entering into a residential mortgage transaction, the creditor shall disclose, in writing at the time the transaction is entered into, whether or not the private mortgage insurance may be canceled by the consumer at any time while the mortgage is outstanding.
Information Required To Be Disclosed if Insurance Is Cancelable.--If private mortgage insurance is required for a residential mortgage transaction and may be canceled by the consumer at any time while the mortgage is outstanding, the creditor shall disclose in writing the following information at the time the transaction is entered into: ``(1) Identifying information.--Such information as may be necessary to permit the consumer to communicate with the creditor, any subsequent servicer of the mortgage, or the issuer of the private mortgage insurance concerning the insurance.
Conditions on cancellation.--Any condition required to be met before the private mortgage insurance may be canceled by the consumer, including the following: ``(A) If a condition for canceling the private mortgage insurance is based on a minimum ratio between the principal on the loan remaining outstanding and either the original or the current value of the property securing the loan, such ratio.
Information relating to any requirement for an appraisal of the property as a condition for the cancellation of the insurance.
Information relating to the time required for canceling the insurance.
Cancellation procedures.--The procedures required to be followed by the consumer in canceling the private mortgage insurance.
Information Required To Be Disclosed With Each Periodic Statement.--If a consumer is required to obtain and maintain private mortgage insurance as a condition for entering into a residential mortgage transaction, the person servicing the mortgage shall include in or with each written statement of account provided to the consumer after December 31, 1995, while such insurance is in effect, but not less than annually-- ``(1) the information required to be disclosed under subsection (b); or ``(2) a clear and conspicuous written statement containing-- ``(A) a statement that the consumer may be able to cancel the private mortgage insurance (if such is the case); and ``(B) an address and telephone number which the consumer may use to contact the creditor or the person servicing the mortgage to determine whether the consumer has the right to cancel the private mortgage insurance and, if so, the conditions and procedures for canceling such insurance.
Notices Furnished Without Cost to the Consumer.--No fee or other cost may be imposed on any consumer with respect to the provision of any notice or information to the consumer pursuant to this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: ``(1) Mortgage insurance.--The term `mortgage insurance' means insurance, including any mortgage guaranty insurance, against the nonpayment of, or default on, a mortgage or loan involved in a residential mortgage transaction.
Private mortgage insurance.--The term `private mortgage insurance' means mortgage insurance other than mortgage insurance made available under the National Housing Act, title 38 of the United States Code, or title V of the National Housing Act of 1949.''.
Amendment Relating to Liability for Violations.--Section 130(a) of the Truth in Lending Act (15 United States Code 1640(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In the case of any failure make any disclosure required under section 126, paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `3 times the amount of any actual damage' for `any actual damage'.
Scope of Applicability.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply with respect to residential mortgage transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 United States Code 1631 et sequentes) is amended by striking the item relating to section 126 and inserting the following new item: ``126.
Notification of cancellation rights for private mortgage insurance.