This Act may be cited as the ``Environmental Finance Act of 1993''.
It is the purpose of this Act to require the establishment of an Environmental Financial Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as ``the Board'') to provide expert advice and recommendations to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter referred to as ``the Administrator'') and to the Congress on issues, trends, options, innovations, and tax matters affecting the cost and financing of environmental protection by State and local governments.
The Committee shall study methods to lower costs of environmental infrastructure and services, increase investment in public and private purpose environmental infrastructure, and build State and local capacity to plan and pay for environmental infrastructure and services.
It is the further purpose of the Act to require the Administrator to establish and support Environmental Finance Centers in institutions of higher learning.
These centers shall serve to improve the capability of State and local governments to manage environmental programs.
The Environmental Finance Centers shall receive Federal funding at first with the goal that they eventually become financially self sufficient.
ENVIRONMENTAL FINANCIAL ADVISORY BOARD.
In General.-- (1) The Administrator shall establish an Environmental Financial Advisory Board to provide expert advice on issues affecting the costs and financing of environmental activities at the Federal, State, and local level.
The Board shall report to the Administrator, and shall make its services and expertise available to the appropriate Committees of Congress.
The Board shall consist of thirty-five members selected by the Administrator.
The members of the Board shall each serve for a term of two years, except that twenty of the members initially appointed to the Board shall serve for a term of one year.
The members of the Board shall be persons with expertise in financial matters and shall be chosen from among elected officials, national trade and environmental organizations, the finance, banking, and legal communities, business and industry, and academia.
The members of the Board shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair, who shall each serve a term of two years.
After establishing appropriate rules and procedures for its operations, the Board shall-- (A) work with the Environmental Protection Agency's Science Advisory Board to identify and develop methods to integrate risk and finance considerations into environmental decisionmaking; (B) identify and examine strategies to enhance environmental protection in urban areas, reduce disproportionate risk facing urban communities, and promote economic revitalization and environmentally sustainable development; (C) develop and recommend initiatives to expand opportunities for the export of United States financial services and environmental technologies; (D) develop alternative financing mechanisms to assist State and local governments in paying for environmental programs; (E) develop alternative financing mechanisms and strategies to meet the unique needs of small and economically disadvantaged communities; and (F) undertake such other activities as the Board determines will further the purposes of this Act.
The Board may recommend to the Administrator and to the Congress legislative and policy initiatives to make financing for environmental protection more available and less costly.
The Board shall hold open meetings and seek input from the public and other interested parties in accordance with provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code Supp., App.
), and shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of such Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated the sum of $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 to carry out this section.
In General.--The Administrator shall establish and support Environmental Finance Centers in each of the ten Federal regions.
These centers shall coordinate their activities with the Board, and are authorized to-- (1) provide on- and off-site training of State and local officials; (2) publish newsletters, course materials, proceedings, and other publications relating to financing of environmental infrastructure; (3) initiate and conduct conferences, seminars, and advisory panels on specific finance issues relating to environmental programs and projects; (4) establish electronic database and contact services to disseminate information to public entities on financing alternatives for State and local environmental programs; (5) generate case studies and special reports; (6) develop inventories and surveys of financial issues and needs of State and local governments; (7) identify financial programs, initiatives, and alternative financing mechanisms for training purposes; (8) hold public meetings on finance issues; and (9) collaborate with one another on projects and exchange information.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated the sum of $2,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 for the Environmental Finance Center program established pursuant to this section.
The Administrator is authorized to grant such funds to institutions of higher learning to carry out the provisions of this section.