TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF 4.3 CENTS OF FUEL TAX RATES.
In General.--Section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to imposition of tax on gasoline and diesel fuel) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Temporary Suspension of 4.3 Cents of Fuel Tax Rates.-- ``(1) In general.--During the temporary rate reduction period, each rate of tax referred to in paragraph (2) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Rates of tax.--The rates of tax referred to in this paragraph are the rates of tax otherwise applicable under-- ``(A) subsection (a)(2)(A) (relating to gasoline and diesel fuel), ``(B) sections 4091(b)(3)(A) and 4092(b)(2) (relating to aviation fuel), ``(C) section 4042(b)(2)(C) (relating to fuel used on inland waterways), ``(D) paragraph (1) or (2) of section 4041(a) (relating to diesel fuel and special fuels), ``(E) section 4041(c)(2) (relating to gasoline used in noncommercial aviation), and ``(F) section 4041(m)(1)(A)(i) (relating to certain methanol or ethanol fuels).
Comparable treatment for compressed natural gas.--No tax shall be imposed by section 4041(a)(3) on any sale or use during the temporary rate reduction period.
Comparable treatment under certain refund rules.--In the case of fuel on which tax is imposed during the temporary rate reduction period, each of the rates specified in sections 6421(f)(2)(B), 6421(f)(3)(B)(ii), 6427(b)(2)(A), 6427(l)(3)(B)(ii), and 6427(l)(4)(B) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Coordination with highway trust fund deposits.--In the case of fuel on which tax is imposed during the temporary rate reduction period, each of the rates specified in subparagraphs (A)(i) and (C)(i) of section 9503(f)(3) shall be reduced by 4.3 cents per gallon.
Temporary rate reduction period.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `temporary rate reduction period' means the period after the date of the enactment of this subsection and before January 1, 1997.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--If-- (1) before the date of the enactment of this Act, tax has been imposed under section 4081 or 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on any liquid, and (2) on such date such liquid is held by a dealer and has not been used and is intended for sale, there shall be credited or refunded (without interest) to the person who paid such tax (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``taxpayer'') an amount equal to the excess of the tax paid by the taxpayer over the amount of such tax which would be imposed on such liquid had the taxable event occurred on such date.
Time For Filing Claims.--No credit or refund shall be allowed or made under this section unless-- (1) claim therefor is filed with the Secretary of the Treasury before the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, based on a request submitted to the taxpayer before the date which is 3 months after such date of enactment, by the dealer who held the liquid on such date of enactment, and (2) the taxpayer has repaid or agreed to repay the amount so claimed to such dealer or has obtained the written consent of such dealer to the allowance of the credit or the making of the refund.
Exception For Fuel Held In Retail Stocks.--No credit or refund shall be allowed under this section with respect to any liquid in retail stocks held at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms ``dealer'' and ``held by a dealer'' have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 6412 of such Code.
Certain Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6412 of such Code shall apply for purposes of this section.
Imposition of Tax.--In the case of any liquid on which tax was imposed under section 4081 or 4091 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 before January 1, 1997, and which is held on such date by any person, there is hereby imposed a floor stocks tax of 4.3 cents per gallon.
Liability for Tax and Method of Payment.-- (1) Liability for tax.--A person holding a liquid on January 1, 1997, to which the tax imposed by subsection (a) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Time for payment.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid on or before June 30, 1997.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) Held by a person.--A liquid shall be considered as ``held by a person'' if title thereto has passed to such person (whether or not delivery to the person has been made).
Gasoline and diesel fuel.--The terms ``gasoline'' and ``diesel fuel'' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 4083 of such Code.
Aviation fuel.--The term ``aviation fuel'' has the meaning given such term by section 4093 of such Code.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
Exception for Exempt Uses.--The tax imposed by subsection (a) shall not apply to gasoline, diesel fuel, or aviation fuel held by any person exclusively for any use to the extent a credit or refund of the tax imposed by section 4081 or 4091 of such Code is allowable for such use.
Exception for Fuel Held in Vehicle Tank.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on gasoline or diesel fuel held in the tank of a motor vehicle or motorboat.
Exception for Certain Amounts of Fuel.-- (1) In general.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a)-- (A) on gasoline held on January 1, 1997, by any person if the aggregate amount of gasoline held by such person on such date does not exceed 4,000 gallons, and (B) on diesel fuel or aviation fuel held on such date by any person if the aggregate amount of diesel fuel or aviation fuel held by such person on such date does not exceed 2,000 gallons.
The preceding sentence shall apply only if such person submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require for purposes of this paragraph.
Exempt fuel.--For purposes of paragraph (1), there shall not be taken into account fuel held by any person which is exempt from the tax imposed by subsection (a) by reason of subsection (d) or (e).
Controlled groups.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) Corporations.-- (i) In general.--All persons treated as a controlled group shall be treated as 1 person.
Controlled group.--The term ``controlled group'' has the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 percent'' each place it appears in such subsection.
Nonincorporated persons under common control.-- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of subparagraph (A) shall apply to a group of persons under common control where 1 or more of such persons is not a corporation.
Other Law Applicable.--All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes imposed by section 4081 of such Code in the case of gasoline and diesel fuel and section 4091 of such Code in the case of aviation fuel shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, apply with respect to the floor stock taxes imposed by subsection (a) to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 4081 or 4091.
OFFSETTING REDUCTIONS IN DEFENSE BUDGET AUTHORITY.
Required Reduction.--Not later than 20 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall cancel available budget authority in current defense procurement accounts in such amounts as may be necessary to achieve a reduction in the amount of $2,900,000,000 in outlays by the Department of Defense from such accounts during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending at the close of December 31, 1996.
Identification of Programs To Be Cut.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report specifying the programs, projects, and activities of the Department of Defense from which cancellations of budget authority are made for the purposes of subsection (a).
Such report shall show the specific dollar amount of budget authority cancelled from each such program, project, or activity.
Effect of Cancellations.--Amounts cancelled under this section shall not be available for obligation for any purpose.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) available budget authority.--The term ``available budget authority'' means amounts appropriated before the date of the enactment of this Act for the Department of Defense that remain available for obligation as of such date.
Current procurement accounts.--The term ``current defense procurement accounts'' means appropriation accounts provided under the major heading ``PROCUREMENT'' in any Act making appropriations for the Department of Defense that was enacted before the date of the enactment of this Act and for which, with respect to any such account, the period of availability for obligation has not expired as of such date.