This Act may be cited as the ``Urban Homestead Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) Community development corporation.--The term ``community development corporation'' means a nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is to promote community development by providing housing opportunities to low-income families.
Low-income families.--The term ``low-income families'' has the same meaning as in section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437a(b)).
Multifamily housing project.--The term ``multifamily housing project'' has the same meaning as in section 203 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978 (12 United States Code 1701z-11).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Severe physical problems.--A dwelling unit shall be considered to have ``severe physical problems'' if such unit-- (A) lacks hot or cold piped water, a flush toilet, or both a bathtub and a shower in the unit, for the exclusive use of that unit; (B) on not less than 3 separate occasions, during the preceding winter months was uncomfortably cold for a period of more than 6 consecutive hours due to a malfunction of the heating system for the unit; (C) has no functioning electrical service, exposed wiring, any room in which there is not a functioning electrical outlet, or has experienced not less than 3 blown fuses or tripped circuit breakers during the preceding 90-day period; (D) is accessible through a public hallway in which there are no working light fixtures, loose or missing steps or railings, and no elevator; or (E) has severe maintenance problems, including water leaks involving the roof, windows, doors, basement, or pipes or plumbing fixtures, holes or open cracks in walls or ceilings, severe paint peeling or broken plaster, and signs of rodent infestation.
Single family residence.--The term ``single family residence'' means a 1- to 4-family dwelling that is held by the Secretary.
Substandard multifamily housing project.--A multifamily housing project is ``substandard'' if not less than 25 percent of the dwelling units of the project have severe physical problems.
Unit of general local government.--The term ``unit of general local government'' has the same meaning as in section 102(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5302).
Unoccupied multifamily housing project.--The term ``unoccupied multifamily housing project'' means a multifamily housing project that the Secretary certifies in writing is not inhabited.
DISPOSITION OF UNOCCUPIED AND SUBSTANDARD PUBLIC HOUSING.
Publication in Federal Register.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), beginning 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a list of each unoccupied multifamily housing project, substandard multifamily housing project, and other residential property that is owned by the Secretary.
Exception for certain projects and properties.-- (A) Projects.--A project described in paragraph (1) shall not be included in a list published under paragraph (1) if less than 6 months have elapsed since the later of-- (i) the date on which the project was acquired by the Secretary; or (ii) the date on which the project was determined to be unoccupied or substandard.
Properties.--A property described in paragraph (1) shall not be included in a list published under paragraph (1) if less than 6 months have elapsed since the date on which the property was acquired by the Secretary.
Transfer of Ownership to Community Development Corporations.-- Notwithstanding section 203 of the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978 (12 United States Code 1701z-11) or any other provision of Federal law pertaining to the disposition of property, upon the written request of a community development corporation, the Secretary shall transfer to the community development corporation ownership of any unoccupied multifamily housing project, substandard multifamily housing project, or other residential property owned by the Secretary, if the project or property is-- (1) located in the same unit of general local government as the community development corporation; and (2) included in the most recent list published by the Secretary under subsection (a).
Satisfaction of indebtedness.--Prior to any transfer of ownership under subsection (b), the Secretary shall satisfy any indebtedness incurred in connection with the project or residence at issue, either by-- (1) cancellation of the indebtedness; or (2) reimbursing the community development corporation to which the project or residence is transferred for the amount of the indebtedness.
EXEMPTION FROM PROPERTY DISPOSITION REQUIREMENTS.
No provision of the Multifamily Housing Property Disposition Reform Act of 1994, or any amendment made by that Act, shall apply to the disposition of property under this Act.
This Act shall not affect the terms or the enforceability of any contract or lease entered into before the date of enactment of this Act.
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish, by rule, regulation, or order, such procedures as may be necessary to carry out this Act.