This Act may be cited as the ``Money Return Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The intent and purpose of Federal securities law is to protect the general investing public and to make the regulation and control required by national public interest reasonably complete and effective.
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission has acknowledged that there are millions of lost security holders in the United States, who are, thereby, deprived of the benefit of their investments valued by the Commission in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
The Commission's current regulations relating to lost security holders apply only to recordkeeping transfer agents who handle approximately half of all security holders, thereby denying the same benefits to the other half.
Available technologies can locate 80 percent or more of corrected addresses for security holders, who have not received the benefit of the dividends and interest earned by their securities and other valuable property rights.
The Federal Government, through its agencies, holds large sums of money owed to others, who cannot reasonably obtain their money, because of a lack of information about these sums and how to claim them.
TITLE I--RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION SEC.
ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES TO SECURE DELIVERY OF DIVIDENDS, INTEREST, AND OTHER VALUABLE PROPERTY RIGHTS.
Section 17A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78q- 1) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Due Diligence for the Delivery of Dividends, Interest, and Other Valuable Property Rights.-- ``(1) Due diligence obligation.--Each issuer of any security registered pursuant to section 12 of this title shall exercise due diligence in delivering dividends, interest, and other valuable property rights to their owners, whether such dividends, interest, or other valuable property rights are delivered by any issuer or on behalf of any issuer by any paying agent.
Revision of regulations required.--The Commission shall amend the provisions of section 240.17Ad-17 of the Commission's regulations (17 Code of Federal Regulations 240.17Ad-17) as in effect on December 8, 1997-- ``(A) to extend the application of such section to all such paying agents, including the obligation to use database searches as required of transfer agents; and ``(B) to extend the application of such section to security holders who became lost security holders before such date.
Notices.-- ``(A) Notice on checks or other valuable property rights to security holders.--Any check or notice to any security holder who has failed to cash or deposit a previous check for any dividend or interest payment or has failed to process a valuable property right as instructed shall bear a printed notice to the effect-- ``(i) if a check or other valuable property right has been sent to a security holder, and the check or other valuable property right has been returned to the sender, the security holder is considered a `lost security holder' whenever that expression is used by the Unites States Securities and Exchange Commission; and ``(ii) if a check or other valuable property right is sent to a security holder, and the check is not negotiated within 7 months or the other valuable property right is not processed as instructed within 7 months, then that security holder shall be considered a `lost security holder' and shall be treated in the same way as lost security holders are treated under subparagraph (A).
Notices on subsequent communications.--If the lost security holder (as defined in subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii)) is to be sent another regularly scheduled communication, including a dividend or interest check, then that next communication shall notify the security holder-- ``(i) that a previous check or valuable property right has been returned to the sender or has not been negotiated or processed as instructed, and such notice shall request the security holder promptly to negotiate the received check or process the received valuable property right as instructed; and ``(ii) that if such check or other valuable property right has not been received by the security holder, then the security holder should call the sender at the toll free number in the notice or should write or otherwise contact the sender at the address or addresses in the notice.
In no event shall the next regularly scheduled communication occur longer than 7 months after the original sending.
Exceptions.--Paying agents may exclude from the search requirements any lost security holder when the value of all dividend, interest, or other valuable property rights due to the security holder plus the value of all assets listed in the lost security holder's account is less than $25.
Listing of lost security holders.--The Commission shall establish, or provide for the establishment by others, of a database that is accessible from the Internet and that contains a list of the names of persons who are lost security holders, the names of those issuers or paying agents who are obligated to deliver to them their dividends, interest, and other valuable property rights, and, in the case of paying agents, the identity of the issuer.
The database and Internet site shall be created or caused to be created by the Commission in accordance with such procedures as the Commission shall prescribe by rule, regulation, or order.
Interest on unpaid amounts; trust for security holders.--Any amounts to which security holders are entitled shall be held in trust by any issuers or any paying agents for the benefit of the security holders.
Interest on the amounts held in trust shall-- ``(A) accrue for the benefit of an issuer or its paying agent as provided for by agreement between them for the first 6 months after the return of any undelivered dividend or interest payment or 7 months after a payment has been sent but remains uncashed; ``(B) accrue for the benefit of the security holders beginning 6 months after the return of any undelivered dividend or interest payment or 7 months after a payment has been sent but remains uncashed; and ``(C) end upon the delivery as escheated or unclaimed property to a State pursuant to State law.
Use of professional search firms.-- ``(A) No lost security holder shall be turned over to a professional search firm for locating until after two database searches have been conducted, regardless of whether the security holder was deemed `lost' before, on, or after December 8, 1997.
The issuer or its paying agent shall solicit competing bids for locating lost security holders in accordance with such procedures as the Commission shall prescribe by rule, regulation, or order.
Any successful bidder shall report to the issuer, its paying agent, and the Commission the number of accounts pursued, the percentage of accounts recovered, the amount and percentage of funds recovered, the names of those who recovered, and the gross and net amounts each received.
Liability.--Any issuer or paying agent that fails to exercise due diligence in accordance with the requirements of this subsection shall be liable to any lost security holders or class of lost security holders for damages.
If the court determines that such failure constitutes gross negligence or wanton misconduct, the court may award punitive damages in an amount equal to triple the amount of such damages.
An action under this paragraph may be brought in any Federal court of competent jurisdiction.
Regulations; report.--The Commission shall-- ``(A) adopt such rules, regulations, and orders necessary to implement this subsection no later than 3 months after the date of enactment of this subsection; ``(B) provide a report to Congress concerning its progress toward implementation of this subsection no later than 6 months after such date of enactment; and ``(C) thereafter include in its annual report similar information.
Definition of paying agent.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `paying agent' includes any issuer, transfer agent, broker, dealer, investment company, mutual fund, investment adviser, indenture trustee, custodian, or any other person obligated to deliver dividends, interest, or valuable property rights.''.
TITLE II--UNITED STATES MONEY RETURN COMMISSION SEC.
In General.--There is established the United States Money Return Commission.
The Commission shall be composed of 5 members appointed by the President.
Chairman.--The President shall designate a Chairman from among the members of the Commission.
Terms.--Each member shall serve for a term of 5 years, except that from the first 5 appointees, one shall serve for 1 year, one shall serve for 2 years, one shall serve for 3 years, one shall serve for 4 years, and one, the chairman, shall serve for 5 years.
Limitation.--No more than 2 members shall be appointed who are employees of the United States of America or any of its agencies.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) collect and publish on the Internet and other appropriate media information on all money held by the United States that is owed to any person or entity; and (2) establish procedures for the use of state-of-the-art technology to restore such moneys to their rightful owners without charge.
Report.--The Commission shall report on its activities to the President not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter.
Information From Executive Agencies.--The heads of executive agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Commission such information as it may require for the purpose of carrying out is functions.
Pay.--Members of the Commission shall serve without any additional Federal compensation for their work on the Commission.
However, members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service (5 United States Code 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available therefor.
Staff.--The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director.
Any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be available to the Secretary of the Treasury.