This Act may be cited as the ``National Advisory Commission on Alternative Routes to Teacher Certification Act of 2001''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a commission to study, and report to the Congress recommendations on, how the States might improve and expand their systems for alternative certification of teachers.
The Commission is also to make recommendations on the appropriate steps the Federal Government might take in fostering improvement and expansion of States' alternative certification programs for teachers.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Interest among the States in providing alternate routes for certifying teachers is escalating.
In 1998 and 1999 alone, States developed 10 new alternate route programs.
In the past 2 years, 14 States have passed, introduced, or plan to introduce, new legislation to establish alternative programs for the preparation and certification of individuals who have a bachelor's degree and want to become teachers.
More than 125,000 individuals have been certified through alternative routes.
In 1998 and 1999, more than 24,000 teachers were certified through alternative routes in just the 28 States that collected these data.
40 States have some type of alternative to going back to college and majoring in education in order to become a teacher.
The States currently report 115 such programs.
People from all walks of life are stepping forward to meet the projected demand for teachers.
Many of these individuals already have at least a bachelor's degree, and for these individuals, the old model of training teachers in undergraduate education programs is not practical.
States are aggressively meeting the challenge by creating new training and licensing avenues for people to enter the teaching profession.
These alternative teacher certification routes provide opportunities for people from various educational backgrounds and walks of life to become teachers.
They have opened doors to teaching for persons switching careers, leaving the military, and graduating from liberal arts colleges.
They have also provided opportunities for former teachers who want to upgrade their credentials and get back into teaching and for people who trained to teach years ago but never did.
In 1999, 36 States reported that they had programs targeted specifically to bring into the teaching profession individuals from careers other than education, the individuals formerly in the military, retirees, liberal arts graduates, and others.
Compared with recent college graduates who come into teaching directly from a traditional teacher preparation program, those entering teaching through alternate routes-- (A) have degrees with majors in subjects other than education; (B) are more likely to have work experience in occupations other than education; (C) tend to be older; (D) are more likely to be people of color; and (E) are more likely to be men.
Those entering teaching through alternate routes are more likely to teach where job demand is greatest, such as in inner cities and outlying rural areas, and in high-demand subject areas.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL ADVISORY COMMISSION ON ALTERNATIVE ROUTES TO TEACHER CERTIFICATION.
In General.--There is established within the executive branch a National Advisory Commission on Alternative Routes to Teacher Certification (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission''), comprised of 10 members to be appointed by the Secretary of Education.
The membership of the Commission shall be as follows: (1) 2 members who currently serve as college professors in schools of education.
2 members who currently serve as State teacher licensure officials.
2 members who currently serve as classroom teachers.
2 members who serve as superintendents or comparable local educational agency officials.
2 members who have special expertise in the alternative certification of teachers, including individuals currently involved in providing alternative routes to teaching and certification.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the Secretary of Education should draw from a number of important areas of expertise in appointing the Commission, including various experts familiar with the issue of teacher licensure and, in particular, alternative teacher certification.
Appointments.--Appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RULES OF THE COMMISSION.
Quorum.--5 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission.
Initial Meeting.--If, 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 5 or more members of the Commission have been appointed, members who have been appointed may meet and select the Chair (or Co- chairs) who thereafter shall have the authority to begin the operations of the Commission, including the hiring of staff.
Rules.--The Commission may adopt such other rules as it considers appropriate.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any meeting of the Commission or any subcommittee thereof may be held in executive session to the extent that the Chair (Co-Chairs, if elected) or a majority of the members of the Commission or subcommittee determine appropriate.
Continuation of Membership.--If any individual is appointed to the Commission by virtue of holding a position described in section 4(a), and ceases to hold such position before the report of the Commission is submitted, such individual may continue as a member of the Commission for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date that such individual ceases to hold such position.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The duties of the Commission shall include the following: (1) To conduct, for a period of not to exceed 18 months from the date of its first meeting, the review described in subsection (b).
To submit to the Congress a report of the results of such review, including recommendations for revisions to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Review and Issuing Proposals.--The Commission shall review all existing and proposed programs for alternative teacher certification in the various States and ascertain which programs work best in terms of hiring and retaining highly qualified teachers, including professionals seeking a second career in teaching, and, when applicable, issue proposals and recommendations on the components of highly effective alternative teacher certification programs and ways for States to develop and implement such programs.
The Commission shall also make recommendations concerning the appropriate measures that might be undertaken by the Federal Government to improve and expand alternative certification programs in the States, including recommendations for legislative changes to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and the Higher Education Act of 1965.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission or, on the authorization of the Commission, any subcommittee or member thereof, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, receive such evidence, and administer such oaths, as the Commission or such designated subcommittee or designated member may deem advisable.
Contracting.--The Commission may, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, enter into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under this Act.
Assistance From Federal Agencies and Offices.-- (1) Information.--The Commission is authorized to secure directly from any executive department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, independent establishment, or instrumentality of the Government, as well as from any committee or other office of the legislative branch, such information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics as it requires for the purposes of its review and report.
Each such department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, establishment, instrumentality, or committee shall, to the extent not prohibited by law, furnish such information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics directly to the Commission, upon request made by the Chair (Co-chairs, if elected).
Department of education.--The Secretary of Education is authorized on a nonreimbursable basis to provide the Commission with administrative services, funds, facilities, staff, and other support services for the performance of the Commission's functions.
General services administration.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a nonreimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Other assistance.--In addition to the assistance set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3), departments and agencies of the United States are authorized to provide to the Commission such services, funds, facilities, staff, and other support services as they may deem advisable and as may be authorized by law.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as departments and agencies of the United States.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property in carrying out its duties under this Act.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Chair (Co-Chairs, if elected), in accordance with rules agreed upon by the Commission, may appoint and fix the compensation of a staff director and such other personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its functions without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III or chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that no rate of pay fixed under this subsection may exceed the equivalent of that payable to a person occupying a position at level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement from the Commission, and such detailee shall retain the rights, status, and privileges of his or her regular employment without interruption.
Consultant Services.--The Commission is authorized to procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates not to exceed the daily rate paid a person occupying a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission may be compensated at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Exception.--Members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress shall receive no additional pay on account of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703(b) of title 5, United States Code.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION; TERMINATION.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit a report to the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate.
The report of the Commission shall describe the results of its review under section 6(b), shall make the recommendations for revisions to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and the Higher Education Act of 1965 referred to section 6(a)(2), and shall such make recommendations to State departments of education as the Commission considers appropriate.
Termination.-- (1) In general.--The Commission, and all the authorities of this Act, shall terminate on the date that is 90 days after the date on which the report is required to be submitted under subsection (a).
Concluding activities.--The Commission may use the 90- day period referred to in paragraph (1) for the purposes of concluding its activities, including providing testimony to committees of the Congress concerning its report and disseminating such report.