This Act may be cited as the ``Employees of America Streamlining for Your Savings Act of 2013'' or the ``EASY Savings Act of 2013''.
ENHANCEMENT OF AUTHORITY TO MAKE CASH AWARDS TO EMPLOYEES FOR COST SAVING DISCLOSURES.
In General.--Section 4512 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``or identification of surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority'' after ``mismanagement''; (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``or identification'' after ``disclosure''; and (C) in the matter following paragraph (2), by inserting ``or identification'' after ``disclosure''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) The Inspector General of an agency or other agency employee designated under subsection (b) shall refer to the Chief Financial Officer of the agency any potential surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority identified by an employee under subsection (a), along with any recommendations of the Inspector General or other agency employee.
(1) If the Chief Financial Officer of an agency determines that rescission of potential surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority, identified by an employee under subsection (a), would not hinder the effectiveness of the agency, the head of the agency shall transfer the amount of the surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority from the applicable appropriations account to the general fund of the Treasury, except as provided in subsection (e).
Title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 681 et sequentes) shall not apply to transfers under paragraph (1).
Any amounts transferred under paragraph (1) shall be deposited in the Treasury and used for deficit reduction, except that in the case of a fiscal year for which there is no Federal budget deficit, such amounts shall be used to reduce the Federal debt, in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury considers appropriate.
The head of an agency may retain not more than 10 percent of any amounts which (but for this subsection) would otherwise be transferred to the general fund of the Treasury under subsection (d), representing surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority identified by an employee under this section, for the purpose of paying a cash award to such employee in accordance with subsection (a).
(1) The head of each agency shall submit to the Director of the Office of Personnel Management an annual report regarding-- ``(A) each disclosure of fraud, waste, or mismanagement or identification of surplus funds or unnecessary budget authority, made under subsection (a) by an employee of the agency, which is determined by the agency to have merit; ``(B) the total savings achieved through disclosures and identifications described in subparagraph (A); and ``(C) the number and amount of cash awards by the agency under subsection (a).
The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall submit to Congress and the Government Accountability Office an annual report on Federal cost saving and awards based on the reports under paragraph (1).
The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall-- ``(A) ensure that the cash award program of each agency complies with this section; and ``(B) submit to Congress an annual certification indicating whether the cash award program of each agency complies with this section.
(1) The head of each agency shall include the information described in subsection (f)(1) in each budget request of the agency submitted to the Office of Management and Budget as part of the preparation of the budget of the President submitted to Congress under section 1105(a) of title 31.
Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of the EASY Savings Act of 2013, and every 3 years thereafter, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the operation of the cost savings and awards program under this section, including recommendations for any legislative changes which the Comptroller General considers appropriate.''.
Prohibition.-- (1) In general.--Section 4509 of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Prohibition of cash award to certain officers ``(a) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `agency' refers to any agency within the meaning of section 551(1) or 4501(1).
Prohibition.--An officer may not receive a cash award under this subchapter if such officer-- ``(1) is the head of an agency; ``(2) serves in-- ``(A) a position under section 5312 (relating to positions at level I of the Executive Schedule); or ``(B) a position for which the compensation is set in statute by reference to section 5312 or level I of the Executive Schedule; or ``(3) is a voting member of an independent establishment.''.
Clerical amendment.--The analysis for chapter 45 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 4509 and inserting the following: ``4509.
Prohibition of cash award to certain officers.