SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Rental Fairness Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
General fairness and responsibility rule.
Preservation of State law.
Preservation of liability based on negligence.
Applicability and effective date.
The Congress finds that-- (1) The vast majority of State statutes and common law follow the generally accepted principle of law that a party should be held liable only for harm that the party could guard against.
A small number of State common laws and statutes still do not recognize this accepted principle of law, and continue to subject companies that rent or lease motor vehicles to vicarious liability for the negligence of their rental customers in operating the motor vehicle simply because of the company's ownership, even where the rental company has not been negligent in any way and the motor vehicle operated properly.
An even smaller minority of State laws impose unlimited liability on the companies for the tortious acts of their customers, without regard to fault.
These small number of vicarious liability laws pose a significant competitive barrier to entry for smaller companies attempting to compete in these markets, in contravention of the fundamental legal principle of fairness prohibiting liability without fault.
Furthermore, because rented or leased motor vehicles are frequently driven across State lines, these small number of vicarious liability laws impose a disproportionate and undue burden on interstate commerce by increasing rental rates for all customers across the nation.
Due to high liability costs and unwarranted litigation costs, consumers face higher vehicle rental costs in all States because of the increased insurance expenses required to provide coverage in the interstate insurance and rental markets.
Rental fairness will lessen burdens on interstate commerce and decrease litigiousness.
Legislation to address these concerns is an appropriate exercise of the powers of Congress under clauses 3, 9, and 18 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution of the United States, and the 14th amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
For the purpose of this Act-- (1) Harm.--The term ``harm'' means-- (A) any injury to or damage suffered by a person; (B) any illness, disease, or death of that person resulting from that injury or damage; and (C) any loss to that person or any other person resulting from that injury or damage.
Motor Vehicle.--The term ``motor vehicle'' shall have the meaning given to this term under section 13102(14) of title 49, United States Code.
Owner.--The term ``owner'' means a person who is-- (A) a record or beneficial owner or lessee of a motor vehicle; (B) entitled to the use and possession of a motor vehicle subject to a security interest in another person; or (C) a lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle, in the trade or business of renting or leasing motor vehicles, having the use or possession thereof, under a lease, bailment, or otherwise.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual, corporation, company, limited liability company, trust, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity (including any governmental entity).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, any other territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision of any such State, commonwealth, territory, or possession.
GENERAL FAIRNESS AND RESPONSIBILITY RULE.
In General.--No owner engaged in the trade or business of renting or leasing motor vehicles may be held liable for harm caused by a person to himself or herself, to another person, or to property, which results or arises from that person's use, operation, or possession of a rented or leased motor vehicle, by reason of being the owner of such motor vehicle, except to the extent of any required financial responsibility statute.
Construction.--Subsection (a) shall not apply if such owner does not maintain the required limits of financial responsibility for such vehicle, as required by State law.
PRESERVATION OF STATE LAW.
State Financial Responsibility Requirements.--Nothing in this Act shall relieve any owner engaged in the trade or business of renting or leasing motor vehicles from the obligation to comply with a State's minimum financial responsibility, motor vehicle, or insurance statutes or regulations imposed by that State for the privilege of registering and operating a motor vehicle within that State.
Priority of Payments.--Nothing in this Act shall preempt any State law regarding priority of payment requirements or whether coverages provided under such statutes or regulations are primary or secondary.
PRESERVATION OF LIABILITY BASED ON NEGLIGENCE.
Nothing in this Act shall preempt the ability of the States to impose liability based on acts of negligence or criminal wrongdoing.
APPLICABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this Act shall apply with respect to any action commenced on or after the date of enactment of this Act without regard to whether the harm that is the subject of the action or the conduct that caused the harm occurred before such date of enactment.