This Act may be cited as the ``Harold Hughes Commission on Alcoholism Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Harold Hughes Commission on Alcoholism (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall carry out the following studies of alcoholism: (1) A study of existing Federal governmental agencies and programs related to alcoholism to determine how such programs and agencies could be better designed or coordinated in order to increase the effectiveness of the funds allocated to them.
A study of how existing government agencies could be more effectively utilized to educate the American public about the known social and financial costs of alcoholism; and how such agencies could work more effectively with private sector groups to better educate the American people about alcoholism its prevention, and treatment.
A study of the nature and extent of instruction on alcoholism provided to physicians in American medical schools and through the certification and re-certification process in the various States, including an examination of the requirements for accreditation of medical schools as they relate to alcoholism.
A study of unmet research needs in the area of alcoholism, and how research money can be prioritized for best results and appropriate research funding levels in view of the size and scope of the alcoholism problem.
A study of the effectiveness of the various forms of alcoholism treatment and the cost-effectiveness of increasing access to public and private treatment for those with alcoholism including the role of managed care.
Such other studies as the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Reports.--Not later than two years after the date on which amounts under section 8 are first made available for carrying out this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report describing the findings made in studies under subsection (a).
The Commission may submit to the President and the Congress such interim reports regarding the duties of the Commission under such subsection as the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members appointed in accordance with paragraph (2) and one ex officio voting member designated in paragraph (3).
Appointed members.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed in accordance with the following: (A) The President shall appoint four individuals from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Of such individuals-- (i) one shall represent the medical profession and teaching hospitals; (ii) one shall represent employee assistance programs; (iii) one shall represent entities that provide health insurance or operate health plans; and (iv) one shall represent entities that provide treatment for alcoholism.
The President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the Senate, appoint four individuals.
Of such individuals-- (i) two shall be Senators; and (ii) two shall be appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall, after consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the House, appoint four individuals.
Of such individuals-- (i) two shall be Members of the House; and (ii) two shall be appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Ex officio member.--The Director of the National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission.
Chair.--The President shall designate a member of the Commission to serve as the chair of the Commission.
The Chair shall be a member who was appointed to the Commission from among individuals who were not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Terms.--The term of a member of the Commission is the duration of the Commission.
Vacancies.-- (1) Authority of commission.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission does not affect the power of the remaining members to carry out the duties under section 3.
Appointment of successors.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Incomplete term.--If a member of the Commission does not serve the full term applicable to the member, the individual appointed to fill the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term of the predecessor of the individual.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of the members, except that not less than two meetings shall be held each year for the duration of the Commission.
Quorum.--A quorum for meetings of the Commission is constituted by the presence of 7 members, except that a lesser number may conduct hearings under section 6(a).
Compensation; Reimbursement of Expenses.-- (1) Compensation.--Members of the Commission may not receive compensation for service on the Commission, subject to paragraph (2).
Reimbursement.--Members of the Commission may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may appoint and determine the compensation of such staff as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission, including an executive director.
Such appointments and compensation may be made without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive services, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title that relate to classifications and the General Schedule pay rates.
Limitation.--Staff members appointed under paragraph (1) may not be compensated in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-15, except that the executive director may not be compensated in an amount exceeding the maximum rate of basic pay payable under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
Consultants.--The Commission may procure such temporary and intermittent services of consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission may determine to be useful in carrying out the duties under section 3.
The Commission may not procure services under this subsection at any rate in excess of the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable under the General Schedule for positions above GS-15.
Consultants under this subsection may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred for activities carried out on behalf of the Commission pursuant to section 3.
In General.--For the purpose of carrying out the duties of the Commission under section 3, the Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Obtaining Official Information.--Upon the request of the Commission, the heads of Federal agencies shall furnish directly to the Commission information necessary for the Commission to carry out the duties under section 3.
Use of Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support, including quarters for the Commission, as may be necessary for the Commission to carry out the duties under section 3.
Acceptance of Gifts.--The Commission may accept cash and in- kind contributions to the Commission for the purpose of carrying out the activities of the Commission.
The Commission terminates upon the expiration of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the final report is submitted under section 3(b).
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence are available until the termination of the Commission under section 7.