PROTECTION OF HEALTH AND SAFETY OF INDIVIDUALS IN A DISASTER AREA.
Title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act is amended by inserting after section 408 (42 United States Code 5174) the following: ``SEC.
PROTECTION OF HEALTH AND SAFETY OF INDIVIDUALS IN A DISASTER AREA.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Harmful substance.--The term `harmful substance' means a substance that the President determines may be harmful to human health.
Program.--The term `program' means a program described in subsection (b) carried out with respect to a disaster area.
Worker.--The term `worker' includes a first responder to a disaster, such as a police officer, a firefighter, and an emergency medical technician.
Program.--If the President determines that 1 or more harmful substances are being, or have been, released in an area that the President has declared to be a disaster area under this Act, the President may carry out a program for the protection, assessment, monitoring, and study of the health and safety of community members, volunteers, and workers in the disaster area, to ensure that-- ``(1) the community members, volunteers, and workers are adequately informed about and protected against potential health impacts of the harmful substance; ``(2) the community members, volunteers, and workers are monitored and studied over time, and receive appropriate care, for any long-term health impacts of the harmful substance; and ``(3) information from any such monitoring and studies is used to prevent or protect against similar health impacts from future disasters.
Program.-- ``(1) In general.--A program may include such activities as-- ``(A) collecting and analyzing environmental exposure data; ``(B) developing and disseminating educational materials to community members, volunteers, and workers; ``(C) providing the public access to current information on continuing releases of a harmful substance in the disaster area; ``(D) training and certifying volunteers and workers in the use of personal protection equipment; ``(E) identifying, performing baseline health assessments on, taking biological samples from, and establishing an exposure registry of community members, volunteers, and workers exposed to a harmful substance; ``(F) studying the long-term health impacts of any exposures through epidemiological studies; and ``(G) providing assistance to participants in registries and studies under subparagraphs (E) and (F) in determining eligibility for health coverage and identifying appropriate health services.
Participation in registries and studies.-- ``(A) In general.--Participation in any registry or study under subparagraph (E) or (F) of paragraph (1) shall be voluntary.
Protection of privacy.--The President shall take appropriate measures to protect the privacy of any participant in a registry or study described in subparagraph (A).
Cooperative agreements.--The President may carry out a program through a cooperative agreement with a medical or academic institution, or a consortium of such institutions, that is-- ``(A) located in close proximity to the disaster area with respect to which the program is carried out; and ``(B) experienced in the area of environmental or occupational health and safety, including experience in-- ``(i) conducting long-term epidemiological studies; ``(ii) conducting long-term mental health studies; and ``(iii) establishing and maintaining environmental exposure or disease registries.
Reports and Responses to Studies.-- ``(1) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of completion of a study under subsection (c)(1)(F), the President, or the medical or academic institution or consortium of such institutions that entered into the cooperative agreement under subsection (c)(3), shall submit to the Director, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Labor, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency a report on the study.
Changes in procedures.--To protect the health and safety of community members, volunteers, and workers, the President shall make such changes in procedures as the President determines to be necessary based on the findings of the report submitted under paragraph (1).