This Act may be cited as the ``Freedom and Privacy Restoration Act of 1999''.
RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT NUMBER.
Repeal of Provisions Authorizing Use of the Social Security Account Number.--Subparagraph (C) of section 205(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 405(c)(2)(C)) is amended by striking ``(C)(i) It is the policy'' and all that follows through clause (vi) and inserting the following: ``(C)(i) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, no agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government, any State, any political subdivision of a State, or any combination of the foregoing may use a social security account number issued under this subsection or any derivative of such a number as the means of identifying any individual.
Clause (i) shall not apply with respect to the use of the social security account number as an identifying number to the extent provided in section 6109(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to use of the social security account number for social security and related purposes).
If and to the extent that any provision of Federal law enacted before January 1, 2001, is inconsistent with the policy set forth in clause (i), such provision shall, on and after such date, be null, void, and of no effect.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Clauses (vii) and (viii) of section 205(c)(2)(D) of such Act (42 United States Code 405(c)(2)(D)(vii) and (viii)) are redesignated as clauses (iv) and (v), respectively.
Subsection (d) of section 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (A) in the heading, by inserting ``for Social Security and Related Purposes'' after ``Number''; and (B) by striking ``this title'' and inserting ``section 86, chapter 2, and subtitle C of this title''.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO PRIVACY ACT OF 1974.
Section 7 of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 United States Code 552a note, 88 United States Statutes at Large 1909) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ``(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply with respect to any disclosure which is required under regulations of the Commissioner of Social Security pursuant to section 205(c)(2) of the Social Security Act or under regulations of the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to section 6109(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
''; and (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b) Except with respect to disclosures described in subsection (a)(2), no agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government, a State, a political subdivision of a State, or any combination of the foregoing may request an individual to disclose his social security account number, on either a mandatory or voluntary basis.''.
PROHIBITION OF GOVERNMENT-WIDE UNIFORM IDENTIFYING NUMBERS.
In General.--Except as authorized under section 205(c)(2) of the Social Security Act, any two agencies or instrumentalities of the Federal Government may not implement the same identifying number with respect to any individual.
Identifying Numbers.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``identifying number'' with respect to an individual means any combination of alpha-numeric symbols which serves to identify such individual, and (2) any identifying number and any one or more derivatives of such number shall be treated as the same identifying number.
PROHIBITION OF GOVERNMENT-ESTABLISHED IDENTIFIERS.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a Federal agency may not-- (1) establish or mandate a uniform standard for identification of an individual that is required to be used by any other Federal agency, a State agency, or a private person for any purpose other than the purpose of conducting the authorized activities of the Federal agency establishing or mandating the standard; or (2) condition receipt of any Federal grant or contract or other Federal funding on the adoption, by a State, a State agency, or a political subdivision of a State, of a uniform standard for identification of an individual.
Transactions Between Private Persons.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a Federal agency may not establish or mandate a uniform standard for identification of an individual that is required to be used within the agency, or by any other Federal agency, a State agency, or a private person, for the purpose of-- (1) investigating, monitoring, overseeing, or otherwise regulating a transaction to which the Federal Government is not a party; or (2) administrative simplification.
Repealer.--Any provision of Federal law enacted before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act that is inconsistent with subsection (a) or (b) is repealed, including sections 1173(b) and 1177(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320d-2(b); 42 United States Code 1320d-6(a)(1)) and section 656 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (5 United States Code 301 note).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' means any of the following: (A) An Executive agency (as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code).
A military department (as defined in section 102 of such title).
An agency in the executive branch of a State government.
An agency in the legislative branch of the Government of the United States or a State government.
An agency in the judicial branch of the Government of the United States or a State government.
State.--The term ``State'' means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, or the Republic of Palau.
The provisions of this Act, including the amendments made thereby, shall take effect January 1, 2001.