In General.--There shall be in the Department an Office of Peaceful Coexistence and Nonviolent Conflict Resolution, the head of which shall be the Assistant Secretary for Peaceful Coexistence and Nonviolent Conflict Resolution.
The Assistant Secretary for Peaceful Coexistence and Nonviolent Conflict Resolution shall carry out those functions in the Department affecting research and analysis relating to creating, initiating, and modeling approaches to peaceful coexistence and nonviolent conflict resolution.
Responsibilities.--The Assistant Secretary for Peaceful Coexistence and Nonviolent Conflict Resolution shall-- (1) study the impact of war, especially on the physical and mental condition of children (using the ten-point agenda in the United Nations Childrens Fund report, State of the World's Children 1996, as a guide), which shall include the study of the effect of war on the environment and public health; (2) publish a monthly journal of the activities of the Department and encourage scholarly participation; (3) gather information on effective community peacebuilding activities and disseminate such information to local governments and nongovernmental organizations in the United States and abroad; (4) research the effect of violence in the media and make such reports available to the Congress annually; and (5) sponsor conferences throughout the United States to create awareness of the work of the Department.
OFFICE OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND ECONOMIC RIGHTS.
In General.--There shall be in the Department an Office of Human Rights and Economic Rights, the head of which shall be the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Economic Rights.
The Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Economic Rights shall carry out those functions in the Department supporting the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights passed by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 10, 1948.
Responsibilities.--The Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Economic Rights shall-- (1) assist the Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of State, in furthering the incorporation of principles of human rights, as enunciated in the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 217A (III) of December 10, 1948, into all agreements between the United States and other nations to help reduce the causes of violence; (2) gather information on and document human rights abuses, both domestically and internationally, and recommend to the Secretary nonviolent responses to correct abuses; (3) make such findings available to other agencies in order to facilitate nonviolent conflict resolution; (4) provide trained observers to work with nongovernmental organizations for purposes of creating a climate that is conducive to the respect for human rights; (5) conduct economic analyses of the scarcity of human and natural resources as a source of conflict and make recommendations to the Secretary for nonviolent prevention of such scarcity, nonviolent intervention in case of such scarcity, and the development of programs of assistance for people experiencing such scarcity, whether due to armed conflict, maldistribution of resources, or natural causes; (6) assist the Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Treasury, in developing strategies regarding the sustainability and the management of the distribution of funds from international agencies, the conditions regarding the receipt of such funds, and the impact of those conditions on the peace and stability of the recipient nations; and (7) assist the Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Labor, in developing strategies to promote full compliance with domestic and international labor rights law.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL ON PEACE AND NONVIOLENCE.
In General.--There shall be in the Department an advisory committee to be known as the Intergovernmental Advisory Council on Peace and Nonviolence (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
The Council shall provide assistance and make recommendations to the Secretary and the President concerning intergovernmental policies relating to peace and nonviolent conflict resolution.
Responsibilities.--The Council shall-- (1) provide a forum for representatives of Federal, State, and local governments to discuss peace issues; (2) promote better intergovernmental relations; and (3) submit, biennially or more frequently if determined necessary by the Council, a report to the Secretary, the President, and the Congress reviewing the impact of Federal peace activities on State and local governments.
Consultation in Cases of Conflict.--(1) In any case in which a conflict between the United States and any other government or entity is imminent or occurring, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State shall consult with the Secretary concerning nonviolent means of conflict resolution.
In any case in which such a conflict is ongoing or recently concluded, the Secretary shall conduct independent studies of diplomatic initiatives undertaken by the United States and other parties to the conflict.
In any case in which such a conflict has recently concluded, the Secretary shall assess the effectiveness of those initiatives in ending the conflict.
The Secretary shall establish a formal process of consultation in a timely manner with the Secretary of the Department of State and the Secretary of the Department of Defense-- (A) prior to the initiation of any armed conflict between the United States and any other nation; and (B) for any matter involving the use of Department of Defense personnel within the United States.
Consultation in Drafting Treaties and Agreements.--The executive branch shall consult with the Secretary in drafting treaties and peace agreements.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act for a fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act an amount equal to at least 2 percent of the total amount appropriated for that fiscal year for the Department of Defense.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a reduction in appropriations for the Department of Defense.
TITLE II--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS AND TRANSFERS OF AGENCY FUNCTIONS SEC.
The Secretary may appoint and fix the compensation of such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Secretary and the Department.
Except as otherwise provided by law, such employees shall be appointed in accordance with the civil service laws and their compensation fixed in accordance with title 5 of the United States Code.
There are hereby transferred to the Department the functions, assets, and personnel of-- (1) the Peace Corps; (2) the United States Institute of Peace; (3) the Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security Affairs of the Department of State; (4) the Gang Resistance Education and Training Program of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; and (5) the SafeFutures program of the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention of the Department of Justice.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress proposed legislation containing any necessary and appropriate technical and conforming amendments to the laws of the United States to reflect and carry out the provisions of this Act.
TITLE III--FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON PEACE AND NONVIOLENCE SEC.
FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON PEACE AND NONVIOLENCE.
There is established a Federal Interagency Committee on Peace and Nonviolence (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Committee'').
The Committee shall-- (1) assist the Secretary in providing a mechanism to assure that the procedures and actions of the Department and other Federal agencies are fully coordinated; and (2) study and make recommendations for assuring effective coordination of Federal programs, policies, and administrative practices affecting peace.
TITLE IV--ESTABLISHMENT OF PEACE DAY SEC.
All citizens should be encouraged to observe and celebrate the blessings of peace and endeavor to create peace on a Peace Day.
Such day shall include discussions of the professional activities and the achievements in the lives of peacemakers.