This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Benefits and Pensions Protection Act of 2003''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) In exchange for a lump-sum payment from a lender, some veterans are surrendering their rights to full future compensation benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs by assigning those benefits to lenders.
Despite language in section 5301 of title 38, United States Code, that states that payments of veterans' benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs shall not be assignable and shall be exempt from the claim of creditors, lenders are entering into contracts with veterans that require the veteran to either give access to their benefit monies to the lender or pay the lender a percentage of their benefit payment each month.
The contracts for these credit transactions do not disclose information that is required to be disclosed under the Truth in Lending Act, including the amount financed, the finance charge, and the annual percentage rate (APR).
Therefore, when signing the contract, the veteran cannot accurately determine the cost of credit obtained by the veteran.
As a result, those transaction agreements are detrimental to veterans as they are required to pay interest rates ranging from 39 percent to 106 percent.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to clarify the definition of a veterans benefit assignment under section 5301 of title 38, United States Code, in order to make illegal the credit transactions between veterans and lenders in which the veteran gives the lender access to benefits payments either through an account or by the guaranteeing of monthly payments.
APPLICABILITY OF PROHIBITION ON ASSIGNMENT OF VETERANS BENEFITS TO AGREEMENTS ON FUTURE RECEIPT OF CERTAIN BENEFITS.
In General.--Section 5301(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; (2) by designating the last sentence as paragraph (2); and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3)(A) For the purposes of this subsection, an agreement described in subparagraph (D) shall be deemed to be an assignment and is prohibited.
An agreement or arrangement for collateral for security for an agreement that is prohibited under subparagraph (A) is also prohibited.
(i) A person who enters into an agreement that is prohibited under subparagraph (A), or into an agreement or arrangement that is prohibited under subparagraph (B), shall be fined under title 18, imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
This subparagraph does not apply to a beneficiary with respect to compensation, pension, or disability and indemnity compensation to which the beneficiary is entitled under a law administered by the Secretary.
An agreement described in this subparagraph is an agreement between a person who is a beneficiary entitled to compensation, pension, or dependency and indemnity compensation and another person under which such other person acquires for consideration the right to receive payment of such compensation, pension, or dependency and indemnity compensation, as the case may be, whether by payment from the beneficiary to such other person, deposit into an account from which such other person may make withdrawals, or otherwise.''.
Effective Dates.--(1) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (3) of section 5301(a) of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a) of this section), shall apply with respect to any agreement or arrangement described in those subparagraphs, whether entered into before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act, and any such agreement or arrangement entered into before the date of the enactment of this Act is void and unenforceable as of such date.
Subparagraph (C) of such paragraph shall apply with respect to any agreement or arrangement covered by such subparagraph that is entered into on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Outreach.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, during the five-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, carry out a program of outreach to inform veterans and other recipients or potential recipients of compensation, pension, or disability and indemnity compensation benefits under the laws administered by the Secretary of the prohibition on the assignability of such benefits under law.
The program shall include information on various schemes to evade the prohibition, and means of avoiding such schemes.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008 the amount of $3,000,000 for purposes of carrying out the program of outreach required by subsection (c).