This Act may be cited as the ``Millennium National Commission on Space Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to establish a National Commission on Space that will assist the United States-- (1) to define the long-range needs of the Nation that may be fulfilled through the peaceful uses of space; (2) to maintain the Nation's preeminence in space science, technology, and applications; (3) to promote the peaceful exploration and utilization of the space environment; and (4) to articulate goals and develop options for the future direction of the Nation's civilian space program in coordination with commercial space activities.
The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the lead civilian space agency, as established in the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (42 United States Code 2451 et sequentes), has conducted a space program that has been an unparalleled success, providing significant economic, social, scientific, and national security benefits, and helping to maintain international stability and good will; (2) the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (42 United States Code 2451 et sequentes) has provided the policy framework for achieving this success, and continues to be a sound statutory basis for national efforts in space; (3) the United States has entered an era of international competition and cooperation in space, and therefore this Nation must strengthen the commitment of its public and private technical, financial, and institutional resources, so that the United States will not lose its leadership position during the coming decade; (4) the private sector is a major participant in the utilization of the space environment; (5) the Nation continues its commitment to a permanently manned space station in low Earth orbit, and future national efforts in space will benefit from the presence of such a station; (6) the separation of the civilian and military space programs is essential to ensure the continued health and vitality of both; and (7) the identification of long range goals and policy options for the United States civilian space program through a high level, representational public forum will assist the President and Congress in formulating future policies for the United States civilian space program.
In General.--The President shall, no earlier than February 1, 2001, and no later than May 1, 2001, establish, and appoint the members of, a National Commission on Space.
Membership.-- (1) Appointments.--The Commission shall consist of 15 members, appointed for the life of the Commission, of whom 10 shall be appointed as follows: (A) 3 members shall be appointed from a list of 6 individuals nominated by the Majority Leader of the Senate in consultation with the chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
3 members shall be appointed from a list of 6 individuals nominated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the chairman of the House Committee on Science.
2 members shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals nominated by the Minority Leader of the Senate in consultation with the ranking member of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
2 members shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals nominated by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives in consultation with the ranking member of the House Committee on Science.
Chairman; vice chairman.--The President shall designate 1 of the members of the Commission appointed under this subsection to serve as Chairman, and 1 of the members to serve as Vice Chairman.
The Vice Chairman shall perform the functions of the Chairman in the Chairman's absence.
Qualifications.-- (1) In general.--The members shall be selected from among individuals from Federal, State, and local governments, industry, business, labor, academia, and the general population who, by reason of their background, education, training, or experience, possess expertise in scientific, technological, and commercial pursuits, as well as the use and implications of the use of such pursuits.
Federal officers or employees.--Not more than 3 members may be employees of the Federal Government.
First time service.--Not less than 5 members shall be individuals who have never before been appointed to serve on a Commission established by the Federal Government.
Compensation.--Members who are not otherwise officers or employees of the United States shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day, including travel time, during which such members are engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
While away from their homes or regular places of business, such members shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Ex Officio Members.--The President shall appoint 1 individual from each of the following Federal departments and agencies to serve as ex officio, advisory, non-voting members of the Commission (if such department or agency does not already have a member appointed to the Commission pursuant to subsection (a)): (1) National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Department of the Interior.
Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Congressional Advisory Members.--The President of the Senate shall appoint 2 advisory members of the Commission from among the Members of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall appoint 2 advisory members of the Commission from among the Members of the House of Representatives.
Such members shall not participate, except in an advisory capacity, in the formulation of the findings and recommendations of the Commission.
Reimbursement of Expenses for Ex Officio and Congressional Members.--Members of the Commission appointed under subsection (e) or (f) shall not be entitled to receive compensation for service relating to the performance of the duties of the Commission, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses incurred while in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Staff.--The Commission shall appoint and fix the compensation of such personnel as it deems advisable.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be responsible for-- (1) the assignment of duties and responsibilities among such personnel and their continuing supervision; and (2) the use and expenditures of funds available to the Commission.
In carrying out the provisions of this subsection, the Chairman shall act in accordance with the general policies of the Commission.
Agency Assistance.--To the extent permitted by law, the Commission may secure directly from any executive department, agency, or independent instrumentality of the Federal Government any information it deems necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Each such department, agency, and instrumentality shall cooperate with the Commission and, to the extent permitted by law and upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, furnish such information to the Commission.
Information-Gathering Activities.--The Commission may hold hearings, receive public comment and testimony, initiate surveys, and undertake other appropriate activities to gather the information necessary to carry out its activities under section 5 of this Act.
Detailed Employees.-- (1) Authority to detail.--Upon request of the chairman of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of the department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Reimbursement.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission with or without reimbursement, and any such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Support and Assistance.-- (1) Support.--The Office of Science and Technology Policy shall provide support services to the Commission.
Assistance.--The Comptroller General of the United States may provide assistance, including the detailing of employees, to the Commission in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Commission.
Other Authority.--The Commission may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission shall give public notice of any such contract before entering into that contract.
Applicability of FACA.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Commission is subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission $2,500,000 for fiscal year 2001, and $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, to carry out its duties under this Act.
Sunset.--The Commission shall cease to exist 60 days after it has submitted the plan required by section 5(c) of this Act.
Study.--The Commission shall study existing and proposed space activities and formulate an agenda for the United States civilian space program.
The Commission shall identify long range goals, opportunities, and policy options for United States civilian space activity for the next 20 years.
In carrying out this responsibility, the Commission shall take into consideration-- (1) the Nation's plans for a permanently manned space station in low Earth orbit; (2) present and future scientific, economic, social, environmental, and foreign policy needs of the United States, and methods by which space science, technology, and applications initiatives might address those needs; (3) the adequacy of the Nation's public and private capability in fulfilling the needs identified in paragraph (2); (4) how a cooperative interchange between Federal agencies on research and technology development, and technology transfer programs can benefit the civilian space program; (5) opportunities for, and constraints on, the use of outer space toward the achievement of Federal program objectives or national needs; (6) current and emerging issues and concerns that may arise through the utilization of space research, technology development, and applications; (7) the Commission shall analyze the findings of the reviews specified in paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection, and develop options and recommendations for a long range national civilian space policy plan.
Estimates of Requirements.--Options and recommendations submitted in accordance with subsection (c) of this section shall include, to the extent appropriate, an estimate of costs and time schedules, institutional requirements, and statutory modifications necessary for implementation of such options and recommendations.
Report.--Within 15 months after the date of the establishment of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President and to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives, a long range plan for United States civilian space activity incorporating the results of the studies conducted under this section, together with recommendations for such legislation as the Commission determines to be appropriate.