This Act may be cited as the ``Antiterrorism Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The continued use of terrorism is to be deplored.
With the dramatic changes that have occurred in the world in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the world community has an extraordinary opportunity to further curtail, and possibly eliminate, terrorist activity.
EMBARGO ON TRADE WITH COUNTRIES SUPPORTING INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM.
Trade Embargo.-- (1) Prohibition on imports.--Goods or services from a country described in subsection (b) may not be imported into the United States.
Prohibition on exports.--(A) Goods and technology that are subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, or that are exported by any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, may not be exported to any country described in subsection (b).
As used in this paragraph, the term ``goods and technology'' includes-- (i) any goods or technology (as those terms are defined in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 16 of the Export Administration Act of 1979); and (ii) any materials or technology that are subject to export controls under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
Sections 11, 12, and 13 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (relating to violations, enforcement, and administrative procedure and judicial review) apply with respect to violations and enforcement of this paragraph, without regard to the termination date specified in section 20 of that Act.
Regulations.--The President may issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this subsection.
Countries Subject To Embargo.-- (1) Determination by the secretary of state.--Subsection (a) applies with respect to a country if the Secretary of State determines that the government of that country has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
For purposes of this section, support for acts of international terrorism includes a situation in which the government of a country knowingly allows an international terrorist organization to operate or maintain facilities within the country without taking measures to prevent such organization from operating freely.
Publication of determinations.--Each determination of the Secretary of State under paragraph (1) shall be published in the Federal Register.
Rescission of determination.--A determination made by the Secretary of State under paragraph (1) may not be rescinded unless the President submits to the Congress-- (A) before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report certifying that-- (i) there has been a fundamental change in the leadership and policies of the government of the country concerned; (ii) that government is not supporting acts of international terrorism; and (iii) that government has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future; or (B) at least 45 days before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report justifying the rescission and certifying that-- (i) the government concerned has not provided any support for international terrorism during the preceding 6-month period; and (ii) the government concerned has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future.
Waiver Authority.--The President may waive, in whole or in part, the application of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2)(A) with respect to a country if-- (1) the President determines that national security interests or humanitarian reasons justify such waiver; and (2) at least 15 days before the waiver takes effect, the President consults with the Congress regarding the proposed waiver and submits to the Congress a report-- (A) identifying the country concerned; (B) describing the national security interests or humanitarian reasons which justify the waiver; (C) specifying the imports and exports that will be allowed by the waiver if the waiver is less than a complete lifting of the embargo required by subsection (a); and (D) specifying the period of time during which such waiver will be effective.
Repeals.-- (1) Authority to ban imports.--Section 505 of the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985 (relating to the authorization to ban the importation of goods and services from countries supporting terrorism) is repealed.
Licensing requirement for exports.--(A) Section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (relating to the requirement for validated licenses and notice to Congress for certain exports to countries supporting international terrorism) is repealed.
Any reference in any law to a determination made under section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 shall be deemed to be a reference to a determination made under subsection (a) of this section.
OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE SPONSORED TERRORISM.
Report.--Concurrent with the publication in the Federal Register pursuant to section 3(b)(2) of this Act, section 620A(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, or section 40(e) of the Arms Export Control Act of a determination by the Secretary of State that the government of a country has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report describing the measures the United States is taking, unilaterally and in concert with other countries, to pressure, both economically and politically, that government to terminate such support.
Examples of Support for Acts of International Terrorism.-- (1) Foreign assistance act.--Section 620A(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of this section, support for acts of international terrorism includes a situation in which the government of a country knowingly allows an international terrorist organization to operate or maintain facilities within the country without taking measures to prevent such organization from operating freely.''.
Arms export control act.--Section 40(d) of the Arms Export Control Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of this section, support for acts of international terrorism includes a situation in which the government of a country knowingly allows an international terrorist organization to operate or maintain facilities within the country without taking measures to prevent such organization from operating freely.''.
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM CONTROL TREATY.
The Congress reaffirms the policy expressed in section 507 of the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985, which expressed the sense of the Congress that the President should establish a process by which democratic and open societies of the world negotiate a viable treaty to effectively prevent and respond to terrorist attacks.
INTERNATIONAL EMBARGO ON IMPORTS FROM LIBYA.
The Congress urges the President to seek the participation of other nations in an embargo on imports from Libya.
REPORT REGARDING INCREASED INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION TO COMBAT TERRORISM.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the Congress a report on the implementation of section 201 of the 1984 Act to Combat International Terrorism, which urges the President to seek more effective international cooperation in combatting international terrorism and identifies certain cooperative steps that could be taken.
Reaffirmation of 1986 Provisions.--The Congress reaffirms the necessity of the President taking the actions to combat international nuclear terrorism specified in section 601(a) of the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986, in particular paragraph (4) of that section which directs the President to seek an agreement in the United Nations Security Council to establish-- (1) an effective regime of international sanctions against any nation or subnational group which conducts or sponsors acts of international nuclear terrorism; and (2) measures for coordinating responses to all acts of international nuclear terrorism, including measures for the recovery of stolen nuclear material and the clean-up of nuclear releases.
Additional Measures.--The Congress urges the President to seek within the United Nations Security Council whatever additional measures may be necessary to discourage the use of nuclear terrorism.
Report to Congress.--Each report submitted pursuant to section 601 of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 shall include a description of the measures the United States is taking unilaterally, bilaterally, or multilaterally-- (1) to curtail the spread of nuclear material and technology to countries whose governments support international terrorism; and (2) to develop a prompt response to nuclear terrorist threats.
IMPROVING THE ABILITY OF UNITED STATES BUSINESSES TO COUNTER THE THREAT OF KIDNAPPING AND OTHER ACTS OF TERRORISM.
Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall establish a Government- Business Antiterrorism Council to study and make recommendations on-- (1) additional steps the United States Government could take to assist United States businesses counter the threat posed by international terrorism; and (2) measures that could be taken by United States businesses to counter the threat posed by international terrorism.
Membership.--The membership of the council established pursuant to this section shall include representatives of the airline industry, the tourism industry, and multinational corporations.
Special Focus on Kidnapping for Ransom.--The study conducted pursuant to this section should focus on ways to improve the ability of United States businesses to avoid the kidnapping of business executives abroad by terrorist groups seeking to obtain, through ransom payments, funds for terrorist activities.
STATE DEPARTMENT COORDINATOR FOR COUNTER-TERRORISM.
In any reorganization of the Department of State, the position of Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism, with the rank of Ambassador at Large, shall be retained.
TERMINATION OF IMET PROGRAM FOR MALTA.
Funds made available for fiscal year 1993 or 1994 to carry out chapter 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (relating to the international military education and training program) may not be obligated for Malta.
STEPS TO ENCOURAGE EXTENDED TOURS OF DUTY FOR GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL INVOLVED IN COUNTER-TERRORISM ACTIVITIES.
In recognition of the long start-up time required for sensitive counter-terrorism work, it is the sense of the Congress that United States Government personnel, both civilian and military, who are assigned counter-terrorism duties and who voluntarily accept extended tours of duty in order to continue to perform counter-terrorism duties should be accorded beneficial consideration for advancement after completion of such extended tours of duty.
DESIGNATION OF FBI AS LEAD AGENCY FOR DOMESTIC COUNTER- TERRORISM.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation shall be the lead agency for coordinating the domestic counter-terrorism activities of the United States Government.
DEATH PENALTY FOR TERRORIST ACTS ABROAD AGAINST UNITED STATES NATIONALS.
Section 2332(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, and shall be subject to the penalty of death in accordance with the procedures applicable to the imposition of that penalty under section 903(c) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code Appendix 1473(c)) relating to procedures in respect of aircraft piracy penalties'' after ``so imprisoned''.
DEATH PENALTY FOR TERRORIST ACTS IN THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Chapter 113A of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Domestic terrorism ``(a) Whoever commits a terrorist act in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce shall be subject to the death penalty, in accordance with the procedures applicable to the imposition of that penalty under section 903(c) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code Appendix 1473(c)) if death results, and in any other case shall be fined under this title or imprisoned any term of years or for life.
As used in this section, the term `terrorist act' means any crime of violence that appears to be intended-- ``(1) to influence or to be in retaliation for the policy or conduct of a government; ``(2) to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; or ``(3) to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping.''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 113A of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``2339.