RURAL HEALTH-CARE CLINIC PROGRAM.
Program.--(1) Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of subchapter II the following new section: ``Sec.
Rural health-care clinics: pilot program ``(a) During the three-year period beginning on October 1, 1993, the Secretary shall conduct a rural health-care clinic program in States where significant numbers of veterans reside in areas geographically remote from existing health-care facilities (as determined by the Secretary).
The Secretary shall conduct the program in accordance with this section.
(1) In carrying out the rural health-care clinic program, the Secretary shall furnish medical services to the veterans described in subsection (c) through use of-- ``(A) mobile health-care clinics equipped, operated, and maintained by personnel of the Department; and ``(B) other types of rural clinics, including part-time stationary clinics for which the Secretary contracts and part- time stationary clinics operated by personnel of the Department.
The Secretary shall furnish services under the rural health- care clinic program in areas-- ``(A) that are more than 100 miles from a Department general health-care facility; and ``(B) that are less than 100 miles from such a facility, if the Secretary determines that the furnishing of such services in such areas is appropriate.
A veteran eligible to receive medical services through rural health-care clinics under the program is any veteran eligible for medical services under section 1712 of this title.
The Secretary shall commence operation of at least three rural health-care clinics (at least one of which shall be a mobile health-care clinic) in each fiscal year of the program.
The Secretary may not operate more than one mobile health-care clinic under the authority of this section in any State in any such fiscal year.
Not later than December 31, 1997, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report containing an evaluation of the program.
The report shall include the following: ``(1) A description of the program, including information with respect to-- ``(A) the number and type of rural health-care clinics operated under the program; ``(B) the States in which such clinics were operated; ``(C) the medical services furnished under the program, including a detailed specification of the cost of such services; ``(D) the veterans who were furnished services under the program, setting forth (i) the numbers and percentages of the veterans who had service-connected disabilities, (ii) of the veterans having such disabilities, the numbers and percentages who were furnished care for such disabilities, (iii) the ages of the veterans, (iv) taking into account the veterans' past use of Department health-care facilities, an analysis of the extent to which the veterans would have received medical services from the Department outside the program and the types of services they would have received, and (v) the financial circumstances of the veterans; and ``(E) the types of personnel who furnished services to veterans under the program, including any difficulties in the recruitment or retention of such personnel.
An assessment by the Secretary of the cost- effectiveness and efficiency of furnishing medical services to veterans through various types of rural clinics (including mobile health-care clinics operated under the pilot program conducted pursuant to section 113 of the Veterans' Benefits and Services Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-322; 38 United States Code 1712 note)).
Any plans for administrative action, and any recommendations for legislation, that the Secretary considers appropriate.
For the purposes of this section, the term `Department general health-care facility' has the meaning given such term in section 1712A(i)(2) of this title.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1720D the following new item: ``1720E.
Rural health-care clinics: pilot program.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Veterans Affairs to carry out the rural health-care clinics program provided for in section 1720E of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), the following: (A) For fiscal year 1994, $3,000,000.
For fiscal year 1995, $6,000,000.
For fiscal year 1996, $9,000,000.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to such authorization may not be used for any other purpose.
No funds may be expended to carry out the rural health-care clinics program provided for in such section 1720E (as so added) unless expressly provided for in an appropriations Act.