Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Health Insurance Relief Act of 2002''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Of the 39,000,000 uninsured Americans, 72 percent are either full-time workers or dependents of those workers.
Of the uninsured working population, 56 percent are employed by small businesses.
Of the working population, more than 74 percent are covered by employer-sponsored health insurance.
Small businesses are less likely to offer health insurance to their employees, and employees of those small businesses are less likely to participate in a health plan when it is offered to them, when compared with larger businesses and employees of larger businesses.
Implementation of the policy set forth in this Act in participating States will reduce the number of low-income workers without health insurance in those States.
Because individuals without health insurance do not seek preventive care or early intervention, when those individuals suffer from a serious medical condition, they are often faced with large medical bills which they cannot pay.
The costs of unpaid medical bills by individuals without health insurance are often shifted to private and Government payers.
By increasing access to affordable health insurance for low-income workers, this Act will contribute to the health and well-being of those individuals, as well as reduce costs for those who bear the burden of uncompensated care.
INCENTIVES TO PROVIDE HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR THE WORKING UNINSURED.
In General.--For each State that applies for a waiver under section 1115 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1315) that includes, as a part of that waiver, the use of funds otherwise paid to the State under the medicaid program or the State children's health insurance program to provide eligible uninsured employees health insurance coverage that meets the requirements of subsection (b), the Secretary may award the State, upon approval of that waiver, an incentive payment (not to exceed $1,000,000) to assist the State in carrying out the waiver.
Requirements.--To be eligible for an incentive payment under subsection (a), an application for a section 1115 waiver, with respect to health insurance coverage, shall meet the following requirements: (1) Coverage.--Provide a process and a timeline for achieving coverage of all eligible uninsured employees statewide, without regard to health status or preexisting condition, or location of residency within the State.
Manner of provision of health insurance coverage.-- Provide health insurance coverage through employer-sponsored health insurance or by buying into the medicaid or the State children's health insurance programs, including the provision of wraparound health benefits.
Benefits.-- (A) Actuarial equivalence.--(i) In the case of health insurance coverage provided through employer- sponsored health insurance coverage or by purchasing coverage through the State children's health insurance programs, provides for a benefit package that is at least actuarially equivalent to the required scope of health insurance coverage under section 2103 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397cc) (relating to coverage requirements for children's health insurance under the State children's health insurance program).
In the case of health insurance coverage provided by purchasing coverage through the medicaid program, provides for a benefit package that is at least actuarially equivalent to the required scope of medical assistance (as defined in section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)) under the State plan of the State.
Limit on employee cost sharing.--Provide that an employee covered under the program pay no more than a nominal amount of the employee's income (as determined by the State) for costs of premiums, deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments under the plan.
Consultation with affected entities.--Provide for consultation with representatives of affected entities and organizations, both public and private, in developing a plan to provide such health insurance coverage.
Outreach mechanisms.--Describe the outreach mechanisms to be used to assure coverage of all eligible individuals, including measures to assure coverage of individuals in hard- to-reach populations and to assure benefits are provided to eligible individuals located in underserved areas.
Quality assurance.--Provide, and describe, mechanisms to be used to assure, monitor, and maintain the quality of items and services furnished under the waiver.
Maintenance of effort.--Provide that employers who, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, offer health insurance coverage to or pay a percentage of premiums for such health insurance coverage for employees and who participate under the demonstration project maintain or increase levels of coverage or contributions to employees health insurance over those levels in effect before the implementation of the waiver.
Such budget shall include a description (and an estimate of costs) of transitional activities to be undertaken in implementing the proposed plan.
Implementation.--Describe the method (including a timetable and period of transition) for implementing the waiver.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as preempting State laws that provide greater protections or benefits than the protections or benefits required under this Act.
Definitions.--As used in this Act: (1) Eligible uninsured employees.--The term ``eligible uninsured employees'' means-- (A) any resident of the United States-- (i) who is a citizen or national of the United States, or lawful resident alien; (ii) who resides in any particular State; (iii) who is employed in a work site of an employer that is a small business located in the State; (iv)(I) whose employer does not offer employer-sponsored health insurance; or (II) whose employer offers such insurance but at a cost that is not affordable for the resident (as determined by the State); and (v) who is not entitled to benefits under title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act based on eligibility requirements under those titles in effect on or after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) the spouse and dependent children of such resident (2) Lawful resident alien.--The term ``lawful resident alien'' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States under color of law, including an alien granted asylum or with lawful temporary resident status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Small business.--The term ``small business'' means an employer who employs 50 or fewer employees.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means a State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.