This Act may be cited as the ``Voter Turnout Enhancement Study Commission Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the right of citizens of the United States to vote is a fundamental right; (2) Federal, State, and local governments have a duty to promote the exercise of the right to vote to the greatest extent possible; (3) the power to tax is only guardedly granted to Federal, State, and local governments by the citizens of the United States; (4) the only regular contact that most Americans have with their government consists of filing personal income tax returns and voting in Federal, State, and local elections; (5) in 1992, almost 115,000,000 Federal income tax returns were filed by individuals and couples, but only approximately 104,000,000 votes were cast in the year's presidential election; and (6) more closely tying the rights of individuals as voters to their obligations as taxpayers will provide additional incentives for individuals to both participate in the electoral process and scrutinize the costs and benefits of government policies.
There is established a commission to be known as the Voter Turnout Enhancement Study Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members appointed as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by the President.
3 members appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, upon the joint recommendation of the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate.
3 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, upon the joint recommendation of the Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 2 of the 3 members of the Commission appointed under any 1 paragraph of subsection (a) may be of the same political party.
Time of Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed to serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.-- Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Compensation.-- (1) Rate of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons employed intermittently in the Government service.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold a hearing.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold its initial meeting not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study of all matters relating to the possibility of changing the filing date for Federal income tax returns to the 1st Tuesday after the 1st Monday in November.
The study shall include an analysis of-- (1) the costs and benefits of the change in filing date; and (2) the likelihood that establishment of a single date on which individuals can fulfill obligations of citizenship as both electors and taxpayers will increase participation in Federal, State, and local elections.
Consultation.--The Commission shall consult with Governors, Federal and State election officials, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and any other person, agency, or entity that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold the hearings, sit and act at the times and places, take the testimony, and receive the information that the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Mails.--the Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as any other Federal department or agency.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
Requests for Official Information.--The Commission may request from a Federal department or agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
The head of the department or agency shall provide the information to the Commission unless release of the information to the public by the agency is prohibited by law.
STAFF ASSISTANCE FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Upon the request of the Commission or the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of the department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission to carry out this Act.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report that contains-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the study required by section 5; and (2) recommendations of the Commission regarding any legislation or administrative action the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate upon the submission of the report required by section 8.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.