Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Electronic Marketplace Ownership Disclosure Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The phenomenal economic expansion that our nation experienced during the last decade was fueled by advances in information technology and the development of the Internet.
Today, consumers and businesses routinely participate in new online marketplaces.
Certain Internet exchanges purporting to provide neutral marketplaces for the exchange of goods and services are actually owned by marketplace operators with interests in the transactions taking place on the exchanges.
Certain Internet exchanges have made business arrangements with sellers without disclosing the existence of those arrangements to the consumers.
Additional consumer protections are needed to increase public confidence in the Internet.
As used in this Act: (1) Electronic marketplace.-- (A) In general.--The term ``electronic marketplace'' means an enterprise that-- (i) is organized to bring together by electronic means, on both sides of a transaction, the offers, bids, or orders of multiple participants; (ii) is accessible to participants from the general public, and is not restricted to licensed or qualified specialists; (iii) lists products and services of such participants, or provides links or connections by which access to such lists may be obtained; and (iv) is operated as a business and collects compensation from any of such participants as a condition of participation.
Exclusions.--Such term does not include-- (i) any securities exchange or national securities association registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; (ii) any contract market or derivative transaction execution facility registered under the Commodity Exchange Act; (iii) any marketplace that is operated for the conduct of retail transactions by a single vendor, even if that vendor sells or offers the products or services of multiple providers of such products or services; or (iv) any marketplace on which the total annual volume of transactions is less than $10,000,000, or such other marketplaces as may be excluded from such term by the regulations prescribed under section 3 on the basis of such factors as minimum transaction volume or size, minimum number of transactions, or minimum number of market participants over a designated period of time, or other relevant factors.
Open to public.--A marketplace shall not be considered to be restricted to licensed or qualified specialists under subparagraph (A)(ii) merely because such marketplace requires participants from the general public to register and to disclose identifying or financial information prior to participating.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal Trade Commission.
Affiliate.--The term ``affiliate'' means any company that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with another company.
ELECTRONIC MARKETPLACE DISCLOSURE REGULATIONS.
Disclosure Required.--The Commission shall prescribe rules in accordance with this section to prohibit unfair and deceptive acts and practices in the operation of an electronic marketplace by requiring the operator of such market to disclose the following: (1) Ownership disclosures.--The operator of an electronic marketplace shall disclose-- (A) the identity of any affiliate of such marketplace; and (B) contact information, or a website link, from which a marketplace participant may obtain additional information about such affiliates.
Disclosure of financial arrangements business arrangements with market participants.--The operator of an electronic marketplace shall disclose-- (A) the usual or customary financial arrangements under which the largest portion of marketplace participants are permitted to participate; (B) any unusual or special financial arrangements under which a smaller number of marketplace participants are accorded special privileges or other benefits in their marketplace participation; and (C) the identity of any persons or entities with which the operator has an arrangement described in subparagraph (B).
Clear and Conspicuous Disclosure.-- (1) Required disclosures.--The regulation prescribed under this section shall require that the disclosures required by subsection (a)-- (A) be clear and conspicuous to electronic marketplace participants; (B) to the extent possible, be stated in simple and uncomplicated terms; and (C) be readily accessible to the public through the Internet.
Exemptions and limitations on disclosures.--The regulations prescribed under this section-- (A) shall require that the disclosures be updated at least quarterly; and (B) shall not require the posting or disclosure of the actual contracts with market participants.
Regulatory Authority.-- (1) Rulemaking.--The Commission shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Procedures and deadline.--Such regulations shall be prescribed in accordance with applicable requirements of title 5, United States Code, and shall be issued in final form not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
This Act and the regulations prescribed thereunder shall be enforced by Commission under the Federal Trade Commission Act.