SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Revitalization Tax Act of 2001''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
CERTAIN INVESTMENTS IN UNITED STATES PROPERTY BY QUALIFIED CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Section 956 is amended by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f) and adding the following new subsection (e): ``(e) Separate Application of Section to Qualified Corporations.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a qualified corporation, this section shall be applied separately with respect to such corporation's qualified income.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) Qualified corporation.--The term `qualified corporation' means any foreign corporation which is a controlled foreign corporation and is created or organized under the laws of, or engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business within, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a possession of the United States.
Qualified income.--The term `qualified income' means income earned by a qualified corporation in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001, from sources outside the United States, from-- ``(i) the active conduct of a trade or business within the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a possession of the United States, or ``(ii) the sale or exchange of substantially all of the assets used in the active conduct of such a trade or business.
Possession.--The term `possession of the United States' includes the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Taxable years to which subsection is applicable.-- This subsection shall be applicable with respect to any taxable year of a qualified corporation beginning after December 31, 2001, for which an election under section 245(d) is not in effect.''
Certain Investments in United States Property.--Section 951(a) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof: ``(4) Certain investments in united states property.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount determined under paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection with respect to a qualified corporation (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(A)) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the lesser of-- ``(i) 90 percent of the amount determined under section 956(e) with respect to such corporation for the taxable year, or ``(ii) 90 percent of such corporation's cumulative qualified income (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(B)), reduced by amounts (if any) previously allowed as a deduction under section 245(d).
Succeeding taxable years.--In applying this section and section 956 to any taxable year, any amount not included in the gross income of a United States shareholder of a qualified corporation in a prior taxable year solely by reason of the application of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be treated as if it had been so included in the gross income of the United States shareholder in such prior taxable year.''
DIVIDENDS RECEIVED DEDUCTION WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN DISTRIBUTIONS BY QUALIFIED CORPORATIONS.
Section 245 is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof: ``(d) Dividends From Qualified Corporations.-- ``(1) General rule.--In the case of a dividend described in paragraph (2) received by a domestic corporation from an electing qualified corporation (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(A)), there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to 85 percent of such dividend.
Eligible dividends.--Paragraph (1) shall apply only to dividends which are paid out of that portion of the earnings and profits of a qualified corporation which does not exceed such corporation's accumulated qualified income (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(B)).
Application of section 316 ordering rule.--For purposes of this subsection, a dividend shall be deemed to be made out of the most recently accumulated earnings and profits of the qualified corporation.
Elections.-- ``(A) In general.--An election under this subsection shall be made by the qualified corporation at such time and in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Years for which election is effective.--An election under this subsection shall be effective for the taxable year of the qualified corporation beginning after December 31, 2001, for which such election is made and for all succeeding taxable years of such corporation, unless-- ``(i) the corporation ceases to be a qualified corporation, or ``(ii) the corporation revokes the election.
New election by qualified corporation following termination.--If a qualified corporation has made an election under this subsection and if such election has been terminated under subparagraph (B), such corporation (and any successor qualified corporation) shall not be eligible to make an election under this subsection for any taxable year before the 5th taxable year which begins after the 1st taxable year for which such termination is effective, unless the Secretary consents to such election.
Coordination with foreign tax credit.--To the extent provided by the Secretary in regulations, the principles of sections 245(a)(8) and (9) shall apply to dividends described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.''
SAFE HARBOR RULE FOR CERTAIN TRANSFERS OR LICENSES OF INTANGIBLE PROPERTY TO A QUALIFIED CORPORATION.
Section 367 is amended by the following new subsection at the end thereof: ``(g) Safe Harbor for Certain Transfers or Licenses of Intangible Property.-- ``(1) General rule.--If subsection (d)(2)(A)(ii) or section 482 is otherwise applicable to the transfer or license of qualified intangible property to an electing qualified corporation (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(A)), the requirements of subsection (d)(2)(A)(ii) or section 482, as the case may be, shall be treated as satisfied for all purposes under this subtitle, with respect to the qualified income attributable to the qualified intangible property, for any taxable year for which the electing qualified corporation computes its qualified income (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(B)) with respect to its products or services involving the use of the qualified intangible property in accordance with the same method specified in section 936(h) (as in effect on the date of enactment of this subsection) which was used by the domestic corporation referred to in paragraph (2)(A) for its last taxable year beginning before the transfer or license to the qualified corporation.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Qualified intangible property.--The term `qualified intangible property' means any intangible property owned by a domestic corporation on the date of enactment of this section, but only if such property was-- ``(i) developed or purchased by the domestic corporation, and ``(ii) used directly in the active conduct by the domestic corporation of a trade or business for which credits were allowed under either section 30A or section 936 for the taxable year within which the transfer or license occurs.
Intangible property.--The term `intangible property' means any intangible property (within the meaning of subsection (d)) but only if such property was used directly in connection with a manufacturing or similar process within the taxable year referred to in paragraph (2)(A)(ii).
Elections.-- ``(A) In general.--An election under this subsection shall be made by the qualified corporation, in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations, only before the 15th day of the 3d month following the close of the first taxable year of such corporation beginning after December 31, 2001.
Years for which effective.--An election under this subsection shall apply to the taxable year for which made and all subsequent years unless-- ``(i) the foreign corporation which is the transferee or licensee ceases to be a qualified corporation, or ``(ii) the Secretary consents to the revocation of the election.''
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING CHANGES.
Imputed Interest.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, no interest shall be imputed, and no original issue discount shall be accrued, for any purpose under such Code with respect to any obligation issued to a qualified corporation (as defined in section 956(e)(2)(A) of such Code) as part of a transaction to which section 956(e) of such Code is applicable.
Constructive Dividends.--Notwithstanding any provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, no amount of United States property held by a qualified corporation (as defined in section 956(e) of such Code) pursuant to sections 951(a)(4) and 956(e) of such Code shall be treated as a dividend for any purpose under the Code.
The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.