This Act may be cited as the ``Bruce Vento Stand Down Act''.
FINDINGS, COMMENDATION, AND PURPOSE.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) veterans outreach activities known as ``Stand Down events'' have proven to be an effective form of outreach and a successful way to provide assistance to those veterans, frequently homeless, who have most often not otherwise used or availed themselves of existing service delivery functions; and (2) Stand Down events have been most effective when managed by a committee composed of representatives of the Department of Veterans Affairs, other agencies (Federal, State, or local), veteran service organizations, and homeless service providers and such shared leadership brings to this partnership access to diverse resources with which to carry out those events.
Sense of Congress Concerning Department of Defense Support.--It is the sense of Congress that the several branches of the Armed Forces and the National Guard-- (1) have provided valuable support and services to establish and maintain the delivery of services to veterans at Stand Down events; and (2) should continue to do so to the extent that their various missions, responsibilities, and roles permit.
Commendation of Veterans' Organizations.--Congress hereby-- (1) commends and recognizes national and local veterans' organizations, which have provided valuable support and services to veterans at Stand Down events and have been instrumental to the success of such events, for their outstanding contributions to those events; and (2) strongly encourages those organizations to continue to provide volunteers and resources for those events.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize the Secretary of Veterans Affairs-- (1) to provide assistance to meet the needs of all veterans at Stand Down events; and (2) to work with veterans service organizations and other not-for-profit organizations to determine the best means for organizing and carrying out Stand Down events.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS AUTHORIZATION FOR STAND DOWN EVENTS.
In General.--(1) Subchapter VII of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Stand Down events ``(a) The Secretary may (directly or in conjunction with a governmental or other entity)-- ``(1) carry out Stand Down events; and ``(2) in connection with any Stand Down event, whether carried out by the Secretary or by another sponsoring entity-- ``(A) provide outreach services; ``(B) use or provide any property and resources of the Department that the Secretary determines are not otherwise reasonably needed by the Department; and ``(C) provide any other benefit or service of the Department that the Secretary considers appropriate.
For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `Stand Down event' means an event to provide target veterans with one to three days of safety and security, access to assistance such as food, shelter, clothing, benefits certification, and health care, and any other form of assistance that the Secretary considers appropriate.
The term `target veteran' means a veteran who is without a home, unemployed, experiencing health or social adjustment challenges, or otherwise in need of assistance.
The Secretary shall establish and implement a pilot program under which the Secretary shall carry out (directly or in conjunction with a governmental or other entity) at least one Stand Down event in each State during each calendar year.
The Secretary may carry out (or otherwise participate in) as many additional Stand Down events during any year as the Secretary determines to be needed.
Not later than February 1 of each year, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report containing-- ``(1) for the preceding year, a description of the implementation of the pilot program established under subsection (c); ``(2) the Secretary's recommendations, if any, for legislation regarding the pilot program; and ``(3) any other matter that the Secretary considers appropriate regarding Stand Down events.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1775.
Effective Dates.--(1) Subsection (c) of section 1775 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect beginning with 2002.
The first report under subsection (d) of such section shall be submitted not later than February 1, 2003.