IMPROVED RISK MANAGEMENT EDUCATION.
Title IV of the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 (7 United States Code 7621 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
IMPROVED RISK MANAGEMENT EDUCATION FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS.
Program Required.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall carry out a program to improve the risk management skills of agricultural producers, including the owners and operators of small farms, limited resource producers, and other targeted audiences, to make informed risk management decisions.
The program is designed to assist producers to develop the skills necessary-- ``(1) to understand the financial health and capability of the producer's operation to withstand price fluctuations, adverse weather, environmental impacts, diseases, family crises, and other risks; ``(2) to understand marketing alternatives, how various commodity markets work, the use of crop insurance products, and the price risk inherent in various markets; and ``(3) to understand legal, governmental, environmental, and human resource issues that impact the producer's operation.
Coordinating Centers.-- ``(1) Establishment and purpose.--The Secretary shall establish a Risk Management Education Coordinating Center in each of five regions of the United States to administer and coordinate the provision of risk management education to producers and their families under the program in that region.
Site selection.--The Secretary shall locate the Center for a region at an existing risk management education coordinating office of the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service or at an appropriate alternative land-grant college in the region approved by the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service.
To be selected as the location for a Center, a land-grant college must have the demonstrated capability and capacity to carry out the program priorities, funding distribution, and reporting requirements of the program.
Coordinating Council.--Each Center shall establish a coordinating council to assist in establishing the funding and program priorities for that region.
The council shall consist of a minimum of five members, including representatives from the following sources: ``(1) Public organizations.
The Regional Service Offices of the Risk Management Agency in that region.
Center Activities.-- ``(1) Instruction for risk management professionals.--Each Center shall coordinate the offering of intensive risk management instructional programs, involving classroom, distant learning, and field training work, for professionals who work with agricultural producers.
These professionals include-- ``(A) extension specialists; ``(B) county extension faculty; ``(C) private service providers; and ``(D) other individuals who are involved in providing risk management education.
Education programs for producers.--Each Center shall coordinate the provision of educational programs, including workshops, short courses, seminars, and distant-learning modules, to improve the risk management skills of agricultural producers and their families.
Development and dissemination of materials.--Each Center shall coordinate the efforts to develop new risk management education materials and the dissemination of such materials.
Coordination of resources.--Each Center shall make use of available and emerging risk management information, materials, and delivery systems, after careful evaluation of the content and suitability of the information, materials, and delivery systems for producers and their families.
The Centers shall use available expertise from land-grant colleges, nongovernmental organizations, government agencies, and the private sector to assist in conducting this evaluation.
Grants.-- ``(1) Special grants.--Each Center shall reserve a portion of the funds provided under this section to make special grants to land-grant colleges and private entities in the region to conduct one or more of the activities described in subsection (d).
Competitive grants.--Each Center shall also reserve a portion of the funds provided under this section to conduct a competitive grant program to award grants to both public and private entities that have a demonstrated capability to conduct one or more of the activities described in subsection (d).
National Agriculture Risk Education Library.--The National Agriculture Risk Education Library is a central focus for the coordination and distribution of risk management educational materials.
The Library shall serve as a means for the electronic delivery of risk management information and materials.
Funding Provisions.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and each subsequent fiscal year to carry out this section.
Distribution.--Funds appropriated to carry out this section for a fiscal year shall be equally distributed among the Centers, except that 2.5 percent of such funds shall be distributed to the National Agriculture Risk Education Library.
The land-grant college at which a Center is located shall be responsible for administering and disbursing such funds, in accordance with applicable State and Federal financial guidelines, for activities authorized by this section.
Prohibition on construction.--Centers shall be located in existing facilities.
Funds provided under this section to a Center or as a grant under subsection (e) may not be used to carry out facility construction.
Evaluation.--The Secretary, acting through the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service, shall evaluate the activities of the Centers to determine whether the risk management skills of agricultural producers and their families are improved as a result of their participation in educational activities financed using funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (g).
Land-Grant College Defined.--In this section, the term `land- grant college' means any 1862 Institution, 1890 Institution, or 1994 Institution.