This Act may be cited as the ``Rebuild American Manufacturing Act of 2013''.
Strategy Required.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall develop a comprehensive national manufacturing strategy.
Biennial revisions.--Not less frequently than once every 2 years after the date on which the President completes the strategy required by paragraph (1), the President shall revise such strategy.
Goals of Strategy.--The President shall include in the national manufacturing strategy required by subsection (a) short- and long-term goals for United States manufacturing, including goals-- (1) to increase the aggregate number of manufacturing jobs in the United States so that such number is not less than 20 percent of the sum of all nonfarm jobs in the United States; (2) to identify emerging technologies to strengthen the competitiveness of United States manufacturing in the global marketplace; and (3) to strengthen the manufacturing sectors of the United States in which the United States is most competitive in the global economy.
Information Required.--The national manufacturing strategy required by subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) A survey of all persons with headquarters in the United States that maintain manufacturing facilities outside of the United States to identify-- (A) the categories of products manufactured at such facilities; and (B) the number of manufacturing jobs located at such facilities.
A survey of all Federal agencies that provide assistance to United States manufacturers, including the following: (A) The Department of Commerce.
The Department of Defense.
The Department of Energy.
The Department of Labor.
The Department of the Treasury.
The Small Business Administration.
The Office of Management and Budget.
The Office of Science and Technology Policy.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative.
The National Science Foundation.
Such other Federal agencies as the President considers appropriate.
A survey of manufacturing goods produced in the United States and where such goods are produced.
The number of people in the United States employed by manufacturers operating in the United States.
An evaluation of the global competitiveness of United States manufacturing, including the following: (A) A comparison of the manufacturing policies and strategies of the United States with the policies and strategies of other countries, including the countries that are the top 5 trading partners of the United States.
A comparison of the productivity of each sector of the manufacturing industry in the United States with comparable sectors of manufacturing industries in other countries.
Recommendations.--The President shall include in the national manufacturing strategy required by subsection (a) recommendations for achieving the goals included in the strategy pursuant to subsection (b).
Such recommendations may include proposals as follows: (1) Actions to be taken by the President, Congress, State, local, and territorial governments, the private sector, universities, industry associations, and other stakeholders.
Ways to improve Government policies, coordination among entities developing such policies, and Government interaction with the manufacturing sector, including interagency communications regarding the effects of proposed or active Government regulations or other executive actions on the United States manufacturing sector and its workforce.
How each Federal agency surveyed under subsection (c)(2) can best support the national manufacturing strategy required by subsection (a).
Adoption of strategies that have been implemented by other countries and proven successful.
Submittal of Strategy.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and each time the President revises under paragraph (2) of subsection (a) the strategy required by paragraph (1) of such subsection, the President shall submit to Congress such strategy.