That this Act may be cited as the ``Small Business and Minority Small Business Procurement Opportunities Act of 1994''.
FUNCTIONS OF SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION.
The Small Business Act is amended by adding the following new section: ``Sec.
The Administrator of the Small Business Administration, in coordination with other Federal agencies, shall-- ``(1) develop plans to coordinate and promote the use of the Federal Acquisition Computer Network by small businesses that incorporate outreach efforts by the Administration, agency Offices of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, Small Business Development Centers, and other appropriate organizations; and ``(2) inform and provide consistent and comprehensive training on the Network for small businesses.''.
Section 15(j) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 644(j)) is amended to read as follows: ``(j)(1) Each contract for the procurement of goods and services that has an anticipated value not in excess of $100,000 shall be reserved exclusively for small business concerns unless the contracting officer is unable to obtain offers from two or more small business concerns that (A) are competitive with market prices, and (B) are competitive with regard to the quality and delivery of the goods or services being procured.
In carrying out paragraph (1), a contracting officer shall consider any offer that is responsive and that is received in a timely manner from an eligible small business offeror.
Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed as precluding an award of a contract with a value not in excess of $100,000 under the authority of-- ``(A) section 8(a) of this Act; ``(B) section 2323 of title 10, United States Code; ``(C) section 316 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949; or ``(D) section 12 of the Business Opportunity Development Reform Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-656; United States Code 644 note).
In the case of contracts referred to in paragraph (1) that are entered into with small business concerns, contracting officers shall, wherever circumstances permit, provide for the use of fast payment terms and the disbursement of payment through electronic fund transfer.
A purchase by an executive agency with an anticipated value of the micro-purchase threshold or less shall not be subject to the small business reserve requirements of paragraph (1) of this subsection.''.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING CHANGES.
Section 3(m) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(m)) is amended to read as follows: ``(m) For purposes of this Act, the term `simplified acquisition threshold' has the meaning given such term in section 4A of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 403A) and the term `micro- purchase threshold' has the meaning given such term in section 4B(e) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 401 et seq.).''.
Section 8(d)(2)(A) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(d)(2)(A)) is amended by striking out ``does not exceed the small purchase threshold'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``is for an amount not in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold''.
CONTRACT GOALS FOR SMALL BUSINESSES OWNED BY ECONOMICALLY AND SOCIALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS AND FOR CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.
Section 8(g) of the Small Business Act is amended to read as follows: ``(g)(1) The President annually shall establish Government-wide goals for procurement contracts awarded to small business concerns and small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals.
The Government-wide goal for participation by small business concerns shall be established at not less than 20 percent of the total value of all prime contract awards for each fiscal year.
The Government-wide goal for participation by small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals shall be established at not less than 5 percent of the total value of all prime contract and subcontract awards for each fiscal year.
A goal of 5 percent of the amount described in paragraph (5) shall be the objective of an executive agency in each of fiscal years 1994 through 2000 for the total combined amount obligated for contracts and subcontracts entered into with-- ``(A) small business concerns, including mass media and advertising firms, owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, the majority of the earnings of which directly accrue to such individuals; ``(B) historically Black colleges and universities, including any nonprofit research institution that was an integral part of such a college or university before November 14, 1986; and ``(C) minority institutions (as defined in section 1046(3) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1135d-5(3)), which, for the purposes of this section, shall include Hispanic-serving institutions (as defined in section 316(b)(1) of such Act (20 United States Code 1059c(b)(1)).
The head of the agency shall establish a specific goal within the overall 5 percent goal for the award of prime contracts and subcontracts to historically Black colleges and universities and minority institutions in order to increase the participation of such colleges and universities in the program provided for by this subsection.
The administration, in consultation with the Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy, shall provide procedures or guidelines for contracting officers to set goals which executive agency prime contractors that are required to submit subcontracting plans under subsection (d) in furtherance of the agency's program to meet the 5 percent goal specified in paragraph (2) should meet in awarding subcontracts, including subcontracts to minority-owned media, to entities described in that paragraph.
The requirements of paragraphs (2) through (4) for any fiscal year apply to the total value of all prime contract awards entered into by the executive agency for such fiscal year.
(A) To attain the goal specified in paragraph (2), the head of the agency shall provide technical assistance to the entities referred to in that subsection and, in the case of historically Black colleges and universities and minority institutions, shall also provide infrastructure assistance.
Technical assistance provided under this section shall include information about the program, advice about the agency's procurement procedures, instruction in preparation of proposals, and other such assistance as the agency head considers appropriate.
If the resources of the executive agency are inadequate to provide such assistance, the agency head may enter into contracts with minority private sector entities with experience and expertise in the design, development, and delivery of technical assistance services to eligible individuals, business firms and institutions, acquisition agencies, and prime contractors.
Agency contracts with such entities shall be awarded annually, based upon, among other things, the number of minority small business concerns, historically Black colleges and universities, and minority institutions that each such entity brings into the program.
The agency head shall, to the maximum extent practical, carry out programs under this section at colleges, universities, and institutions that agree to bear a substantial portion of the cost associated with the programs.
To attain the goal of paragraph (2), ``(A) The head of the agency shall-- ``(i) ensure that substantial progress is made in increasing awards of agency contracts to entities described in paragraph (2); ``(ii) exercise his utmost authority, resourcefulness, and diligence; and ``(iii) actively monitor and assess the progress of prime contractors of the agency in attaining such goal.
In making the assessment under subparagraph (A)(iii), the agency head shall evaluate the extent to which use of the authority provided in paragraphs (C) and (D) and compliance with the requirement in paragraph (E) is effective for facilitating the attainment of the goal.
To the extent practicable and when necessary to facilitate achievement of the 5 percent goal described in paragraph (2), the agency head shall make advance payments under section 305 of title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes) to contractors described in paragraph (2).
The Federal Acquisition Regulation shall provide guidance to contracting officers for making advance payments to entities described in subsection (a)(1) under such section.
To the extent practicable and when necessary to facilitate achievement of the 5 percent goal described in paragraph (2), the agency head may enter into contracts using less than full and open competitive procedures (including awards under subsection (a) of this section) and partial set asides for entities described in paragraph (2), but shall pay a price not exceeding fair market cost by more than 10 percent in payment per contract to contractors or subcontractors described in paragraph (2).
The agency head shall adjust the percentage specified in the preceding sentence for any industry category if available information clearly indicates that nondisadvantaged small business concerns in such industry category are generally being denied a reasonable opportunity to compete for contracts because of the use of that percentage in the application of this paragraph.
To the extent practicable, the agency head shall maximize the number of minority small business concerns, historically Black colleges and universities, and minority institutions participating in the program.
The administration, in consultation with the Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy, shall prescribe regulations which provide for the following: ``(i) Procedures or guidance for contracting officers to provide incentives for prime contractors described in paragraph (2) to increase subcontractor awards to entities described in such paragraph.
A requirement that contracting officers emphasize the award of contracts to entities described in paragraph (2) in all industry categories, including those categories in which such entities have not traditionally dominated.
Guidance to executive agency personnel on the relationship among the following programs: ``(I) The program implementing this subsection.
The program established under subsection (a).
The small business set-aside program established under section 15(a) of this Act (15 United States Code 644(a)).
With respect to an agency procurement which is reasonably likely to be set aside for entities described in paragraph (2), a requirement that (to the maximum extent practicable) the procurement be designated as such a set-aside before the solicitation for the procurement is issued.
Policies and procedures which, to the maximum extent practicable, will ensure that current levels in the number or dollar value of contracts awarded under the program established under subsection (a) (15 United States Code 637(a)) and under the small business set-aside program established under section 15(a) of this Act (15 United States Code 644(a)) are maintained and that every effort is made to provide new opportunities for contract awards to eligible entities, in order to meet the goal of paragraph (2).
Implementation of this section in a manner which will not alter the procurement process under the program established under subsection (a) of this Act (15 United States Code 637(a)).
A requirement that one factor used in evaluating the performance of a contracting officer be the ability of the officer to increase contract awards to entities described in paragraph (2).
Increased technical assistance to entities described in paragraph (2).
(A) Whoever for the purpose of securing a contract or subcontract under paragraph (2), misrepresents the status of any concern or person as a small business concern owned and controlled by a minority (as described in paragraph (2), shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year or a fine of not less than $10,000, or both.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation shall prohibit awarding a contract under this section to an entity described in paragraph (2) unless the entity agrees to comply with the requirements of section 15(o)(1) of this Act (15 United States Code 644(o)(1)).
(A) To the maximum extent practicable, the head of the agency shall-- ``(i) ensure that no particular industry category bears a disproportionate share of the contracts awarded to attain the goal established by paragraph (2); and ``(ii) ensure that contracts awarded to attain the goal established by paragraph (2) are made across the broadest possible range of industry categories.
Under procedures prescribed by the head of the agency and approved by the administration, a person may request the agency head to determine whether the use of small disadvantaged business set asides by a contracting activity of the agency has caused a particular industry category to bear a disproportionate share of the contracts awarded to attain the goal established for that contracting activity for the purposes of this subsection.
Upon making a determination that a particular industry category is bearing a disproportionate share, the agency head shall take appropriate actions to limit the contracting activity's use of set asides in awarding contracts in that particular industry category.
(A) The administration shall issue regulations to ensure that potential contractors submitting sealed bids or competitive proposals to the executive agency for procurement contracts to be awarded under the program provided for by this subsection are complying with applicable subcontracting plan requirements of subsection (d) of this Act (15 United States Code 637(d)).
The regulations required by paragraph (A) shall ensure that, with respect to a sealed bid or competitive proposal for which the bidder or offeror is required to negotiate or submit a subcontracting plan under subsection (d) of this Act (15 United States Code 637(d)), the subcontracting plan shall be a factor in evaluating the bid or proposal.
(A) Not later than December 15 of each year, the administration shall submit to Congress a report on the progress of each executive agency toward attaining the goal of paragraph (2) during the preceding fiscal year.
The report required under paragraph (A) shall include a description of-- ``(i) the degree of participation by small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals in procurements conducted by each executive agency; and ``(ii) the extent of compliance by executive agencies with the goals for participation by such businesses required by paragraph (1), relating to Government-wide small business and small disadvantaged business goals for procurement contracts.
This subsection shall not be construed as modifying or superseding any other provision of law establishing a goal or requirement for an agency to obligate 5 percent or more of the total value of all prime contract awards entered into by the agency for a fiscal year with any entity described in paragraph (2).
The Coast Guard and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (notwithstanding section 302(a)(1)) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et seq.)
shall each be considered to be an executive agency for the purposes of this subsection.
This subsection applies to each of fiscal years 1994 through 2000.''.
TEST OF INNOVATIVE AND ALTERNATIVE PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES.
Section 8(g) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(g)) (as amended by section 5 of this Act) is further amended by inserting the following: ``(15) The requirements of subsections (e) and (f) of this section may be waived by the Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy after consultation with the Administrator of the Small Business Administration in conducting innovative and alternative procurement test programs under section 9001 of the Federal Acquisition Improvement Act of 1994.''.