This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Dams Safety Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) in 1980, the Secretary of the Interior established a department-wide dam safety program to correct deficiencies identified by inspections of dams; (2) the Bureau of Indian Affairs (hereafter referred to in this Act as the ``BIA'') did not make timely progress toward accomplishing the objectives of the dam safety program and, as a result, 53 dams on Indian lands are considered to present a high hazard to human life in the event of failure; (3) unsafe BIA dams continue to pose an imminent threat to people and property because the dam safety program has not been given a sufficiently high priority either by the BIA or by the Congress; (4) until 1991, the BIA did not have an adequate program to ensure proper periodic maintenance of dams under its jurisdiction and structural problems have often led to seepage and accelerated bank erosion, as well as other unsafe conditions; (5) safe working dams are necessary on Indian lands to supply irrigation water, to provide flood control, to provide water for municipal, industrial, domestic, livestock, and recreation uses, and for fish and wildlife habitats; (6) because of inadequate attention in the past to regular maintenance requirements for BIA dams, the costs for needed repairs and future maintenance are significantly increased; (7) many dams have operation and maintenance deficiencies regardless of their current safety condition classification and the deficiencies must be corrected to avoid future threats to human life and property; and (8) it is necessary to institute a regular dam maintenance and repair program, utilizing expertise either within the BIA, the Indian tribal governments, or other Federal agencies.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Indian tribes.--The term ``Indian tribes'' has the meaning given such term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Dam safety program.--The term ``dam safety program'' means the program established by the Secretary of the Interior by order dated February 28, 1980, to prevent dam failure and the resulting loss of life or serious property damage.
Dam safety operation and maintenance program.--The term ``dam safety operation and maintenance program'' means the program established under section 4 of this Act.
Dam safety condition classifications.--The term ``dam safety condition classifications'' means the following classifications cited in the Bureau of Reclamation glossary of dam safety terms: (A) Satisfactory.--No existing or potential dam safety deficiencies are recognized.
Safe performance is expected under all anticipated conditions.
Fair.--No existing dam safety deficiencies are recognized for normal loading conditions.
Infrequent hydrologic or seismic events would probably result in a dam safety deficiency.
Conditionally poor.--A potential dam safety deficiency is recognized for unusual loading conditions that may realistically occur during the expected life of the structure.
Poor.--A potential dam safety deficiency is clearly recognized for normal loading conditions.
Immediate actions to resolve the deficiency are recommended; reservoir restrictions may be necessary until resolution of the problem.
Unsatisfactory.--A dam safety deficiency exists for normal loading conditions.
Immediate remedial action is required for resolution of the problem.
Establishment of Dam Safety Operation and Maintenance Program.--The Secretary shall establish a dam safety operation and maintenance program within the BIA to ensure the regular, recurring, routine maintenance, examination, and monitoring of the condition of each dam identified pursuant to subsection (c) necessary to maintain the dam in a satisfactory condition on a long-term basis.
Rehabilitation.--The Secretary is directed to perform such rehabilitation work as is necessary to bring the dams identified pursuant to subsection (c) to a satisfactory condition.
Upon the completion of rehabilitation work on each dam, the dam shall be placed under the dam safety operation and maintenance program established pursuant to subsection (a) and shall be regularly maintained under the guidelines of such program.
List of Dams.--The Secretary shall develop a comprehensive list of dams located on Indian lands that describes the dam safety condition classifications of each dam, as such terms are defined in section 3(5).
Purpose.--Work authorized by this Act shall be for the purposes of dam safety operation and maintenance and not for the purposes of providing additional conservation storage capacity or developing benefits beyond those provided by the original dams and reservoirs.
Technical Assistance.--To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may obtain technical assistance from agencies in addition to the BIA under his jurisdiction, such as the Bureau of Reclamation, or from other departments through memoranda of understanding, such as the Department of Defense.
Notwithstanding any such technical assistance, the dam safety program and the dam safety operation and maintenance program shall remain under the direction of the BIA.
Contract Authority.--In addition to any other authority established by law, the Secretary is authorized to contract with appropriate Indian tribes to carry out the dam safety operation and maintenance program established pursuant to this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Passed the Senate July 20 (legislative day, June 30), 1993.
Attest: WALTER J. STEWART, Secretary.