67, and approved by Congress, allow for such further authorizations.
TITLE II--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
Section 3(f) of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1862(f)) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) The Foundation shall provide an annual report to the President which shall be submitted by the Director to the Congress at the time of the President's annual budget submission.
The report shall-- ``(1) contain a strategic plan, or an update to a previous strategic plan, which-- ``(A) defines for a three-year period the overall goals for the Foundation and specific goals for each major activity of the Foundation, including each scientific directorate, the education directorate, and the polar programs office; and ``(B) describe how the identified goals relate to national needs and will exploit new opportunities in science and technology; ``(2) identify the criteria and describe the procedures which the Foundation will use to assess progress toward achieving the goals identified in accordance with paragraph (1); ``(3) review the activities of the Foundation during the preceding year which have contributed toward achievement of goals identified in accordance with paragraph (1) and summarize planned activities for the coming three years in the context of the identified goals, with particular emphasis on the Foundation's planned contributions to major multi-agency research and education initiatives; ``(4) contain such recommendations as the Foundation considers appropriate; and ``(5) include information on the acquisition and disposition by the Foundation of any patents and patent rights.''.
Facilities Plan.--The Director shall provide to Congress annually, as a part of the report required under section 3(f) of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950, a plan for the proposed construction of, and repair and upgrades to, national research facilities.
The plan shall include estimates of the cost for such construction, repairs, and upgrades, and estimates of the cost for the operation and maintenance of existing and proposed new facilities.
For proposed new construction and for major upgrades to existing facilities, the plan shall include funding profiles by fiscal year and milestones for major phases of the construction.
The plan shall include cost estimates in the categories of construction, repair, and upgrades for the year in which the plan is submitted to Congress and for not fewer than the succeeding 4 years.
Limitation on Obligation of Unauthorized Appropriations.--No funds appropriated for any project which involves construction of new national research facilities or construction necessary for upgrading the capabilities of existing national research facilities shall be obligated unless the funds are specifically authorized for such purpose by this Act or any other Act which is not an appropriations Act, or unless the total estimated cost to the Foundation of the construction project is less than $50,000,000.
This subsection shall not apply to construction projects approved by the National Science Board prior to June 30, 1994.
ELIGIBILITY FOR RESEARCH FACILITY AWARDS.
Section 203(b) of the Academic Research Facilities Modernization Act of 1988 is amended by striking the final sentence of paragraph (3) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``The Director shall give priority to institutions or consortia that have not received such funds in the preceding 5 years, except that this sentence shall not apply to previous funding received for the same multiyear project.''.
National Science Foundation Act of 1950 Amendments.--The National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1861 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the subsection (k) of section 4 (42 United States Code 1863(k)) that was added by section 108 of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 1988 as subsection (l); (2) in section 5(e) (42 United States Code 1864(e)) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2) Any delegation of authority or imposition of conditions under paragraph (1) shall be promptly published in the Federal Register and reported to the Committees on Labor and Human Resources and Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives.
''; (3) by inserting ``be entitled to'' between ``shall'' and ``receive'', and by inserting ``, including traveltime,'' after ``Foundation'' in section 14(c) (42 United States Code 1873(c)); (4) by striking section 14(j) (42 United States Code 1873(j)); and (5) by striking ``Atomic Energy Commission'' in section 15(a) (42 United States Code 1874(a)) and inserting in lieu thereof ``Secretary of Energy''.
National Science Foundation Authorization Act, 1976 Amendments.--Section 6(a) of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act, 1976 (42 United States Code 1881a(a)) is amended by striking ``social,'' the first place it appears.
National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 1988 Amendments.--(1) Section 117(a)(1)(B)(v) of the National Science Foundation Authorization Act of 1988 (42 United States Code 1881b(1)(B)(v)) is amended to read as follows: ``(v) from schools established outside the several States and the District of Columbia by any agency of the Federal Government for dependents of its employees.''.
Section 117(a)(3)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1881b(3)(A)) is amended by striking ``Science and Engineering Education'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Education and Human Resources''.
Education for Economic Security Act Amendments.--Section 107 of Education for Economic Security Act (20 United States Code 3917) is repealed.
Technical Amendment.--The second subsection (g) of section 3 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 is repealed.
Matching Funds.--Matching funds required pursuant to section 204(a)(2)(C) of the Academic Research Facilities Modernization Act of 1988 (42 United States Code 1862c(a)(2)(C)) shall not be considered facilities costs for purposes of determining indirect cost rates.
Report.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, in consultation with other relevant agencies, shall prepare a report analyzing what steps would be needed to-- (1) reduce by 10 percent the proportion of Federal assistance to institutions of higher education that are allocated for indirect costs; and (2) reduce the variance among indirect cost rates of different institutions of higher education, including an evaluation of the relative benefits and burdens of each option on institutions of higher education.
Such report shall be transmitted to the Congress no later than December 31, 1995.
RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION AND FACILITIES.
The Foundation shall incorporate the guidelines set forth in Important Notice No.
91, dated March 11, 1983 (48 Fed.
15754, April 12, 1983), relating to the use and operation of Foundation- supported research instrumentation and facilities, in its notice of Grant General Conditions, and shall examine more closely the adherence of grantee organizations to such guidelines.
Persons temporarily employed by or at the Foundation shall be subject to the same financial disclosure requirements and related sanctions under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 as are permanent employees of the Foundation in equivalent positions.
EDUCATIONAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE FOR ACTIVE DUTY.
In order to be eligible to receive funds from the Foundation after September 30, 1995, an institution of higher education must provide that whenever any student of the institution who is a member of the National Guard, or other reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States, is called or ordered to active duty, other than active duty for training, the institution shall grant the member a military leave of absence from their education.
Persons on military leave of absence from their institution shall be entitled, upon release from military duty, to be restored to the educational status they had attained prior to their being ordered to military duty without loss of academic credits earned, scholarships or grants awarded, or tuition and other fees paid prior to the commencement of the military duty.
It shall be the duty of the institution to refund tuition or fees paid or to credit the tuition and fees to the next semester or term after the termination of the educational military leave of absence at the option of the student.
PROHIBITION OF LOBBYING ACTIVITIES.
None of the funds authorized by this Act shall be available for any activity whose purpose is to influence legislation pending before the Congress, provided that this shall not prevent officers or employees of the United States or of its departments or agencies from communicating to Members of Congress on the request of any Member or to Congress, through the proper channels, requests for legislation or appropriations which they deem necessary for the efficient conduct of the public business.
Amendment.--Section 822 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 1991 (42 United States Code 6686) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Critical Technologies Institute'' in the section heading and in subsection (a), and inserting in lieu thereof ``Science Studies Institute''; (2) in subsection (b) by striking ``As determined by the chairman of the committee referred to in subsection (c), the'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``The''; (3) by striking subsection (c), and redesignating subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g) as subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), respectively; (4) in subsection (c), as so redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection-- (A) by inserting ``science and'' after ``developments and trends in'' in paragraph (1); (B) by striking ``with particular emphasis'' in paragraph (1) and all that follows through the end of such paragraph and inserting in lieu thereof ``and developing and maintaining relevant informational and analytical tools.
''; (C) by striking ``to determine'' and all that follows through ``technology policies'' in paragraph (2) and inserting in lieu thereof ``with particular attention to the scope and content of the Federal science and technology research and develop portfolio as it affects interagency and national issues''; (D) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: ``(3) Initiation of studies and analysis of alternatives available for ensuring the long-term strength of the United States in the development and application of science and technology, including appropriate roles for the Federal Government, State governments, private industry, and institutions of higher education in the development and application of science and technology.
''; (E) by inserting ``science and'' after ``Executive branch on'' in paragraph (4)(A); and (F) by amending paragraph (4)(B) to read as follows: ``(B) to the interagency committees and panels of the Federal Government concerned with science and technology.
''; (5) in subsection (d), as so redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection, by striking ``subsection (d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsection (c)''; and (6) by amending subsection (f), as so redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection, to read as follows: ``(f) Sponsorship.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall be the sponsor of the Institute.''.
Conforming Usage.--All references in Federal law or regulations to the Critical Technologies Institute shall be considered to be references to the Science Studies Institute.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) Federal research funds made available to institutions of higher education often create incentives for such institutions to emphasize research over undergraduate teaching and to narrow the focus of their graduate programs; and (2) National Science Foundation funds for Research and Related Activities should be spent in the manner most likely to improve the quality of undergraduate and graduate education in institutions of higher education.
Educational Impact.--(1) The impact that a grant or cooperative agreement by the National Science Foundation would have on undergraduate and graduate education at an institution of higher education shall be a factor in any decision whether to award such grant or agreement to that institution.
Paragraph (1) shall be effective with respect to any grant or cooperative agreement awarded after September 30, 1996.
Report.--The Director shall provide a plan for the implementation of subsection (b) of this section, no later than December 31, 1995, to the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate.
DIVISIONS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Amendment.--Section 8 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1866) is amended by inserting ``The Director may appoint, in consultation with the Board, not more than 6 Assistant Directors to assist in managing the Divisions.''
after ``time to time determine.''.
Report.--By November 15, 1995, the Director shall transmit to the Congress a report on the reorganization of the National Science Foundation required as a result of the amendment made by subsection (a).
Exclusive Authorization for Fiscal Year 1996.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no sums are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1996 for the activities of the National Science Foundation unless such sums are specifically authorized to be appropriated by this Act.
Subsequent Fiscal Years.--No sums are authorized to be appropriated for any fiscal year after fiscal year 1996 for the activities of the National Science Foundation unless such sums are specifically authorized to be appropriated by Act of Congress with respect to such fiscal year.
In General.--The Director shall exclude from consideration for awards of financial assistance made by the National Science Foundation after fiscal year 1995 any person who received funds, other than those described in subsection (b), appropriated for a fiscal year after fiscal year 1995, from any Federal funding source for a project that was not subjected to a competitive, merit-based award process.
Any exclusion from consideration pursuant to this section shall be effective for a period of 5 years after the person receives such Federal funds.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to awards to persons who are members of a class specified by law for which assistance is awarded to members of the class according to a formula provided by law.