This Act may be cited as the ``Kid Friendly TV Programming Act of 2005''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) More than a decade ago, the American Psychological Society concluded that ``There is absolutely no doubt that higher levels of viewing violence on television are correlated with increased acceptance of aggressive attitudes and increased aggressive behavior.''.
A study in 2003 found that adults who were ``high TV- violence viewers'' as children are more than three-to-four times as likely as other adults to be convicted of a crime and to use violence against their spouses and other adults.
Adults who watched more violent programming as children were more likely to be arrested and convicted for spousal and child abuse, murder and aggravated assault.
Ten percent of violent acts committed by youths are attributable to their exposure to violence on television.
Forty percent of parents surveyed in l999 in Rhode Island reported that at least one symptom of post-traumatic stress disorder occurred after their child viewed a scary event on television, and that this symptom lasted at least 1 month.
The average child who watches 2 hours of cartoons a day will view almost 10,000 violent acts a year.
Teenagers who watched television with the greatest amount of sexual content were twice as likely to initiate sexual intercourse the following year as those who watched television with the least amount of sexual content.
The Kaiser Family Foundation reported in 2002 that 72 percent of teenagers think sex on television influences ``somewhat'' or ``a lot'' the sexual behavior of their peers.
The Kaiser Family Foundation reported in 2003 that 64 percent of all television shows have some sexual content, and that in prime time, 71 percent of the top 4 broadcast network shows have some sexual content.
The continued exposure of children to obscene, indecent, sexual, or gratuitous or excessively violent content on television is harmful to the public health and welfare of communities across the country.
Efforts to limit the exposure of children to television programming that contains material with obscene, indecent, violent, or sexual content, or to impose fines and penalties for the broadcast of such content, have not been successful in protecting children from harmful content.
The number of homes in the United States that receive television programming via cable or satellite providers is estimated to have grown to 85 percent of American households, and of that percentage, an estimated 95 percent of the households subscribe to basic or expanded basic programs.
The efforts to limit the exposure of children to harmful television content have not been successful because Federal regulatory agencies have not had the authority to require cable and satellite providers to offer a child-friendly tier of programming.
Parents need more effective ways to limit the exposure of children to television with harmful content through alternative, child-friendly tiers of programs.
BASIC TIER CONTENT RESTRICTIONS.
Part IV of title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 631 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--Within 1 months after the date of enactment of the Kid Friendly TV Programming Act of 2005, each multichannel video programming distributor shall offer a child-friendly tier of programming consisting of no fewer than 15 channels.
Blocking Instructions.--Beginning 6 months after the date of enactment of the Kid Friendly TV Programming Act of 2005, each multichannel video programming distributor shall provide, as part of the monthly statement of charges, instructions for how to block any channel whose content a subscriber may wish to block.
Penalties.--In addition to any other penalty imposed under this Act or title 18, United States Code, failure to comply with the requirements of this section is punishable by a civil penalty of up to $500,000 per day.
Each day of such failure shall be considered a separate offense.
Child-Friendly Defined.--In this section, the term `child- friendly tier' means a group of channels that do not carry programming, advertisements, or public service announcements that would be considered inappropriate for children due to obscene, indecent, profane, sexual, or gratuitous and excessively violent content.''.