This Act may be cited as the ``401(k) Protection Act of 1996''.
QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS PROHIBITED FROM MAKING LOANS THROUGH CREDIT CARDS AND OTHER INTERMEDIARIES.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(35) Prohibition of loans through credit cards and other intermediaries.--A trust shall not constitute a qualified trust under this section if the plan makes any loan to any beneficiary under the plan through the use of any credit card or any other intermediary.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to plan years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
LOANS FROM QUALIFIED EMPLOYER PLANS TREATED AS DISTRIBUTIONS UNLESS USED TO PURCHASE A FIRST HOME, TO PAY HIGHER EDUCATION OR FINANCIALLY DEVASTATING MEDICAL EXPENSES, OR DURING PERIODS OF UNEMPLOYMENT.
In General.--Subsection (p) of section 72 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to loans treated as distributions) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Exception only to apply to certain loans.--Paragraph (2) shall apply to any loan only if such loan is-- ``(A) a qualified first-time homebuyer loan (as defined in paragraph (7)), ``(B) a qualified higher education loan (as defined in paragraph (8)), ``(C) a qualified medical expense loan (as defined in paragraph (9)), or ``(D) a qualified unemployment loan (as defined in paragraph (10)).''
Definitions.--Subsection (p) of section 72 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(7) Qualified first-time homebuyer loan.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (3), the term `qualified first-time homebuyer loan' means any loan received by an individual to the extent the amount of the loan is used within a reasonable period to pay qualified acquisition costs with respect to a principal residence of a first-time homebuyer who is such individual, the spouse of such individual, or any child, grandchild, or ancestor of such individual or the individual's spouse.
Qualified acquisition costs.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified acquisition costs' means the costs of acquiring, constructing, or reconstructing a residence.
Such term includes any usual or reasonable settlement, financing, or other closing costs.
First-time homebuyer; other definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) First-time homebuyer.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual if-- ``(I) such individual (and if married, such individual's spouse) had no present ownership interest in a principal residence during the 2-year period ending on the date of acquisition of the principal residence to which this paragraph applies, and ``(II) subsection (h) or (k) of section 1034 did not suspend the running of any period of time specified in section 1034 with respect to such individual on the day before the date the loan is received.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Date of acquisition.--The term `date of acquisition' means the date-- ``(I) on which a binding contract to acquire the principal residence to which subparagraph (A) applies is entered into, or ``(II) on which construction or reconstruction of such a principal residence is commenced.
Qualified higher education loan.--For purposes of paragraph (3)-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education loan' means any loan received by an individual to the extent the amount of the loan is used within a reasonable period to pay expenses for tuition, fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(i) the individual, ``(ii) the individual's spouse, or ``(iii) any child (as defined in section 151(c)(3)), grandchild, or ancestor of the individual or the individual's spouse, at an eligible educational institution (as defined in section 135(c)(3)).
Coordination with savings bond provisions.-- The amount of qualified higher education expenses for any taxable year shall be reduced by any amount excludable from gross income under section 135.
Qualified medical expense loan.--The term `qualified medical expense loan' means any loan received by an individual to the extent the amount of the loan does not exceed the amount allowable as a deduction under section 213 to the individual for amounts paid during the taxable year for medical care (determined without regard to whether the taxpayer itemizes deductions for such taxable year).
Qualified unemployment loan.--The term `qualified unemployment loan' means any loan to an individual after separation from employment, if-- ``(A) such individual has received unemployment compensation for 12 consecutive weeks under any Federal or State unemployment compensation law by reason of such separation, and ``(B) such loan is received during any taxable year during which such unemployment compensation is paid or the succeeding taxable year.
To the extent provided in regulations, a self-employed individual shall be treated as meeting the requirements of subparagraph (A) if, under Federal or State law, the individual would have received unemployment compensation but for the fact the individual was self-employed.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to loans made after the date of the enactment of this Act.