This Act may be cited as the ``Retirement Savings Commission Act of 1997''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Retirement Savings (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The general purpose of the Commission shall be to make a comprehensive study of private pension and savings issues and to recommend policies to expand access to and encourage participation in retirement savings vehicles.
Issues To Address.--In preparation for making the specific policy recommendations described in subsection (c), the Commission shall conduct a full and complete study and review of-- (1) trends in coverage of American workers by workplace retirement plans; (2) trends in Americans' personal rates of saving; (3) the changing nature of workplace retirement plans, particularly the shift from defined benefit plans to defined contribution plans; (4) the workforce and demographic trends affecting the retirement savings of future retirees; (5) the increased prevalence in the workforce and the special retirement needs of-- (A) women; (B) part-time workers; and (C) temporary workers; (6) the amounts of retirement income that future retirees will need to replace various levels of preretirement income, including amounts necessary to pay for medical care and long- term care; (7) the various sources of retirement income available to individuals in the United States; (8) past legislative changes adopted by Congress which have acted as disincentives to the creation of workplace retirement plans and as disincentives to personal retirement savings; (9) the most efficient and effective manner, considering the needs of retirement plan sponsors for simplicity, reasonable cost, and appropriate incentives, of encouraging the adoption of workplace retirement plans by employers, particularly small businesses; (10) the amount and sources of Federal and private funds, including tax expenditures (as defined in section 3 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 622)), needed to finance both existing Federal incentives and programs designed to encourage and protect retirement savings and any new Federal incentives or programs that the Commission recommends be established; (11) the proper role of tax-deferred individual retirement savings vehicles (such as individual retirement accounts and annuities) in individual and national retirement planning; (12) the manner in which tax expenditures designed to encourage pension and retirement savings are scored for budget purposes, specifically how to reflect accurately that tax revenues on pension and retirement income are not lost to the Federal Government but instead are deferred until the time these funds are withdrawn; and (13) the role of retirement savings in the economy of the United States.
Recommendations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall formulate recommendations based on the study and review conducted under subsection (b).
These recommendations shall include proposals that are designed to-- (A) expand workplace retirement plan coverage among American workers; (B) encourage the accumulation of adequate retirement income; (C) stimulate personal savings for retirement; (D) encourage workers with access to workplace retirement plans to participate in these plans; (E) ensure the security of benefits accumulated by workers who have participated in workplace retirement plans; (F) help low-wage workers, who often have the greatest difficulty saving for retirement, accumulate adequate retirement savings; and (G) simplify the regulatory requirements associated with administration of workplace retirement plans.
Unanimity required.--The recommendations of the Commission shall be adopted by unanimous vote of all 16 members.
Policy proposals not supported by unanimous vote of all 16 members shall not be considered recommendations of the Commission and shall not be included in the report described in section 7.
No recommendations regarding social security.--While conducting the study and review outlined in subsection (b), the Commission may consider the role of Social Security retirement benefits as a source of retirement income.
However, the Commission shall in no circumstances make recommendations regarding the Social Security program or reforms thereto.
Effect on federal budget deficit.--A recommendation of the Commission for a new Federal incentive or program that would result in an increase in the Federal budget deficit shall not appear in the report required under section 7 unless it is accompanied by a recommendation for offsetting the increase.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``workplace retirement plan'' means any financial vehicle referred to in section 219(g)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Number and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of 16 members appointed not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Appointments.--The Commission shall include-- (A) 4 individuals appointed by the President, 1 of whom the President shall appoint from the Congress to serve as co-chairperson of the Commission; (B) 4 individuals appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 1 of whom the Speaker shall appoint from the Congress to serve as co-chairperson of the Commission; (C) 4 individuals appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (D) 2 individuals appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; and (E) 2 individuals appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.-- (A) The individuals referred to in paragraph (1) shall be Members of the Congress, leaders of business or labor, representatives of the plan sponsor and plan participant communities, distinguished academics, individuals with technical expertise in pension administration, or other individuals with distinctive qualifications or experience in retirement income policy.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled not later than 30 days after the date of the creation of the vacancy in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--Ten members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but 6 members may hold hearings, take testimony, or receive evidence.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the co- chairpersons.
Decisions.--Decisions of the Commission, other than recommendations adopted pursuant to section 3, shall be made by consensus when possible, or otherwise according to the majority vote of those members who are present and voting at a meeting called pursuant to subsection (f).
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Recommendations Regarding Staff.--There shall be two co- directors of the staff of the Commission.
Each co-chairperson of the Commission shall recommend an individual to serve as co-director of the staff of the Commission.
Each co-chairperson shall also recommend such additional professional staff to serve under each co-director as are required to carry out the duties of the Commission.
The 2 co-directors of the staff shall report to their respective co-chairperson and shall work cooperatively to manage the day-to-day operations and staff of the Commission.
Appointment of Staff.--Acting upon the recommendations of the co-chairpersons, the Commission shall appoint and fix the pay of the co-directors and any additional staff.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The co-directors and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Public hearings.--The Commission may hold public hearings to receive the views of a broad spectrum of the public on the status of the private retirement system of the United States.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member, committee, or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.-- (1) Information from federal agencies.-- (A) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any information that the Commission is prohibited to secure or request by another law.
Public surveys.--The Commission may conduct public surveys as necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
In conducting such surveys, the Commission shall not be considered an agency for purposes of chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contract and Procurement Authority.--The Commission may make purchases, and may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for property or services, without regard to-- (1) section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5); and (2) title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes).
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of assisting the work of the Commission.
Gifts of money and proceeds from sales of property received as gifts shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
For purposes of Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property accepted under this subsection shall be considered as a gift to the United States.
Volunteer Services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Commission may accept and use voluntary and uncompensated services as the Commission determines necessary.
The Commission shall submit a report to the President, the majority and minority leaders of the Senate, and the Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives.
The report shall review the matters that the Commission is required to study under section 3, shall explain the Commission's analysis of these matters, and shall set forth the recommendations of the Commission.
The Commission shall submit its report not later than 1 year and 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
The Commission shall terminate not later than 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
Sums appropriated under this section are authorized to remain available until expended.