USE OF LAND; FEE AUTHORITY.
Authority.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') may permit the use of land and facilities in units administered by the Secretary for-- (A) motion picture production; (B) television production; (C) soundtrack production; (D) the production of an advertisement using a prop or a model; or (E) any similar commercial project.
Exception.--The Secretary shall not permit a use of land or a facility described in paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines that a proposed use-- (A) is not appropriate; or (B) will impair the value or resources of the land or facility.
Bonding and insurance.--The Secretary may require a bond, insurance, or such other means as is necessary to protect the interests of the United States in connection with an activity conducted under a permit issued under this Act.
Fees.-- (1) In general.--For any use of land or a facility in a unit described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall assess-- (A) a reimbursement fee; and (B) a special use fee.
Reimbursement fee.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall require the payment of a reimbursement fee in an amount that is not less than the amount of any direct and indirect costs to the Government incurred-- (i) in processing the application for a permit for a use of land or facilities; and (ii) as a result of the use of land and facilities under the permit, including any necessary costs of cleanup and restoration.
Funds collected.--An amount equal to the amount of a reimbursement fee collected under this subparagraph shall-- (i) be retained by the Secretary; and (ii) be available for use by the Secretary, without further Act of appropriation, in the unit in which the reimbursement fee is collected.
Special use fee.-- (A) Factors in determining special use fee.--To determine the amount of a special use fee, the Secretary shall establish a schedule of rates sufficient to provide a fair return to the Government, based on factors such as-- (i) the number of people on site under a permit; (ii) the duration of activities under a permit; (iii) the conduct of activities under a permit in any area designated by a statute or regulation as a special use area, including a wilderness or research natural area; (iv) the amount of equipment on site under a permit; and (v) any disruption of normal park function or accessibility, including temporary closure of land or a facility to the public.
Funds collected.--A special use fee under this subparagraph shall be distributed as follows: (i) 80 percent shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury, and shall be available, without further Act of appropriation, for use by the supervisors of units where the fee was collected.
20 percent shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury, and shall be available, without further Act of appropriation, for use by supervisors of units in the region where the fee was collected.
Exceptions.-- (A) Fee waiver or reduction.--The Secretary may waive a special use fee or charge a reduced special use fee if the activity for which the fee is charged provides clear educational or interpretive benefits for the Department of the Interior or the public.
Regular visitor entrance fee.--Nothing in this subsection affects the requirement that, in addition to fees under subparagraph (A), each individual entering a unit for purposes described in subsection (a) shall pay any regular visitor entrance fee charged to visitors to the unit.
Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that establish a schedule of rates for fees collected under subsection (b) based on factors listed in subsection (b)(2)(C)(ii).
Review of regulations.-- (A) Initial review.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall review and, as appropriate, revise the regulations promulgated under this subsection.
Continuing review.--After the date of promulgation of regulations under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall periodically review the regulations and make necessary revisions.
Applicability of Regulations.-- (1) Prohibition on certain fees.--The prohibition on fees set forth in section 5.1(b)(1) of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations, shall cease to apply beginning on the effective date of regulations promulgated under this Act.
Effect on other regulations.--Nothing in this Act, other than paragraph (1), affects the regulations set forth in part 5 of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations.
Civil Penalty.-- (1) In general.--A person that violates any regulation promulgated under this Act, or conducts or attempts to conduct an activity under subsection (a)(1) without obtaining a permit or paying a fee, shall be assessed a civil penalty-- (A) for the first violation, in the amount that is equal to twice the amount of the fees charged (or fees that would have been charged) under subsection (b)(2); (B) for the second violation, in the amount that is equal to 5 times the amount of the fees charged (or fees that would have been charged) under subsection (b)(2); and (C) for the third and each subsequent violation, in the amount that is equal to 10 times the amount of the fees charged (or fees that would have been charged) under subsection (b)(2).
Costs.--A person that violates this Act or any regulation promulgated under this Act shall be required to pay all costs of any proceedings instituted to enforce this subsection.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), this Act and the regulations promulgated under this Act take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Exception.--This subsection and the authority of the Secretary to promulgate regulations under subsection (c) take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.