This Act may be cited as the ``Radio Free Asia Act of 1997''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Government of the People's Republic of China systematically controls the flow of information to the Chinese people.
The Government of the People's Republic of China demonstrated that maintaining its monopoly on political power is a higher priority than economic development by announcing in January 1996 that its official news agency Xinhua, will supervise wire services selling economic information, including Dow Jones-Telerate, Bloomberg, and Reuters Business, and in announcing in February of 1996 the ``Interim Internet Management Rules'', which have the effect of censoring computer networks.
Under the May 30, 1997, order of Premier Li Peng, all organizations that engage in business activities related to international computer networking must now apply for a license, increasing still further government control over access to the internet.
Both Radio Free Asia and the Voice of America, as a surrogate for a free press in the People's Republic of China, provide an invaluable source of uncensored information to the Chinese people, including objective and authoritative news of in-country and regional events, as well as accurate news about the United States and its policies.
Radio Free Asia currently broadcasts only 5 hours a day in the Mandarin dialect and 2 hours a day in Tibetan.
Voice of America currently broadcasts only 10 hours a day in Mandarin and 3\1/2\ hours a day in Tibetan.
Radio Free Asia and Voice of America should develop 24- hour-a-day service in Mandarin, Cantonese, and Tibetan, as well as further broadcasting capability in the dialects spoken in Xinjiang and other regions of the People's Republic of China.
Radio Free Asia and Voice of America, in working toward continuously broadcasting the People's Republic of China in multiple languages, have the capability to immediately establish 24-hour-a-day Mandarin broadcasting to that nation by staggering the hours of Radio Free Asia and Voice of America.
Simultaneous broadcasting on Voice of America radio and Worldnet television 7 days a week in Mandarin are also important and needed capabilities.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR INCREASED FUNDING FOR RADIO FREE ASIA AND VOICE OF AMERICA BROADCASTING TO CHINA.
Authorization of Appropriations for Radio Free Asia.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for ``Radio Free Asia'' $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1999.
Limitations.-- (A)(i) Of the funds under paragraph (1) authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1998, $8,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated for one-time capital costs.
Of the funds under clause (i), $900,000 is authorized to be appropriated for additional advanced editing equipment.
Of the funds under paragraph (1), $1,200,000 is authorized to be appropriated for each such fiscal year for additional personnel to staff Cantonese language broadcasting.
Authorization of Appropriations for International Broadcasting to China.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated for ``International Broadcasting Activities'' for fiscal years 1998 and 1999, there are authorized to be appropriated for ``International Broadcasting Activities'' $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and $7,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, which shall be available only for enhanced Voice of America broadcasting to China.
Authorization of Appropriations for Radio Construction.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated for ``Radio Construction'' for fiscal years 1998 and 1999, there are authorized to be appropriated for ``Radio Construction'' $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, which shall be available only for construction in support of enhanced broadcasting to China.
Limitation.--Of the funds under paragraph (1) authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1998, $3,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated to facilitate the timely augmentation of transmitters at Tinian, Marshall Islands.
Allocation.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for ``International Broadcasting Activities'', the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Board of Broadcasting Governors shall seek to ensure that the amounts made available for broadcasting to nations whose people do not fully enjoy freedom of expression do not decline in proportion to the amounts made available for broadcasting to other nations.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, in consultation with the Board of Broadcasting Governors, the President shall prepare and transmit to Congress a report on a plan to achieve continuous broadcasting of Radio Free Asia and Voice of America to the People's Republic of China in multiple major dialects and languages.