This Act may be cited as the ``Russian-American Trust and Cooperation Act of 2001''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Government of the Russian Federation maintains an agreement with the Government of Cuba which allows Russia to operate an intelligence facility at Lourdes, Cuba.
The Secretary of Defense has formally expressed concerns to the Congress regarding the espionage complex at Lourdes, Cuba, and its use as a base for intelligence activities directed against the United States.
The Secretary of Defense, referring to a 1998 Defense Intelligence Agency assessment, has reported that the Russian Federation leases the Lourdes facility for an estimated $100,000,000 to $300,000,000 a year.
It has been reported that the Lourdes facility is the largest such complex operated by the Russian Federation and its intelligence service outside the region of the former Soviet Union.
The Lourdes facility is reported to cover a 28 square- mile area with over 1,500 Russian engineers, technicians, and military personnel working at the base.
Experts familiar with the Lourdes facility have reportedly confirmed that the base has multiple groups of tracking dishes and its own satellite system, with some groups used to intercept telephone calls, faxes, and computer communications, in general, and with other groups used to cover targeted telephones and devices.
News sources have reported that the predecessor regime to the Government of the Russian Federation had obtained sensitive information about United States military operations during Operation Desert Storm through the Lourdes facility.
Former United States National Security Agency officials have been quoted describing the Lourdes facility as an ``intelligence cornucopia'' which lies within the ``footprint'' of every United States communications satellite.
Public reports relating to the Lourdes facility state that Defense Intelligence Agency officials testified to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in 1996 that ``while commercial intelligence [gathered at the facility] is the top priority, it is not the only one .
Personal information about United States Reports citizens in private and government sectors is also snatched from the airwaves and used by Russian intelligence to identify promising recruits in these sectors.''.
It has been reported that the operational significance of the Lourdes facility has grown dramatically since February 7, 1996, when then Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, issued an order demanding that the Russian intelligence community increase its gathering of United States and other Western economic and trade secrets.
It has been reported that the Government of the Russian Federation is estimated to have spent in excess of $3,000,000,000 in the operation and modernization of the Lourdes facility.
Colonel General Mikhail Kolenik, Russia's current chief of staff, has affirmed during his visits to the Lourdes facility that this espionage base remains critical to the intelligence needs of the Russian Federation.
The December 2000 visit of Russian President Putin to Cuba was described by United States analysts as a ``diplomatic offensive'' to strengthen and expand Russia's ties with its former satellite in Latin America.
PROHIBITION ON BILATERAL DEBT RESCHEDULING AND FORGIVENESS FOR THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION.
Prohibition.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the President-- (1) shall not reschedule or forgive any outstanding bilateral debt owed to the United States by the Government of the Russian Federation, and (2) shall instruct the United States representative to the Paris Club of official creditors to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose rescheduling or forgiveness of any outstanding bilateral debt owed by the Government of the Russian Federation, until the President certifies to the Congress that the Government of the Russian Federation has ceased all its operations at, removed all personnel from, and permanently closed the intelligence facility at Lourdes, Cuba.
Waiver.--The President may waive the application of subsection (a)(1) with respect to rescheduling of outstanding bilateral debt if-- (1) the President determines that such waiver is necessary to the national interests of the United States; and (2) not less than 10 days before the waiver is to take effect, the President transmits to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a written certification that contains the determination made pursuant to paragraph (1) and the reasons therefor.