This Act may be cited as the ``Traditional Use Protection Act of 2008''.
SUPPORT FOR THE TRADITIONAL USE OF LANDS.
Grants.--The Chief of the Forest Service shall establish a program to award grants, on a competitive basis, to States for the purpose of allowing such States-- (1) to acquire the rights to land to make such land available to the public for traditional use; and (2) to make subgrants to an entity to allow such entity to acquire the rights to land to make such land available to the public for traditional use.
Requirements for Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--A State shall use the funds received under this section only-- (A) to purchase land, acquire an easement, or take other actions to acquire rights to land, as long as such purchase, acquisition, or other action results in the State holding rights to the land in perpetuity; and (B) to make a subgrant to an entity to allow such entity to purchase land, acquire an easement, or take other actions to acquire rights to land, as long as such purchase, acquisition, or other action results in the entity holding rights to the land in perpetuity.
Willing sellers.--A State or entity may only use funds received through a grant or subgrant under subsection (a) to acquire rights to land from a willing seller.
Eminent domain prohibited.--A State may not use funds received through a grant under subsection (a) to acquire land through eminent domain.
Access.--A State or entity shall make any land purchased, acquired, or otherwise obtained using funds received through a grant or subgrant under subsection (a) available to the public for appropriate traditional use, as determined by the State.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To be considered for a grant under this section, a State shall submit to the Chief an application at such time and in such manner as the Chief may require.
Contents.--The application shall include the following: (A) Information demonstrating the commitment of the State to stewardship and maintenance of land currently held by the State for traditional and recreational use (including park land).
Certification by the State that the State maintains a landowner relations program.
A copy of the comprehensive State plan.
Such information as the Chief may require.
Cost Sharing.--The amount of any grant under this section may not exceed 75 percent of the total cost of the land rights acquired with the grant.
Publication of Criteria.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Chief shall publish criteria for making grants under subsection (a) in the Federal Register.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Chief shall submit to Congress a report on the grant program established under subsection (a).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Chief.--The term ``Chief'' means the Chief of the Forest Service.
Comprehensive state plan.--The term ``comprehensive State plan'' means a comprehensive plan developed by the State, regarding recreational access to and conservation of land in the State, that-- (A) is developed through a process that involves interested persons from both the public and private sectors, including landowners; and (B) includes strategies for developing partnerships between the public and private sectors to develop, improve, and preserve traditional recreational opportunities.
Landowner relations program.--The term ``landowner relations program'' means a program established by the State that-- (A) engages private landowners to facilitate public access to their property for traditional use; (B) addresses the concerns of landowners relating to public access to private land; and (C) serves as a clearinghouse for information about rules, regulations, certifications, and procedures for land use.
Program.--The term ``program'' means the grant program established under subsection (a).
Traditional use.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term ``traditional use'' has the meaning given that term by the State receiving a grant under subsection (a).
Such term may include hunting, fishing, access to water, motorized recreation, hiking, bird watching, and non-motorized recreational activities.
Exclusion.--The term ``traditional use'' does not include residential or commercial development.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Chief to carry out this Act, $50,000,000 for each fiscal year from 2009 through 2013.