This Act may be cited as the ``Nonprofit Energy Efficiency Act''.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY RETROFIT PILOT PROGRAM.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Applicant.--The term ``applicant'' means a nonprofit organization that applies for a grant under this section.
Energy-efficiency improvement.-- (A) In general.--The term ``energy-efficiency improvement'' means an installed measure (including a product, equipment, system, service, or practice) that results in a reduction in demand by a nonprofit organization for energy or fuel supplied from outside the nonprofit building.
Inclusions.--The term ``energy-efficiency improvement'' includes an installed measure described in subparagraph (A) involving-- (i) repairing, replacing, or installing-- (I) a roof, electrical wiring, plumbing, sewage, or lighting system, or component of a roof, electrical wiring, or system; (II) a window; (III) a door, including a security door; or (IV) a heating, ventilation, or air conditioning system or component of the system (including insulation); (ii) a renewable energy generation or heating system, including a solar, photovoltaic, wind, geothermal, or biomass (including wood pellet) system or component of the system; and (iii) any other measure taken to modernize, renovate, or repair a nonprofit building to make the nonprofit building more energy efficient.
Nonprofit building.-- (A) In general.--The term ``nonprofit building'' means a building operated and owned by a nonprofit organization.
Inclusions.--The term ``nonprofit building'' includes a building described in subparagraph (A) that is-- (i) a hospital; (ii) a youth center; (iii) a school; (iv) a social-welfare program facility; (v) a house of worship; and (vi) any other nonresidential and noncommercial structure.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish a pilot program to award grants for the purpose of retrofitting nonprofit buildings with energy-efficiency improvements.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may award grants under the program established under subsection (b).
Application.--The Secretary may award a grant under this section if an applicant submits to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Criteria for grant.--In determining whether to award a grant under this section, the Secretary shall apply performance-based criteria, which shall give priority to applications based on-- (A) the cost-effectiveness of the energy-efficiency improvement; and (B) an effective plan for evaluation, measurement, and verification of energy savings.
Limitation on individual grant amount.--Each grant awarded under this section shall not exceed-- (A) an amount equal to 50 percent of the energy- efficiency improvement; and (B) $200,000.
Cost sharing.-- (A) In general.--A grant awarded under this section shall be subject to a minimum non-Federal cost-sharing requirement of 50 percent.
In-kind contributions.--The non-Federal share may be provided in the form of in-kind contributions of materials or services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2014 through 2017, to remain available until expended.
The Secretary of Energy shall use to carry out the pilot program established under section 2 amounts otherwise made available to carry out the Building Technologies Program.