The Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Recycling Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The United States failure to manage its solid waste has resulted in critical regional and national problems.
Successful solid waste management requires creative use of the entire hierarchy of solid waste management, including waste reduction, recycling, waste-to-energy operations, and landfilling.
Recycling can play a significant role in reducing municipal waste.
Recycling can prevent depletion of valuable landfill space, save energy and natural resources, and provide useful products from discarded materials.
The failure to recycle and reuse materials is a significant and unnecessary waste of important national energy and material resources.
Comprehensive, multimaterial recycling programs represent the most cost-effective and efficient method of meeting recycling goals.
Limited or selective approaches to recycling may work to the detriment of a comprehensive national recycling effort by imposing additional costs and creating inefficiencies in the overall program.
The responsibility to recycle should be shared by all consumers of recyclable goods, including individual households, municipalities, and commercial and institutional establishments.
All Americans should be provided with an opportunity to recycle in their community, including at home and at their place of employment.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To require each State to develop and implement a comprehensive, multimaterial recycling plan to provide its citizens with the opportunity to recycle.
To require each State, under its plan, to eventually recycle at least 25 percent of its municipal waste stream.
The Congress hereby establishes as a national goal the recycling of municipal waste to the maximum extent practicable, consistent with market demand for recycled materials.
For purposes of assisting States in carrying out this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall provide technical assistance and guidance to the States on recycling methods and opportunities, including the development of the elements for an effective comprehensive State recycling program.
Such a program shall include, at a minimum, the following elements: (1) Proven approaches to separation and collection of municipal waste according to material, including metals, glass, paper, plastics, yard waste, used oil, used tires, and used batteries.
Guidance on local or regional drop-off centers for municipal waste separated at home or business.
Planning and information exchange services on successful strategies for municipal, commercial, and industrial recycling programs.
Planning and information exchange services on the creation of State and regional information clearinghouses on markets for secondary materials and recycled goods.
Requirement for State Programs.-- (1) Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, each State shall develop and implement a comprehensive multimaterial recycling program to provide its residents with an opportunity to participate and engage in recycling.
Each State program shall be designed to provide at least 20 percent of the State's population with an opportunity to participate in the program within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Every 2 years thereafter, such program must be available to an additional 20 percent of the State's population, until such time that 100 percent of the population is provided an opportunity to participate in the recycling program.
Program Components.--Each State recycling program under this section shall include, at a minimum, each of the following elements: (1) Material separation and recycling.--Provisions, as determined by the States, for the separation of recyclable materials from other municipal waste generated at residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments.
The types of recyclable materials covered shall be designated by the State and may include metal cans, glass bottles and jars, paper, and containers made of plastic such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and high density polyethylene (HDPE).
Yard waste.--Persons at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments shall separate yard waste from other municipal waste generated at those establishments, unless those persons have provided for the composting of their yard waste.
Notice.--Each State or its political subdivisions shall establish a comprehensive and sustained public information and education program concerning recycling program features and requirements.
Preference.--In implementing its recycling program, a State or its political subdivisions shall accord consideration for the collection, processing, and marketing of recyclable materials to persons engaged in the business of recycling.
Alternative Programs.--A State or its municipalities, or both, shall be deemed to comply with this section if it has in place an existing program for the collection of separated materials which may provide for curbside collection, drop-off centers, regional collection centers or similar methods of collection which, in its discretion, best meets the needs of the State and its political subdivisions and which comply with the intent and requirements of this Act.
Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, a State shall include its comprehensive recycling program in the State solid waste management plan required by subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6941 et sequentes).
Upon approval of the recycling program component of the plan by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the State shall be eligible to apply for Federal grants under section 4011 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as added by section 7, to implement the recycling program.
STATE GRANTS FOR RECYCLING.
Grants.--Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6941 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Upon application of a State and from funds appropriated pursuant to sections 4008 and 4009, the Administrator shall make grants, subject to such terms and conditions as the Administrator considers appropriate, under this section to such State for the purpose of assisting the State in implementing the comprehensive recycling program developed by the State and approved by the Administrator under the Comprehensive Recycling Act of 1993, including activities to promote the use of recycling techniques by businesses, local governments, and regional waste management authorities.
In reviewing grant applications, the Administrator shall give specific consideration to the needs of rural areas regarding the collection, separation, and transportation of such materials and the availability and maturity of the region's recyclers and markets.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of contents for such Act (contained in section 1001) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4010 the following new item: ``4011.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``commercial, non-hazardous solid waste'' means waste which originates in private, commercial establishments or enterprises.
The term ``industrial waste'' means all non-hazardous solid wastes other than residential, commercial, and institutional wastes.
The term ``institutional waste'' means non-hazardous solid waste originating from services provided by governmental entities to the public.
The term ``metal cans'' means aluminum cans, bimetal cans, and ``tin'' food cans.
The term ``municipal waste'' means residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial waste.
The term does not include source-separated materials.
The term ``recycling'' means (A) the collection, processing, and marketing for reuse of metals, glass, paper, plastics, used oil, yard waste, and other materials which could otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste, or (B) the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel.
Such term includes composting.
The term ``residential waste'' means solid waste originating from private households.
The term ``solid waste'' has the meaning given such term by section 1004(27) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
The term ``waste reduction'' means an activity or action, or a combination of activities or actions, that result in less generation of waste from production, use, and disposal of a product than would have been generated in the absence of such activities or actions.
The term ``yard waste'' means leaves, grass clippings, garden residues, shrubbery, tree trimmings, and similar material, but does not include land clearing debris such as tree trunks and stumps.