Appeal No. 42821 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 42821 Rushikesh Vijay Bhopatrao CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 08 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005and 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act as the same relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or interest and may cause unwarranted invasion into the privacy of the individual and may also endanger the life or physical safety of the person(s).
information was refused.
4.
Ground of appeal The appellant has filed the appeal on the ground that the access to the requested I have perused the documents available on record and I find no infirmity in the denial of the information by the respondent under Section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act as it relates to various third parties and disclosure of the same may cause unwarranted invasion of their privacy.
Similar observations were made by the Hon’ble CIC in the matter of Ajit Kumar vs. CPIO Union Public Service Commissionwherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under Section 8(1)(j) of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios laid down by the same Court in the matter(s) of Canara Bank Vs. CS Shyam in Civil Appeal No. 209 Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner & Ors. MANU SC 0816 2012 :1 SCC 212 and RK Jain vs. Union of India & Anr. MANU SC 0384 2013 : 14 SCC 794.
In the said matter the Hon’ble Supreme held that “ 59.
Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents in our opinion would indicate that personal records including name address physical mental and psychological status marks obtained grades and answer sheets are all treated as personal information.
Similarly professional records including qualification performance evaluation reports ACRs disciplinary proceedings etc. are all personal information.
Medical records treatment choice of medicine list of hospitals and doctors visited findings recorded including that of the family members information relating to assets liabilities income tax returns details of investments lending and borrowing etc. are personal information.
Such personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied.
This list is indicative and not exhaustive..." In view of the same I find that the requested information is exempt from disclosure under section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act.
Accordingly I do not find any deficiency in the response.
Further I note that the appellant in his appeal sought information regarding current detailed salary structure of SEBI employees an information seeker cannot be allowed to expand the scope of his RTI enquiry at appeal stage.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Place: Mumbai Date: June 28 2021