1.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order 4639 of 2018 by which the Division Bench by way of an interim relief directed the respondent herein accused be Station the State of Maharashtra has preferred the present 2.
At the outset it is required to be noted that the present is a glaring example of fourm shopping by the accused which offences under Sections 384 386 387 read with Section 34 Raju.
The case on behalf of the prosecution has been JudgeThane in his order dated 26032018 passed Special Judge rejected the application submitted by the respondent herein for bail and therefore the same is not by international gangster Shakil Babu Mohiddin Shaikh Chhota Shakil @ CS and Iqbal Ibrahim Kaskar @ Iqbal to time the respondent herein was paying the amount to used to use the said amount for taking help of other Borivali Mumbai after prior sanction the provisions of to be applied.
After investigation a charge sheet was 3.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the rejection of the application No.855 of 2018.
The same was heard by the learned Single Judge.
From the order dated 13072018 learned counsel on instructions withdrew the said bail order dated 13072018.
Immediately on withdrawal of the unguided being absolutely arbitrary uncanalized and thus unconstitutional being violative of the Articles 14 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India or to save it from unconstitutionality to read down expound empty formality dependent upon whims fancies prejudices and caprices of the concerned officer for release on bail as encapsulated therein to be unconstitutional and violative of Article 14 and c) To quash and set aside the impugned prior petitioner and consequently to quash the Case no.217 under Section 384 386 387 34 & 120of IPC and 3(1)(ii) 3(2) 3(4) and 3(5 2017 of Kasarvadavli Police Station at Thane and Charge Sheet dated under Sec 3(1)(ii) 3(2) 3(4) and 3(5) of MCOCA disposal of the instant Application the Petitioner Nol­190 2017 registered with Kasarvadavli Police Station Thane on such interim bail on suitable terms and conditions as this Hon ble of the MCOCA and on the prayer to strike down the twin conditions imposed for release on bail to be unconstitutional and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore as such the constitutionality challenging the vires of aforesaid two provisions the High Court has also considered and dealt with on merits the to invoke the provisions of MCOCA and though a detailed Section 482 Cr.PC and or considering the discharge application the High Court has observed that the order passed by the Additional Commissioner of Police dated has granted the interim relief by directing that the MCOC No.24 of 2017 arising out of CR No.I­190 2017 which the respondent accused could not get before the 4.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned too by way of interim relief the State Government has has vehemently submitted that in the facts and 51 It is submitted that while releasing the accused on bail the High Court has not at all considered the gravity of the by a detailed judgment and order the learned Special thereafter the accused preferred the bail application before the High Court which was heard by the learned Single Judge the respective parties including the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused as the learned Single Judge was not inclined to release the accused on bail the accused withdrew the said bail application and thereafter filed a writ petition before the Division Bench of the High Court under the guise of challenging the vires of the provisions of MCOCA and prayed for interim relief which has been filed by the investigating agency against the the case of M s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs State of Maharashtra and Others (Criminal Appeal No330 Court has virtually acquitted the accused for the offences under the MCOCA and that too at the interim stage.
It is aside the approval sanction given by the appropriate authority invoking the MCOCA which is inopportune and 6.
Making the above submissions it is prayed to allow the 7.
The present appeal is opposed by Shri Siddhartha Dave learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the 71 It is submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the High Court has rightly held that the sanction to prosecute have passed and there are no allegations that the accused it is requested not to cancel the bail granted by the High Court in exercise of powers under Article 136 of the 8.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of 9.
At the outset it is required to be noted that the allegations i.e. offences under Sections 384 386 387 read with Section 34 of the IPC.
On considering the material on record the investigating agency has invoked the provisions of the MCOCA.
After investigation a charge sheet has been filed under the MCOCA.
By the impugned order the Division Bench of the High Court has released the accused on bail this Court in the catena of decisions the Division Bench ought not to have released the accused on bail by way of interim relief [see the decision of this Court in the case of M s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
Vs. State of 91 It is required to be noted that while releasing the accused on at all considered the seriousness of the offences alleged that the respondent accused is running the Matka business is providing funds to the Chhota Shakil and his of organized crime syndicate.
By the impugned order the High Court has observed that the sanction to invoke the provisions of the MCOCA is bad in law as there is no MCOCA was not warranted.
Virtually the High Court has interim stage exonerating the respondent from MCOCA 92 It is required to be noted that by the detailed judgment and writ petition before the Division Bench of the High Court under the guise of challenging the vires of MCOCA and Court has released the accused on bail that too by way of interim relief which otherwise the accused could not get before the learned Single Judge and he withdrew the bail High Court releasing the accused on bail deserves to be 10.
Now so far as the submissions on behalf of the accused that on bail therefore the impugned order may not be quashed catena of decisions quashing and setting aside the wrong a question of cancellation of bail but it is a question of quashing and setting aside the wrong order passed by the 11.
In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the present appeal succeeds.
The impugned order dated in Criminal Writ Petition No4639 of 2018 releasing the respondent accused on bail in connection with Special registered with Kasarvadavli Police is hereby quashed and concerned Court by issuing non­bailable warrant.
The