IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1658 OF 2010 W I T H CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2322 OF 2010 BOMBAY HOSPITAL & MEDICAL RESEARCH ASHA JAISWAL & ORS JUDGMENT HEMANT GUPTA J The present appeals are directed against an order passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission1 on 06012010 against the appellants i.e. Bombay Hospital & Medical Research Centre2 and Dr. C Anand Somaya3 directing to pay a sum of Rs 14 18 491 along with interest @ 9% pa from the date of filing of the complaint till the date of payment.
1 For short the ‘Commission’ 2 For short the ‘Hospital’ 3 For short the ‘Doctor’ The complaint was filed before the Commission by the legal heirs4 of the deceased patient Dinesh Jaiswal5 alleging medical negligence on the part of the Hospital and the Doctor in treating the patient The patient was admitted to the Hospital on 22041998 and breathed his last on 12061998.
The Hospital charged a sum of Rs 4 08 800 for the treatment of the patient during the period of his admission in the Hospital.
The said amount is included in and is part of the amount of compensation awarded against the appellants The patient was taking treatment since 1990 for having difficulties in walking due to the pain and discomfort in legs.
For his complaint of inability to walk a Colour Doppler Test was conducted on 13041998 at Khemuka X Ray & Ultrasound Clinic Nagpur which detected the following “Aneurismal dilatation of the lower abdominal aorta just above bifurcation is seen.
The aneurism measures 54 x 26 in its maximum dimensions Irregular thrombus is seen within the aneurism on colour Prostate is normal in echo pattern and measures 4 x 3 x 3cms.
Prostatic capsule is intact.
Urinary bladder is normal in capacity and contour.
Post void residual urine is not Impression: Mild hepatomegaly with aneurism of lower abdominal aorta just above the bifurcation.” Dr. KG Deshpande Memorial Center Nagpur was consulted by the 4 For short the ‘Complainant’ 5 For short the ‘patient’ patient on 15041998 and Dr. Deshpande diagnosed the following “A case of Abd Aortic Aneurysum Involvement on left side with Left PVBand surgery after noticing the following physical conditions “A 42 years old male with aorta pain left lower limb and right leg below knee.
Gradual Claudication BP 100 80 Ischaemic changes both lower limbs.
Seen with impending Both legs left muscles are tested The Doctor after examining the patient recorded that there were ischemic changes in both lower limbs and also noted an impending gangrene.
Subsequent to the pre operative preparations surgery was conducted on 23041998 by a team of surgeons including Dr Partha and Dr. Bindra led by the appellant Doctor.
The operation notes read as thus “On inspection there was a huge aneurysum on the latral aspect on left side arising infra renal It was densely adherent to the surrounding structure.
The aneurysum was directed out.
The tape was passed around the left Renal artery vein for retraction.
A tape was passed around the aorta just below the renal artery and above the aneurysum.
Both the common iliac arteries were exposed Tapes were passed around both the iliac arteries After achieving proper exposure slinging around all the vessels.
The aorta was iron clamped just infra renally.
The aneurysum opened out.
The aorta transected and both illiacs transected.was sutured in place.
The short main limb to the aorta using continuous prolure and both the limbs of the graft were sutured to the common iliacs end to end anastomosis on right side.
After checking the flow in the graft after suture the upper end the lower anastomosis On the left side the side of the graft was sutured the end of the common iliac.
The limb of the graft further brought down through a tunnel to the femoral artery and the end of the graft sutured to the side of the femoral artery After achieving proper haemostasis and checking the Intra operatively the abdomen closed using drainage tubes The patient was later shifted to recovery room on ventilator with stable vital signs.” It is the case of the complainant that on 2441998 at about 4 am that is the night after surgery the nurse who was attending the patient observed that the pulsation of the patient had become feeble and body temperature was low and the lower limbs had gone cold.
The relatives were informed at about 7 am that the patient was unconscious legs were cold with no pulsation.
The complainant further alleged that the nurse had informed the Doctor at 4 am but he came only at 930 am The patient upon assessment by the Doctor was directed to get second DSA test but DSA machine was out of order.
Hence the Doctor advised angiography but the patient was made to wait for both DSA test as well as for angiography.
One Dr. BK Goyal examined the patient and reported that the patient had probably developed block of abdominal aorta.
The angiography conducted at 1230 pm on 2441998 showed a blockat the graft due to which the blood supply to the lower limbs had totally stopped.
The complainant contended that the earlier surgery was not performed correctly and there was negligence in conducting the same.
A decision was taken to re explore the earlier surgery done at about 3:30 pm but since all the four operation theatres were occupied he could only be taken to the operation theatre for re grafting at 530 pm As there was no pulsation in the graft and there was clot in the graft extending into both limbs of the graft a fresh graft was sutured and the patient was shifted to recovery room and put on ventilator It was contended by the Hospital that the patient was in the care of qualified doctors such as Dr. Nemish Shah Dr. J A Pachore Dr. AL Kripalani Dr. Partha Dr. HS Bindra and many others throughout his course of admission and no stone was left unturned to ascertain the complications and treat the same.
Various specialist doctors were treating the patient and medicines treatment was timely regulated and changed as and when required on a daily basis.
Regular daily dialysis dressing of wounds etc. were also done.
However unfortunately despite the best efforts of the qualified doctors the patient did not respond to the treatment and passed away on The complainant in the complaint enumerated the facts suggesting negligence and deficiency of service on the part of the appellants The averments made by the complainant and the corresponding reply by the Doctor is extracted hereinunder In all cases of grafting the patient is kept under close observation to find out whether blood is flowing normally.
In case there is stoppage or lack of flow immediate action is taken to control the situation because lack of blood is certain to rupture and deaden the muscles.
The tissues cannot survive without blood flow But in this case after the patient was taken to recovery room he was “16.
Without prejudice to the above and with reference to para 34 of the complaint under reply I deny the allegations made therein are false With further reference to the said para it is substantially correct to state that in all cases of grafting patient is kept under closer observations to find out whether blood is flowing normally.
In case there is stoppage or lack of flow immediate action is taken to control not examined by any doctor.
The attending nurse observed at 430 am on 24498 that lower limbs had become cold and did inform the doctors.
The doctors were called in writing at 8 am but Dr Somaya came at 930 am This time gap was enough to rupture the muscles.
The process is irreversible.
It cannot be corrected Timely medical care could have saved the life of the complainant 35.
That in spite of the critical condition of the complainant on 24498 he was made to stand in queue for DSA test for more than 3 hours.
This delay further worsened the condition of the complaint it appears that Bombay Hospital had no medical ethics the situation because lack of blood is certain to rupture and deaden the muscles.
I say and submit that even while treating the said deceased utmost care was taken by the opp party in post operative period.
In this connection I say and submit that patient was kept in Cardio Vascular Incentive Care Unit CVICU which is considered to be finest in India.
The patient was continuously monitored by efficient and trained nursing staff and was also monitored for 24 hours by resident doctor.
With further reference to the said para I deny that at about 430 am on 24 4 1998 the attending nurse observed that lower limbs had become cold as alleged or at all.
I deny that doctors were summoned and that I came to the said unit only at 930 am as alleged or at all I deny that because of the so called delay on my part complications took place in the case of the said deceased as alleged or at all.
I say and submit that received immediately after message from the resident doctor attached to the opp.
party no1 attended the said patient at about 900 am and not at 930 am as sought to be suggested by the 17.
With reference to paras 35 and 36 of the complaint under reply I deny that in spite of critical condition of the complainant on 2441998 he was deliberately made to stand in queue for DSA test for more than 3 hours.
I deny that the said delay was deliberate and due to the said delay the condition of 36.
The situation turned darker because after waiting for 3 hours the complainant was informed that the machine was dis functional the said patient further worsened as alleged or at all.
I say and submit that to the best to my knowledge immediately I suggested DSA test on 2441998 the staff of the opp party no1 took the said deceased for DSA test but unfortunately during the relevant time the equipment was not functioning properly and as soon as the defects were located the said test was conducted to enable the opp parties to give further treatment to the said deceased.
I say and submit that on perusal of the case papers on record it is crystal clear that the best possible treatment and due care was given to the said deceased under circumstances.
I say and submit that during the relevant time the condition of the said deceased was critical and therefore it was not possible to shift the said patient to any other hospital in nearby vicinity for any test including DSA.
It is also significant to note here that during the relevant time DSA test machinery was available only in Jaslok Hospital Hinduja Hospital and Breach Candy Hospital.
However it was not possible to shift the said patient for the said test considering the patient condition.
In any event I dispute the allegations made by the complainant as the complainant’s failed to substantiate the said allegations by producing any independent material on that behalf Besides this the said allegations are not based or supported on the basis of the independent expert’s opinion 37.
That on the same day at 1230 p.m.1 Weekly Law Reports 246 had DSA machines at the relevant time.
The Hospital in its affidavit had inter alia mentioned that the DSA test is not a bed side test The patient has to be carefully shifted to the cardiac cauterization department where the DSA machine was installed.
The patient hence had to be stabilized before he was shifted to DSA department.
Since the patient was put on ventilator and on several support medications it was not possible to immediately undergo the DSA test.
But when the patient was taken for DSA test the machine developed certain technical problem.
Since the DSA machine was not working angiography was thought to be the best possible test and was thus conducted.
The Hospital had specialized staff in all branches of medicine and the medical assistance as was required from time to time including nephrology orthopedics etc was provided to the patient.
It was argued that the professional competence of Doctor has not been doubted even by the Commission but two factors have been taken against the Doctor for holding him negligent first that he did not visit the patient soon after the surgery till 9 930 am on the next day to verify the blood flow after the surgery and second he did not visit the patient from 2941998 to 951998 when he was in Mumbai and from 951998 to 7.6.1998 when he went abroad for attending medical 17.
We do not find that the basis of finding the Doctor negligent in providing medical care is sustainable as there are both legal and factual errors in the findings recorded by the Commission.
18.
Dr. KG Deshpande had referred the patient to the Doctor on 154.1998 with advice of urgent surgical repair of Aneurysum.
The patient had taken another six days to consult Doctor at Mumbai and it was only on 21.4.1998 that the patient was examined by the Doctor and was advised immediate Aneurysmectomy in view of the impending gangrene.
Therefore gangrene was not found to be impending after few days of admission to the Hospital but even before the patient was admitted.
The patient was in critical condition when the Doctor was consulted on 21.4.1998 and surgery was thereafter performed within two days Further the non working of the DSA machine and consequent delay in performing the test cannot be said to be negligence on the part of the Doctor or the Hospital.
The DSA machine is a large expensive and complicated machine which unfortunately developed certain technical problem at the time when patient had to be tested.
Any machine can become non functional because of innumerable factors beyond the human control as the machines involve various mechanical electrical and electronic components.
The DSA test was conducted in the Hospital on 2241998 and hence DSA machine cannot be said to be dysfunctional for a long time.
The alternative process to determine the blood flow was carried out by angiography and the decision for re exploration was taken at 1230 p.m. No fault can be attached to the Hospital if the operation theatres were occupied when the patient was taken for surgery.
Operation theatres cannot be presumed to be available at all times.
Therefore non availability of an emergency operation theatre during the period when surgeries were being performed on other patients is not a valid ground to hold the Hospital negligent in any manner The re exploration of operative notes dated 2441998 shows that a fresh graft was sutured in place after establishing the flow.
The patient was then put on ventilator and shifted to recovery room.
On 254.1998 a note by Dr. Bindra indicated that the patient was seen by Dr. Shruti.
It was noted that there was no movement in both the legs but had pin prick sensation and below mid thigh sensation was present on the lower limbs.
Further legs were warm till the ankles and the feet were cold.
On 27.4.1998 Dr. HS Bindra had sought consultation from Dr. Khadilkar giving case history that limbs were warm and that the patient had pain in the lumber region and was also feeling tightness in both the lower limbs.
Dr. Khadilkar noted his impressions that it was very likely lower spinal cord conus syndrome and thereafter advised MRI of the lower cervical spine and till then to continue with the medicine pentosiflin and lomodex and for muscle ischemia high CK and Myoglobulin.
Dr. Khadilkar suggested the same treatment to continue on 28498.
On 29.4.1998 Dr. Khadilkar had reported the sensory level dropped to upper 1 3rd of the thigh and that there was no power in limbs.
No changes were however seen in the MRI report.
It was also reported that probably myonecrosis was playing more significant role in the weakness.
The patient was put on dialysis thereafter.
The patient was examined by Dr. Kripalani or his unit from 151998 and thereafter for many days till 2351998.
The dialysis was being conducted in the meantime as well.
The patient was being monitored by Dr. Bindra throughout.
Subsequently the patient was referred to Dr. Amarapurkar on 1251998 when it was noted that Ischemic Injury to liver needed no treatment on 1351998.
The patient was then referred to Dr. Amin for enternal nuirisim on It was further noted on 18051998 from Colour Flow Imaging of limb arteries that both common femoral superficial femoral and popliteal arteries were patent.
The flow in both posterior tibial arteries was of low velocity and of venous type suggesting refilled flow.
Dr Pachore also examined the patient on 2751998 and observed that the patient had wet gangrene below knee and was thus advised amputation.
On 2951998 the patient was operated for amputation below the knee at the level of tibial tuberosity for treatment of wet gangrene and the Bilateral Guillatine Amputation was carried out On 30051998 it was noted that the acute renal failure was improving.
Further septicemia was diagnosed on 30051998.
Later on 12061998 the patient was put on ventilator and he subsequently passed away at 930 pm due to septicemic shock It is to be noted that it is not the case of the complainant that Doctor was not possessed of requisite skill in carrying out the operation.
In fact the patient was referred to him by Dr. Deshpande keeping in view the expertise of the Doctor in vascular surgery There is no proof that there was any negligence in performing the surgery on 2341998 or in the process of re exploration on 2441998.
The allegation is of failure of the Doctor to take the follow up action after surgery on 2341998 a delayed decision to amputate the leg subsequent to re exploration on 2441998 and the alleged undue foreign visit of the Doctor.
In respect to such contention of the Doctor being on a foreign visit it is well known a medical professional has to upgrade himself with the latest development in his field which may require him to attend conferences held both in and outside the country.
Mere fact that the Doctor had gone abroad cannot lead to an inference of medical negligence as the patient was admitted in a hospital having specialists in multi faculties.
Two doctors from the unit of the Doctor namely Dr. Bindra and Dr. Partha both post graduates were present to attend to the patient.
Moreover as per the stand of the Hospital and the Doctor the patient was kept in Cardio Vascular Intensive Care Unit after the surgery and was continuously being monitored by qualified post graduate doctors including Dr. Nemish Shah Head of Cardio Vascular Surgery.
The patient was even attended by other specialist doctors as well which is evident from the brief summary of treatment given to the patient.
The experts in the other fields have been consulted from time to time and the treatment was modulated accordingly.
In spite of the treatment if the patient had not survived the doctors cannot be blamed as even the doctors with the best of their abilities cannot prevent the inevitable.
The blood was flowing properly soon after the surgery but later the formation of clot was confirmed after the angiography test was conducted at 1230 p.m. An immediate decision was taken for re exploration at 330 pm The allegation of delay in treatment after the surgery seems to be baseless as the patient was being administered antibiotics like Metrogyl 400 and Piperacillin Injection which are used for treatment in gangrene.
Dr. Kripalani in his affidavit denied the allegation leveled by the complainant.
Dr Kripalani had treated patient continuously including carrying out the dialysis.
In respect of the allegation that doctors failed to amputate legs on time efforts were being made to save the limbs as amputation is considered as the last resort.
The amputation was done as per the advice of Dr. Pachore.
In the present era of super specialization one doctor is not a solution for all problems of a patient.
Each problem is dealt with by an expert in the concerned field and that is what is apparent from the medical record.
The stand of the complainant is that since surgery was performed by a doctor he alone would be responsible for different aspects of the treatment required and given to the patient.
However it is an incorrect assumption to be made.
It is a case where the patient was in serious condition impending gangrene even before admission to the Hospital but even after surgery and re exploration if the patient does not survive the fault cannot be fastened on the doctors as a case of medical negligence It is too much to expect from a doctor to remain on the bed side of the patient throughout his stay in the hospital which was being expected by the complainant here.
A doctor is expected to provide reasonable care which is not proved to be lacking in any manner in the present case The sole basis of finding of negligence against the Hospital is of res ipsa loquitor.
It is to be noted that res ipsa loquitor is a rule of evidence.
This Court in a judgment reported as Syad Akbar v State of Karnataka7 explained the principle in a criminal trial as “19.
As a rule mere proof that an event has happened or an accident has occurred the cause of which is unknown is not evidence of negligence.
But the peculiar circumstances con stituting the event or accident in a particular case may themselves proclaim in concordant clear and unambiguous voices the negligence of somebody as the cause of the event or accident.
It is to such cases that the maxim res ipsa lo quitur may apply if the cause of the accident is unknown and no reasonable explanation as to the cause is coming forth from the defendant.
To emphasise the point it may be reiter ated that in such cases the event or accident must be of a kind which does not happen in the ordinary course of things if those who have the management and control use due care But according to some decisions satisfaction of this condi tion alone is not sufficient for res ipsa to come into play and it has to be further satisfied that the event which caused the accident was within the defendant s control.
The reason for this second requirement is that where the defendant has con trol of the thing which caused the injury he is in a better po sition than the plaintiff to explain how the accident occurred Instances of such special kind of accidents which “tell their own story” of being offsprings of negligence are furnished by cases such as where a motor vehicle mounts or projects over a pavement and hurts somebody there or travelling in the ve hicle one car ramming another from behind or even a head on collision on the wrong side of the road.1 All ER 392 399] Cream v. Smith8 AER 349] Rich ley v. Faull1 WLR 1454 :3 All ER 109 20.
Thus for the application of the maxim res ipsa loquitur “no less important a requirement is that the res must not only bespeak negligence but pin it on the defendant” 26.
From the above conspectus two lines of approach in re gard to the application and effect of the maxim res ipsa lo quitur are discernible.
According to the first where the maxim applies it operates as an exception to the general 71 SCC 30 rule that the burden of proof of the alleged negligence is in the first instance on the plaintiff.
In this view if the nature of an accident is such that the mere happening of it is evidence of negligence such as where a motor vehicle without appar ent cause leaves the highway or overturns or in fair visibility runs into an obstacle or brushes the branches of an over hanging tree resulting in injury or where there is a duty on the defendant to exercise care and the circumstances in which the injury complained of happened are such that with the exercise of the requisite care no risk would in the ordinary course ensue the burden shifts or is in the first instance on the defendant to disprove his liability.
Such shifting or casting of the burden on the defendant is on account of a presump tion of law and fact arising against the defendant from the constituent circumstances of the accident itself which be speak negligence of the defendant.
This is the view taken in several decisions of English courts.
22 LJ 442] Moore v.R Fox & Sons1 QB 596 :1 All ER 182] .
Also see paras 70 79 and 80 of Halsbury s Laws of England Third Edn.
Vol. 28 and the rulings mentioned in the footnotes thereunder 27.
According to the other line of approach res ipsa loquitur is not a special rule of substantive law that functionally it is only an aid in the evaluation of evidence “an application of the general method of inferring one or more facts in issue from circumstances proved in evidence”.
In this view the maxim res ipsa loquitur does not require the raising of any presumption of law which must shift the onus on the defen dant.
It only when applied appropriately allows the drawing of a permissive inference of fact as distinguished from a mandatory presumption properly so called having regard to the totality of the circumstances and probabilities of the case.
Res ipsa is only a means of estimating logical probabil ity from the circumstances of the accident.
Looked at from this angle the phrase24 TLR 548] ) only means “that there is in the circumstances of the particular case some evidence which viewed not as a matter of conjecture but of reasonable argument makes it more probable that there was some negligence upon the facts as shown and undisputed than that the occurrence took place without negligence ....
It means that the circumstances are so to speak eloquent of the negligence of somebody who brought about the state of things which is complained of.” 28.
Recently a three Judge Bench in a judgment reported as Iffco Tokio General Insurance Company Limited v. Pearl Beverages Lim ited8 approved the aforesaid judgment in a case of medical negli gence being examined by the consumer fora.
It was held as under “86.
Thus it is used in cases of tort and where the facts with out anything more clearly and unerringly point to negligence The principle of res ipsa loquitur as such appears to be inap posite when what is in question is whether driver was under the influence of alcohol.
It may be another matter that though the principle as such is inapplicable the manner in which the accident occurred may along with other circum stances point to the driver being under the influence of alco In Martin F D Souza v. Mohd.
Ishfaq9 this court observed that the doctor cannot be held liable for medical negligence by applying the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur for the reason that a patient has not favourably responded to a treatment given by a doctor or a surgery has failed.
There is a tendency to blame the doctor when a patient dies or suffers some mishap.
This is an intolerant conduct of the family members to not accept the death in such cases.
The in creased cases of manhandling of medical professionals who worked day and night without their comfort has been very well seen in this pandemic.
This Court held as under: 87 SCC 704 9(2009) 3 SCC 1 “40.
Simply because a patient has not favourably responded to a treatment given by a doctor or a surgery has failed the doctor cannot be held straightaway liable for medical negligence by applying the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
No sensible professional would intentionally commit an act or omission which would result in harm or injury to the patient since the professional reputation of the professional would be at stake.
A single failure may cost him dear in his lapse 42.
When a patient dies or suffers some mishap there is a tendency to blame the doctor for this.
Things have gone wrong and therefore somebody must be punished for it However it is well known that even the best professionals what to say of the average professional sometimes have failures.
A lawyer cannot win every case in his professional career but surely he cannot be penalised for losing a case provided he appeared in it and made his submissions.” In case of medical negligence this Court in a celebrated judgment reported as Jacob Mathew v. State of Punjab and Anr.10 held that simple lack of care an error of judgment or an accident is not a proof of negligence on the part of a medical professional.
The Court held as under We sum up our conclusions as under 1) Negligence is the breach of a duty caused by omission to do something which a reasonable man guided by those considerations which ordinarily regulate the conduct of hu man affairs would do or doing something which a prudent and reasonable man would not do.
The definition of negli gence as given in Law of Torts Ratanlal & Dhirajlalreferred to hereinabove holds good Negligence becomes actionable on account of injury result 106 SCC 1 ing from the act or omission amounting to negligence at tributable to the person sued.
The essential components of negligence are three: “duty” “breach” and “resulting dam 2) Negligence in the context of the medical profession nec essarily calls for a treatment with a difference.
To infer rash ness or negligence on the part of a professional in particu lar a doctor additional considerations apply.
A case of occu pational negligence is different from one of professional negligence.
A simple lack of care an error of judgment or an accident is not proof of negligence on the part of a med ical professional.
So long as a doctor follows a practice ac ceptable to the medical profession of that day he cannot be held liable for negligence merely because a better alter native course or method of treatment was also available or simply because a more skilled doctor would not have cho sen to follow or resort to that practice or procedure which the accused followed.
When it comes to the failure of taking precautions what has to be seen is whether those precau tions were taken which the ordinary experience of men has found to be sufficient a failure to use special or extraordi nary precautions which might have prevented the particular happening cannot be the standard for judging the alleged negligence.
So also the standard of care while assessing the practice as adopted is judged in the light of knowledge available at the time of the incident and not at the date of trial.
Similarly when the charge of negligence arises out of failure to use some particular equipment the charge would fail if the equipment was not generally available at that par ticular timeat which it is suggested it should have been used 4) The test for determining medical negligence as laid down in Bolam case1 WLR 582 : 2 All ER 118WLR at p. 586holds good in its ap plicability in India Res ipsa loquitur is only a rule of evidence and operates in the domain of civil law specially in cases of torts and helps in determining the onus of proof in actions relating to negligence.
It cannot be pressed in service for determin ing per se the liability for negligence within the domain of criminal law.
Res ipsa loquitur has if at all a limited applica tion in trial on a charge of criminal negligence.” In another judgment reported as Arun Kumar Manglik v. Chirayu Health and Medicare Private Limited and Anr.11 this Court held that the standard of care as enunciated in Bolam case must evolve in consonance with its subsequent interpretation by English and Indian Courts.
The threshold to prove unreasonableness is set with due regard to the risks associated with medical treatment and the conditions under which medical professionals’ function.
The Court held as under “45.
In the practice of medicine there could be varying approaches to treatment.
There can be a genuine difference of opinion.
However while adopting a course of treatment the medical professional must ensure that it is not unreasonable.
The threshold to prove unreasonableness is set with due regard to the risks associated with medical treatment and the conditions under which medical professionals function.
This is to avoid a situation where doctors resort to “defensive medicine” to avoid claims of negligence often to the detriment of the patient.
Hence in a specific case where unreasonableness in professional conduct has been proven with regard to the circumstances of that case a professional cannot escape liability for medical evidence merely by relying on a body of 117 SCC 401 In CP SreekumarMSv.
S. Ramanujam12 this Court held that the Commission ought not to presume that the alle gations in the complaint are inviolable truth even though they re mained unsupported by any evidence.
This Court held as under “37.
We find from a reading of the order of the Commission that it proceeded on the basis that whatever had been al leged in the complaint by the respondent was in fact the in violable truth even though it remained unsupported by any evidence.
As already observed in Jacob Mathew case1369] the onus to prove medical negligence lies largely on the claimant and that this onus can be discharged by leading cogent evidence.
A mere aver ment in