 on 09 07 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH210 CRM M 24616 2021Date of Decision : July 06 2021RANJIT SINGH .....PetitionerVERSUSSTATE OF PUNJAB.....RespondentCORAM:HON BLE MR. JUSTICE JASGURPREET SINGH PURIPresent :Mr. Angel Walia Advocatefor the petitioner.Mr.
Randhir Singh Thind DAG Punjab.Through Video ConferencingJ ASGURPREET SINGH PURI.
J.The present petition has been filed under Section 439 of theCode of Criminal Procedure for grant of regular bail to the petitioner incase FIR No.40 dated 432021 under Section 22 of the Narcotic Drugsand Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 registered at Police StationSamrala Khanna Ludhiana.Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that thepetitioner has been falsely implicated in the present case only because ofpolitical enmity as the petitioner does not belong to the ruling party.
Hehas submitted that the petitioner is not involved in any other case andwhile he was travelling from Ludhiana to Amritsar the present false casewas planted upon him.
He further submitted that the alleged recoveryfrom the petitioner has been shown to be 528 grams of Spasmo 26 gramsof Lomotil and 504 grams of Alprasafe and all these are of category of on 09 07 CRM M 24616 2021 2 non commercial quantity and therefore he has not been hit by the barcontained under Section 37 of the NDPS Act.
Learned counsel hassubmitted that the petitioner is in custody since 432021 andinvestigation of the case is already complete and no recovery is to bemade from the petitioner.
He has submitted that there are no badantecedents of the petitioner as he is not involved in any other case andthe trial would take long time and therefore he may be considered forgrant of regular bail.On the other hand Mr. Thind learned DAG Punjab hassubmitted that it is correct that the petitioner is in custody since 432021and the investigation of the case is already complete and no recovery is tobe made from the petitioner.
However he has further submitted thatsince three categories of contraband were recovered from the petitioner the petitioner may not be considered for grant of regular bail.
Although all these recoveries do not fall in the commercial quantity.I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The custody period of the petitioner is not in dispute.
It isalso not in dispute that the investigation of the case is already completeand the challan has already been presented.
It is also not disputed by thelearned State counsel that the petitioner is not involved in any other case.So far as the recoveries of different salts are concerned all of themindividually fall in the non commercial quantity.
Furthermore it is not the case of the State that in case thepetitioner is released on bail then he may influence any witness or maytamper with evidence or may flee from justice.
on 09 07 CRM M 24616 2021 3 In view of the above and considering the totality of thecircumstances of the present case the present petition is allowed.
Thepetitioner is ordered to be released on bail on furnishing of bail bondsand surety bonds to the satisfaction of concerned Chief JudicialMagistrate Duty Magistrate.
(JASGURPREET SINGH PURI)July 06 2021 JUDGEajay 1Whether speaking reasoned.
:Yes NoWhether Reportable.
:Yes No