 on 15 07 In virtual CourtCRM M 13016 2020 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA ATCHANDIGARHCRM M 13016 2020aged about 05 years had gone out to play.
The petitioner is hisneighbour.
When his daughter came back she was crying and when his wifeSunita inquired from her as to why she is crying his daughter told that heruncleLala petitioner had bitten her face and removed her clothes and hadgiven threat to her if she discloses anything about the same he would kill her.After registration of the FIR statement of the victim was recorded which readsas under: “Stated that yesterday Lala took me to his house and he bitten myprivate part and also bitten my mouth face.
He told me not todisclose about it to your mother.
Not told to your uncle.
I will giveyou groundnut and money.
There is pain in my private part.
Lalais having big teeth.
Lala used to consume liquor daily.”Similar statement was recorded by the victim under Section 164Cr.P.C.Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that there wassome money dispute between the petitioner and the complainant and on thataccount he has been falsely implicated.
Learned counsel has relied upon certain on 15 07 In virtual CourtCRM M 13016 2020 3 telephonic conversation between the complainant and one Gopi Ram to submitthat the complainant is demanding some money.
Certain affidavits of thevillagers are also filed to submit that the petitioner has been falsely implicated.It is further submitted that even on an earlier occasion Sunita wife ofcomplainant Chetram had levelled allegations against her brother in lawRajender that he used to tease her and later on she compromised the matter.
Itis also submitted that the petitioner is in custody for the last 01 year and 07months and therefore he may be granted the concession of regular bail.Learned State counsel has however opposed the prayer for bail onthe ground that as per MLR of the victim her ocular version finds support asthe doctor has reported it as a case with history of physical molestation andthere was slight redness over the right cheek however no bruise or no cut markwere visible.
In the examination of Female Genitalia the doctor noticed asbelow: “Labia Majora: Multiple pin point piteche mark present overlabia majora lt side slight redness over labia majora.”Learned State counsel thus submits that the MLR do not suggestthat it is a case of false implication and till the time statement of the victim orthe complainant is recorded the petitioner is not entitled to regular bail.After hearing learned counsel for the parties I find that thedocuments affidavits and conversation relied upon by learned counsel for thepetitioner are to be seen during the course of trial however considering the on 15 07 In virtual CourtCRM M 13016 2020 4 allegations in the FIR wherein it is stated that the victim is a girl aged about 05years and also in view of her MLR no ground to grant regular bail to thepetitioner is made out.Accordingly the present petition is dismissed.
[ ARVIND SINGH SANGWAN ]14.07.2021 JUDGEvishnuWhether speaking reasoned: Yes NoWhether Reportable: Yes No