Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 Allahabad High Court Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 Bench: Ramesh Sinha Vikas Kunvar Srivastav HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD LUCKNOW BENCH Court No. 9 Case : MISC.
BENCH No. 132521 Petitioner : Heera Lal Yadav Respondent : State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief Secy.
Home Lucknow & Ors Counsel for Petitioner : Meenakshi Singh Parihar Counsel for Respondent : G.A Hon ble Ramesh Sinha J Hon ble Vikas Kunvar Srivastav J Per Ramesh Sinha J for the Bench)The Court has convened through Video Conferencing 2) Heard Sri HGS Parihar learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mrs. Meenakshi Singh Parihar learned Counsel for the petitioner and Ms. Meera Tripathi learned Additional Government Advocate for the State respondents no. 1 and 2 3) The instant writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner Heera Lal Yadav challenging the First Information Report dated 27102020 to the extent of petitioner registered as Case Crime No. 00120 under Sections 120 B 471 468 467 and 420 I.PC Police Station SIT Lucknow 4) Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that earlier the petitioner has challenged the impugned FIR.
before this Court at Allahabad by filing Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 126020 : Heera Lal Yadav Vs. State of UP and 2 others wherein initially a Co ordinate Bench of this Court at Allahabad vide order dated 14.12.2020 restrained the respondents from taking any coercive action against the petitioner in connection with the impugned FIR.
and the same was continued from time to time however when the case was listed before Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 another Co ordinate Bench of this Court at Allahabad on 24.03.2021 the same was dismissed on the ground that this Court at Allahabad has no jurisdiction to hear the matter as the impugned FIR has been registered at Police Station SIT Lucknow and liberty was granted to the petitioner to approach the appropriate forum court if so advised.
Thereafter the petitioner has filed the instant writ petition challenging the impugned FIR 5) It has been argued by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned FIR.
has been lodged against eight persons including the petitioner.
He argued that the petitioner has falsely been implicated in the impugned FIR.
as the entire process of selection recruitment were completed on the basis of the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Managing Committee UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow on 07.07.2015 and at that time the petitioner was not working in the office of UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow from 20.10.2014 to 6) Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner further argued that at present the p e t i t i o n e r i s h o l d i n g C l a s s I p o s t a n d w o r k i n g o n t h e p o s t o f A d d i t i o n a l Commissioner cum Additional Registrar Co operative Society UP Lucknow.
On 20.10.2014 the State Government has appointed the petitioner on the post of Managing Director UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow.
On 12.03.2013 the Commissioner cum Registrar Co operative Societies UP Lucknow wrote a letter to the Managing Director UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow for the direct recruitment on different post of Assistant Manager and Assistant ManagerState of UP Lucknow wrote a letter to the Principal Secretary Co operative UP Lucknow for the recruitment of the employee in the Co operative department on the different post.
On 05.12.2014 the Commissioner cum Registrar Uttar Pradesh wrote a letter to the Principal Secretary Co operative Uttar Pradesh Lucknow.
On 30012015 the petitioner being the then Managing Director UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow sent a requisition for the recruitment selection on the post of Assistant Manager Assistant Manager Computer) before the Secretary UP Co operative Institutional Service Board Lucknow Thereafter on 21032015 the petitioner has proposed the educational qualification for the recruitment on the post in question which was sent before the Commissioner cum Registrar Co operative Societies Uttar Pradesh Lucknow for its approval.
Thereafter the petitioner was transferred from the post of Managing Director UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow on 22042015 and in his place on the same day ie 22042015 co accused Rabikant Singh Additional Registrar Co operative Society took the charge of the post of Managing Director UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow.
He argued that after the transfer and posted as Additional Registrar Co operative and Additional Commissioner in the office of the Registrar Co operative Societies L u c k n o w U t t a r P r a d e s h t h e p e t i t i o n e r h a s g o t n o c o n c e r n w i t h t h e f u r t h e r development recruitment selection appointment on the post of Assistant Manager and Assistant Managerin UP Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow 7) Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that co accused namely Rabi Kant Singh Ram Jatan Yadav and Santosh Kumar and Rakesh Kumar Mishra have approached this Court by filing writ petition Nos. 21792022252025621wherein interim protection has been granted to them.
Therefore the Indian Kanoon petitioner is also entitled to get similar protection as has been granted to the co accused Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 8) Learned Additional Government Advocate on the other hand opposed the prayer for quashing the impugned FIR.
and argued that interim protection has been granted to co accused namely Rabi Kant Singh Ram Jatan Yadav and Santosh Kumar and Rakesh Kumar Mishra only on the ground that interim order dated 14.12.2020 has been granted in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No 126020 which has been filed by the petitioner before this Court at Allahabad.
Thereafter as the impugned FIR.
has been registered at police station SIT.
Lucknow therefore Co ordinate Bench of this Court at Allahabad vide order dated 24.03.2021 dismissed the writ petition and granted liberty to the writ petitioner to approach the appropriate forum Court if so desire.
He argued that while dismissing the writ petition filed by the present writ petition Co ordinate Bench of this Court at Allahabad has not extended or directed to continue the interim order dated 14.12.2020 meaning thereby after dismissal of the writ petition the interim order dated 14.12.2020 has become redundant as it merges into final order 9) It has further been argued by the learned Additional Government Advocate that on the basis of the interim order dated 14.12.2020 passed in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 126020 which has been filed by the present writ petitioner co accused has sought interim protection which was granted to them.
Now after dismissal of the aforesaid writ petition wherein interim order dated 14.12.2020 was not enforced as it merges into final order the petitioner has come before this Court seeking relief to grant him the benefit of the interim order as has been granted to co accused which cannot be granted to the present writ petitioner 10) On merits learned Additional Government Advocate has argued that in respect of the irregularities committed in selection held in the year 2015 number of complaints for corruption in the said selection was received in the office of Hon ble the Chief Minister and other office of the State Department whereupon an inquiry was entrusted to the SIT who after thorough enquiry has found that the petitioner who was the then Managing Director of UP Co operative Bank is responsible for making educational qualification for ten posts contrary to rules.
Therefore it cannot be said that the petitioner has no concern with the aforesaid selection.
He argued that from the perusal of the FIR prima facie it cannot be said that no cognizable offence is made out hence no ground exists for quashing of the FIR.
or staying the arrest of the petitioner 11) Having heard the submissions advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties and gone through the record we find that initially the petitioner has filed Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No 126020 wherein vide order dated 14.12.2020 following interim order has been passed : As prayed list in the additional cause list on 15.1.2021 Till then no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner in connection with FIR dated 27102020 in Case Crime No. 00120 under section 120 B 471 468 467 and 420 IPC Police Station S.I.R.
District Lucknow Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 12) The aforesaid interim order dated 14.12.2020 was extended from time to time as is evident from Annexure Nos. 2 to 4 to the writ petition.
Thereafter co accused Rabi Kant Singh has approached this Court by filing Misc.
Bench No. 217920 : Rabi Kant Singh Vs. State of UP and others wherein following interim order dated 12012021 has been passed Heard Mr HGS Parihar learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Prashant Kumar Singh learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned AGA on behalf of the State Learned AGA was granted time vide order dated 9122020 to submit progress report of the investigation done so far and the evidence if any collected against the petitioner regarding his involvement in the alleged crime Learned AGA has filed short counter affidavit.
However in the short counter affidavit no specific statement regarding progress report of the investigation done so far and the evidence if any collected against the petitioner regarding his involvement in the alleged crime.
This fact has been noted by the court vide order dated 16122020.
The court thereafter had again granted time to learned AGA to file counter affidavit Learned AGA submits that the investigation is still pending and the averments made in the short counter affidavit are the only material available with the investigating authority regarding the investigation done so far Learned counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that co accused Heera Lal Yadav has been granted protection by this court at Allahabad vide order dated 14.12.2020 passed in Criminal Misc Writ Petition No.126020 copy of the order dated 14.12.2020 has been placed before the court same is taken on record We have considered the submissions made by parties counsel and gone through the records Let detailed counter affidavit be filed by the opposite parties within three weeks Till filing of counter affidavit or till filing of report under Section 173Cr.PC whichever is earlier no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner in pursuance of impugned First Information Report dated 27102020 registered as FIR Case Crime No00120 under Sections 12 B 471 468 467 420 of IPC at Police Station SIT District Lucknow.
However the petitioner will co operate with the investigation 13) Subsequently co accused Ram Jatan Yadav has filed Misc.
Bench No. 222520 in which also following interim order dated 12012021 has been passed : Heard Mr. Balram Yadav learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned AGA on behalf of Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 Learned AGA was granted time vide order dated 9122020 to submit progress report of the investigation done so far and the evidence if any collected against the petitioner regarding his involvement in the alleged crime Learned AGA has filed short counter affidavit.
However in the short counter affidavit no specific statement regarding progress report of the investigation done so far and the evidence if any collected against the petitioner regarding his involvement in the alleged crime.
This fact has been noted by the court vide order dated 16122020.
The court thereafter had again granted time to learned AGA to file counter affidavit Learned AGA submits that the investigation is still pending and the averments made in the short counter affidavit are the only material available with the investigating authority regarding the investigation done so far Learned counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that co accused Heera Lal Yadav has been granted protection by this court at Allahabad vide order dated 14.12.2020 passed in Criminal Misc Writ Petition No.126020 copy of the order dated 14.12.2020 has been placed before the court same is taken on record We have considered the submissions made by parties counsel and gone through the records Let detailed counter affidavit be filed by the opposite parties within three weeks Till filing of counter affidavit or till filing of report under Section 173Cr.PC whichever is earlier no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner in pursuance of impugned First Information Report dated 27102020 registered as FIR Case Crime No00120 under Sections 420 467 468 471 and 120 B of IPC at Police Station SIT District Lucknow.
However the petitioner will co operate with the investigation 14) Thereafter co accused Santosh Kumar has filed Misc.
Bench No. 25621 in which following interim order dated 2912021 has been passed Heard Mr HGS Parihar learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Saharsh learned Counsel for the petitioner learned AGA for the State respondents and perused the record The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner namely Santosh Kumar seeking to quash the First Information Report dated 27102020 registered as Crime No. FIR.
No. 00120 under Sections 420 467 468 471 and 120B I.PC police station Special Investigation Team District Lucknow with a further prayer to stay the arrest during the pendency of the investigation of the said case Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 It has been argued by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned FIR.
has been lodged against the petitioner with an oblique motive and just to harass the petitioner.
He submits that co accused namely Rabi Kant Singh and Ram Jatan Yadav have also approached this Court by filing writ petition no. 21793of 2020 : Rabi Kant Singh Vs. State of UP and others and writ petition No. 222520 : Ram Jatan Yadav Vs. State of UP and others respectively and a Co ordinate Bench of this Court vide order dated 12012021 has granted interim protection to co accused Rabi Kant Singh and Ram Jatan Yadav a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure nos. 10 and 11 to the writ petition respectively.
Similarly co accused Heera Lal Yadav has also been granted protection by this Court at Allahabad vide order dated 14.12.2020 passed in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No.126020 copy of the order dated 14.12.2020 has been annexed as Annexure no. 9 to the writ petition.
He also submits that the role of the present writ petitioner in the impugned FIR.
is similar to that of co accused.
Therefore the petitioner is also entitled to get similar protection as has been granted to the co accused Considering the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case prima facie a case of interim relief is Learned AGA has accepted notice on behalf of the respondents Let counter affidavit be filed within four weeks.
Rejoinder affidavit if any may be filed within two Connect with Writ Petition No. 222520and 217920and list thereafter Till filing of counter affidavit or till filing of report under Section 173Cr.PC whichever is earlier no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner in pursuance of impugned First Information Report.
However the petitioner will co operate with the investigation 15) Thereafter Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 126020 was dismissed vide order dated 24.03.2021 which reads as under Heard Sri OP Singh learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri Indra Jit Singh learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Amit Sinha learned counsel for the State and perused the record The present writ petition has been filed with following prayers: 1.
Issue a writ of certiorari calling for record of the case and quashing the impugned first information report dated 27102020 registered as Case Crime No00120 under section 120 B 471 467 and 420 I.PC Police Station SIT.
District Lucknow Annexure No.1) in respect of the petitioner 2.
Issue a writ of mandamus commanding the respondent no to arrest the petitioner in pursuance to the impugned first information report dated 27102020 registered as Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 Case Crime No00120 under section 120 B 471 467 and 420 I.PC Police Station SIT.
District Lucknow 3.
Issue any other suitable writ order or direction which this Hon ble Court may deem fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of the case 4.
Award cost to the writ petition in favour of the petitioner At the very outset learned counsel for the State raised a preliminary objection regarding maintainability of the present writ petition at Allahabad.
It is argued that the impugned first information report has been registered at District Lucknow for offence which was committed at Lucknow and as such this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the present writ petition and hear it.
It is argued that on the own showing of the petitioner the impugned first information report the copy of which is annexed as Annexure 1 to the writ petition was registered at Police Station SIT.
District Lucknow and as such this Court has no jurisdiction to hear and entertain the present writ petition which should be dismissed Learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner argued that the present writ petition may be transferred to the Lucknow Bench of this Court in view of the judgement of Sri Nasiruddin Vs. State Transport Appellate Tribunal:2 SCC 671.
It is argued that since the first information report has been registered at Lucknow this Court has powers to do so under Clause 14 of the United Provinces High CourtsOrder 1948 and as such the same be transferred to Lucknow for its hearing Before proceeding to examine the matter on merits we propose and consider it appropriate to deal with the preliminary objection raised by Sri Amit Sinha learned counsel for the State The Apex Court in the case of Sri Nasiruddinhas noted in paragraphs 12 and 13 as follows: 12.
It is in this context that the following five questions were referred for decision to the Full Bench 1) Can a case falling within the jurisdiction of the Lucknow Bench of this Court be presented at Allahabad 2) Can the Judges sitting at Allahabad summarily dismiss a case presented at Allahabad pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Lucknow Bench 3) Can a case pertaining to the jurisdiction of Lucknow Bench presented and entertained at Allahabad be decided finally by the Judges sitting at Allahabad Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 without there being an order as contemplated by the second proviso to Article 14 of the UP High CourtOrder 1948 4) What is the meaning of the expression "in respect of cases arising in such areas in Oudh" used in first proviso to Article 14 of the High Courtorder 1948 Has this expression reference to the place where the case originated or to the place of the sitting of the last Court of authority whose decree or order is being challenged in the proceedings before the High Court 5) Whether this writ petition can be entertained heard and decided by the Judges sitting at Lucknow 13.
The majority view of the Full Bench gave the following answers: 1) A case falling within the jurisdiction of Judges at Lucknow should be presented at Lucknow and not at Allahabad 2) However if such a case is presented at Allahabad the Judges at Allahabad cannot summarily dismiss it only for that reason.
The case should be returned for filing before the Judges at Lucknow and where the case has been mistakenly or inadvertently entertained at Allahabad a direction should be made to the High Court office to transmit the papers of the case to Lucknow 3) A case pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Judges at Lucknow and presented before the Judges at Allahabad cannot be decided by the Judges at Allahabad in the absence of an order contemplated by the second proviso to Article 14 of the Amalgamation Order 1948 4) The expression "in respect of cases arising in such areas in Oudh" used in the first proviso to Article 14 of the High CourtOrder 1948 refers to legal proceedings including civil cases criminal cases petitions under Articles 226 227 and 228 of the Constitution and petitions under Articles 132 133 and 134 of the Constitution instituted before the Judges sitting at Lucknow and having their origin in the sense explained in the majority judgment in such areas in Oudh as the Chief Justice may direct.
The expression "arising in such areas in Oudh" refers to the place where the case originated in the sense explained in the majority judgment and not to the place sitting of the last court or authority whose decree or order is being challenged in the proceeding before the High Court 5) The Lucknow Bench have no jurisdiction to hear writ petition No. 7564 which gave rise to writ petition No. 32970 While dealing with the said questions and the answers as given therein the conclusions as drawn by the Apex Court are in paragraph 38 of the said judgement Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 which are as follows: 38.
To sum up.
Our conclusions are as follows.
First there is no permanent seat of the High Court at Allahabad.
The seats at Allahabad and at Lucknow may be changed in accordance with the provisions of the order.
Second the Chief Justice of the High Court has no power to increase or decrease the areas in Oudh from time to time.
The areas in Oudh have been determined once by the Chief Justice and therefore there is no scope for changing the areas.
Third the Chief Justice has power under the second proviso to paragraph 14 of the order to direct in his discretion that any case or class of cases arising in Oudh areas shall be heard at Allahabad.
Any case or class of cases are those which are instituted at Lucknow.
The interpretation given by the High Court that the word "heard" confers powers on the Chief Justice to order that any case or class of cases arising in Oudh areas shall be instituted or filed at Allahabad instead of Lucknow is wrong.
The word "heard" means that cases which have already been instituted or filed at Lucknow may in the discretion of the Chief Justice under the second proviso to paragraph 14 of the order he directed to be heard at Allahabad Fourth the expression "cause of action" with regard to a civil matter means that it should be left to the litigant to institute cases at Lucknow Bench or at Allahabad Bench according to the cause of action arising wholly or in part within either of the areas.
If the cause of action arises wholly within Oudh areas then the Lucknow Bench will have jurisdiction.
Similarly if the cause of action arises wholly outside the specified areas in Oudh then Allahabad will have jurisdiction.
If the cause of action in part arises in the specified Oudh areas and part of the cause of action arises outside the specified areas it will be open to the litigant to frame the case appropriately to attract the jurisdiction either at Lucknow or at Allahabad.
Fifth a criminal case arises where the offence has been committed or otherwise as provided in the Criminal Procedure Code.
That will attract the jurisdiction of the Court at Allahabad or Lucknow.
In some cases depending on the facts and the provision regarding jurisdiction it may arise in either place The controversy as has been raised in the present case has been answered by the Apex Court in its conclusion which has been dealt with as the third conclusion therein.
The same is at the cost of repetition being again extracted herein below: 38.
........................ Third the Chief Justice has power under the second proviso to paragraph 14 of the order to direct in his discretion that any case or class of cases arising in Oudh areas shall be heard at Allahabad.
Any case or class of cases are those which are instituted at Lucknow.
The interpretation given by the High Court that the word "heard" confers powers on the Chief Justice to order that any case or class of cases arising in Oudh areas shall be instituted or filed at Allahabad instead of Lucknow is wrong.
The word "heard" means that cases which have already been instituted or filed at Lucknow may in the discretion of the Chief Justice under the second proviso to paragraph 14 of the Order be directed to be heard at Allahabad Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 A perusal of the third conclusion of the Apex Court in the case of Sri Nasiruddin supra) leaves no doubt that a case which has already been instituted or filed at Lucknow may in the discretion of the Chief Justice under the second proviso to paragraph 14 of the Amalgamation Order be directed to be heard at Allahabad but not vice versa.
This leaves with no doubt that a case filed or instituted at Lucknow can be directed to be heard at Allahabad but a case filed or instituted at Allahabad cannot be directed to be heard at Lucknow.
The legal proposition is quite clear and Looking to the position of law as stated above and the facts of the present case this Court comes to a conclusion that the preliminary objection regarding maintainability of the present writ petition at Allahabad as raised by the learned counsel for the State has substance.
The argument of learned Senior Advocate that the present case be transferred to Lucknow as per the dictum laid down in the case of Sri Nasiruddin supra) is fallacious The present writ petition is dismissed on the ground that this court has no jurisdiction to hear the same However the petitioner is at liberty to approach the appropriate forum Court if so The party shall file computer generated copy of order downloaded from the official website of High Court Allahabad self attested by it alongwith a self attested identity proof of the said person(s)mentioning the mobile number(s) to which the said Aadhar Card is linked The concerned Court Authority Official shall verify the authenticity of such computerized copy of the order from the official website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a declaration of such verification in writing 16) It transpires from perusal of the aforesaid orders that co accused has been granted the parity of the interim order dated 14.12.2020 passed in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 126020.
Now the situation is that the said interim order dated 14.12.2020 has not become enforced as it merges into final order dated 24.03.2021 passed in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 126020 whereby this Court at Allahabad while dismissing the writ petition filed by the petitioner granted liberty to approach the appropriate forum court if so advised.
Thereafter the petitioner has filed the instant writ petition claiming the interim orders granted to co accused 17) On due consideration we are of the view that the petitioner cannot be granted the parity of interim order passed in the case of co accused for the reason that the basis for passing the interim order in the case of co accused as quoted hereinabove was the interim order dated 14.12.2020 passed in writ petition filed by the writ petitioner himself before this Court at Allahabad which is in fact not enforced after dismissal of the said writ petition.
Thus the plea of the petitioner in this Indian Kanoon regard has no force and is rejected Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 18) However on merit it has been argued by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the petitioner has no concern with the further development recruitment selection appointment on the post of Assistant Manager & Assistant Managerin U.P Co operative Bank Ltd Lucknow as he was transferred to elsewhere at that time which was vehemently opposed by the learned AGA by saying that the petitioner was involved in making educational qualification for the selection contrary to rules therefore it cannot be said that the petitioner has no concern with the said irregularities in the selection 19) We have minutely examined the contentions of the learned Counsel for the parties and gone through the impugned FIR 20) The legal position on the issue of quashing of FIR or criminal proceedings is well settled that the jurisdiction to quash a complaint FIR or a charge sheet should be exercised sparingly and only in exceptional cases.
The Courts should not ordinarily interfere with the investigations of cognizable offences.
However where the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint even if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused the FIR or the charge sheet may be quashed in exercise of powers under Article 226 or inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C 21) Recently in Neeharika Infrastructure Private Limited vs. State of Maharashtraa three judge Bench of the Hon ble Supreme Court considered the powers of the High Court while adjudicating a petition for quashing of the FIR under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1973.
In Neeharika Infrastructure Private Limitedthe appellants challenged an interim order issued by the Bombay High Court in a quashing petition filed under Section 482 CrPC and Article 226 of the Constitution.
The Bombay High Court issued an interim order directing that "no coercive measures shall be adopted against the petitioners in respect of the said FIR".
While examining the correctness of the said interim order Hon ble the Supreme Court in para 23 has held as under 23.
In view of the above and for the reasons stated above our final conclusions on the principal core issue whether the High Court would be justified in passing an interim order of stay of investigation and or "no coercive steps to be adopted" during the pendency of the quashing petition under Section 482 CrP.C and or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and in what circumstances and whether the High Court would be justified in passing the order of not to arrest the accused or "no coercive steps to be adopted" during the investigation or till the final report chargesheet is filed under Section 173 Cr.PC while dismissing disposing of not entertaining not quashing the criminal proceedings complaint FIR in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC and or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India our final conclusions are Indian Kanoon Heera Lal Yadav vs State Of UP Thru.
Addl.
Chief ... on 30 June 2021 i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure contained in Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a cognizable offence ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the cognizable offences iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence of any kind is disclosed in the first information report that the Court will not permit an investigation to go on iv) The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly with circumspection as it has been observed in the rarest of rare casesWhile examining an FIR complaint quashing of which is sought the court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the initial stage vii) Quashing of a complaint FIR should be an exception rather than an ordinary rule viii) Ordinarily the courts are barred from usurping the jurisdiction of the police since the two organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one ought not to tread over the other sphere ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary not overlapping x) Save in exceptional cases where non interference would result in miscarriage of justice the Court and the judicial process should not interfere at the stage of investigation of offences xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice xii) The first information report is not an encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts and details relating to the offence reported.
Therefore when the investigation by the police is in progress the court sho