United India Fire And General ... vs Smt. Kanchanbai And Ors. on 25 June 1981 Madhya Pradesh High Court United India Fire And General ... vs Smt. Kanchanbai And Ors. on 25 June 1981 Equivalent citations: AIR 1981 MP 225 Author: P Muley Bench: P Muley JUDGMENT P.D.
Muley J 1.
This appeal filed by the Insurance Company under Section 110 D of the Motor Vehicles Act is directed against an award dated 30 8 1975 given by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal Indore in Claim Case No. 773 awarding compensation of Rs. 15 500 with interest at 6 per cent per annum alone with costs in favour of respondents Nos. 1 2 and 3 who had initially claimed Rs 1 10 000 as total compensation 2.
The facts giving rise to this appeal which are no lonser in dispute and also Droved are as under That respondent No. 4 Babulal was the owner of truck Number MPF 6083 the registration of which stood in his name.
The said truck was insured by him with the appellant United India Fire and General Insurance Company Limited.
On 14 3 73 the said truck MPFBalwant Singh v. Jhannubai: 1980 Ace CJ 377and 1979 Ace CJ 503:Insurance Co Ltd v. Gurcharan Singh) 1980 Ace CJ 189 :1967 Ace CJ 155Nanyang Insurance Company Ltd v. Salbiah) 1976 Ace CJ 1:and 1971 Ace CJ 49(Orissa Co operative Ins.
Society Ltd v. Bhagaban Sahu 11.
Shri R C Chhazed learned counsel for the respondent No. 6 contended that as there was not a complete sale of the truck on the day of the accident the respondent No. 4 had retained his control over the said truck and that he was acting and working on behalf of respondent No. 4 as his agent and it is only to facilitate the payment of instalments which were to be paid by him to respondent No. 4 that possession of the truck was with respondent No. 6 but the possession could not be said to be on the basis of concluded sale as even according to Ex. D 1 certain amount was yet to be paid by respondent No. 6 to respondent No. 4.
He further submitted that it is not at all suggested to Babulal that on the date of the accident he had received the entire full consideration as agreed to in Ex. D 1 or that he had ceased to have any control over the said truck on the date of the accident Indian Kanoon United India Fire And General ... vs Smt. Kanchanbai And Ors. on 25 June 1981 12.
After cerefully considering the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and after some through the evidence adduced by the parties as also the case law cited I am of opinion that the contentions advanced on behalf of the appellant cannot be accepted.
The evidence of D W 1 Babulal D. W. 2 Sunderlal and a bare reading of Ex. D 1 clearly indicates that there was no concluded sale of the truck but it was only an agreement to sell.
It is no doubt true that for effecting such a sale transfer of the registration certificate under the Motor Vehicles Act is not necessary but along with the delivery of possession payment of full consideration as agreed to is necessary In the present case as has emerged from evidence on record on the date of the accident a pact of the sale consideration was yet to be paid by respondent No. 6 to respondent No. 4 and in these circumstances in my opinion Ex. D 1 being only an agreement to sell cannot be treated to be an absolute sale.
It is therefore difficult to agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that on 21 12 72 when possession of the truck was handed over to respondent No. 6 there was a concluded sale and that respondent No. 4 had ceased to have any interest or control over the said truck with the result that the eon tract of insurance with Babulal respondent No. 4 had come to an end.
The evidence of Babulal and Sunderlal further indicates that it was Babulal who after the accident approached the Insurance Company to defend the case that it was Babulal who defended the case by engaging the same counsel who also was the counsel for the appellant Insurance Company.
All this further goes to show that Babulal still continued to be the owner of the said truck.
Besides respondent No. 6 has not been examined as witness to prove that he had become the owner of the said truck on 21 12 72 itself and that even on the date of the accident he was the sole owner of the said truck.
It is therefore clear that the property in the said truck still vested with Babulal respondent No. 4 and the truck was also being driven by respondent No. 6 with his permission respondent No. 5 Nathusingh being the driver.
Therefore though the principles enunciated in the authorities cited on behalf of the appellant cannot be disputed still they are distinguishable on facts when applied to the facts of the present case 13.
In the result this appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
The award is maintained.
Counsel s fee according to schedule if certified Indian Kanoon