Appeal No. 43021 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 43021 Geeta Khattar CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated April 14 2021 under the Right to Information Act 2005 wherein the Hon’ble CIC held that “Further the obligation of a respondent extends only to providing information which it “holds” or controls in terms of Section 2(f) of the RTI Act.
If it can be established through evidence that a party applicant himself possesses an information which he has sought from a public authority such information can be denied to him.
This appellant has already been provided the judgement dated 30.3.2007 of the Income Tax Appellate Authority.
The information therefore is already in appellant’s possession and cannot therefore be said to be “held” much less “exclusively held” by the public authority in terms of Section 2(j) of the RTI Act.” In view of these observations I am of the view that the respondent is not obliged to provide the information sought by the appellant.
Without prejudice to the same I note that the respondent has guided the appellant to approach the concerned stock exchange.
Accordingly the query number 1 of the application is adequately addressed.
Therefore I do not find any deficiency in the response.
6.
Query number 2 On consideration I do not find any reason to disbelieve the observation of the respondent that the information sought is not available with SEBI.
In this context I note that the Hon’ble CIC in the matter of Sh. Pattipati Rama Murthy vs. CPIO SEBI held: “… if itdoes not have any such information in its possession the CPIO cannot obviously invent one for the benefit of the Appellant.
There is simply no information to be given.” In view of these observations I find that the information sought by the appellant was not available with SEBI and therefore the respondent cannot be obliged to provide such nonavailable information.
Appeal No. 43021 7.
Query numbers 3 and 4 I have perused query numbers 3 and 4 and the response provided thereto.
I note that the respondent has clearly informed regarding the availability of the IGRP order on the SCORES Portal since the complaints were lodged on the said portal.
It is understood that all the complaints which are lodged in the SCORES system the related correspondence and Action History can be accessed online on SCORES website under the tab “View Complaint Status” by providing the complaint registration number and password which is allotted at the time of registering the complaint.
Further the appellant was also advised to directly approach the exchange for the requisite data pertaining to the exchange.
On consideration I find that the respondent has adequately addressed the query by providing the information available with him.
Accordingly I do not find any deficiency in the response.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 12 2021 ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA