IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI W.P.(CRL.)
1166 2020 & CRLMA 10239 2020 HARMEET SINGH Judgment reserved on: 08.12.2020 Judgment delivered on: 16.02.2021 Petitioner Through: Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal Mr. Arjun Dewan Mr. Sowjahnya Shankaran and Mr. Shahryar Khan Advocates UNION OF INDIA THROUGH ITS SECRETARY MINISTRY OF FINANCE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE CENTRAL ECONOMIC INTELLIGENCE & ORS. Respondent Through: Mr. Amit Mahajan CGSC with Mr. Dhruv Pande Mr. Gitesh Chopra and Mr. Kritagya Kumar Kait Advocates for R 1 and R 2.
Mr. Satish Aggarwal Sr.
Standing Counsel with Mr. Gagan Vaswani and Mr. Vineet Sharma Advocates for R 3 R 4.
HON BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI HON BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNISH BHATNAGAR JUDGMENT W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 VIPIN SANGHI J. The petitioner has preferred the present writ petition to assail the Detention Order bearing No. PD 12002 05 20 COFEPOSA dated 05062020 issued against the petitioner by Respondent No. 2 Joint Secretary COFEPOSA Government of India under Section 3(1) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act 1974 would also be arriving with other people via the connecting flight no. KU 381 from Kuwait to Delhi smuggling similar contraband items into the Indian Territory.
Consequently on the intervening night of 01.02.19 and 02.02.19 at around 1:30 am the Petitioner and certain W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 other passengers namely Amarjeet Singh Saurabh Chopra and Sumit Verma arrived at IGI Airport from Dubai by Kuwait Airways flight No. KU381.
While the Petitioner and other passengers were collecting their suitcases from the conveyer belt the Petitioner was taken to Customs Arrival Hall at IGI Airport New Delhi.
A detailed examination of the bags belonging to the petitioner was conducted from which the following items were recovered: 112 Benson & Hedges Cigarette dandas kept in checked in Fabric Zipper Baggage having tag No. KU 326359 and 108 Benson & Hedges Cigarette dandas kept in transparent polythene then wrapped with Black colour polythene and one hand bag containing 18 Dandas of Benson & Hedges CigaretteBoarding Pass of Flight No. KU 381 dated 01.02.2019having seat No. 2H Indian Passport No. Z5317414 issued on 16012019.
One Vivo Y53 Mobile Phone having Vodafone Sim No. 8860253525 as disclosed by Pax AED 300 02 bottles of Chivas Regal 12 YO whisky.
Personal effect old and used W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 After effecting recoveries a Panchnama was prepared and total value of Benson & Hedges cigarettes recovered from the Petitioner was Rs. 7 14 000 and not against the present Petitioner.
Mr. Gaganjot Singh challenged his detention W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 by filing W.P.(CRL.)
1843 2019 which was dismissed by this Court on On 6th April 2019 the Petitioner was released on statutory bail as the Investigating Agency did not file the chargesheet within prescribed period of 60 days.
The petitioner was then summoned to appear before Air Customs Superintendent on 220419 when his statement under Section 108 of the Customs Act 1862 was again recorded.
Separately Show Cause Notice dated 220719 w.r.t.
the seized goods was issued to the petitioner proposing confiscation of the goods and imposing penalty under Section 112 112 and 114AA of the Customs Act 1962.
As a part of the investigation the respondents desired to unlock the mobile phone instrument of the petitioner to retrieve the materials documents therefrom.
To open unlock the mobile phone instrument of the petitioner the Respondents required the password of the mobile phone belonging to the petitioner which led to issuance of various summons letters to petitioner.
The petitioner it appears desired that his mobile phone instrument be opened unlocked in his presence.
Consequently notices were issued to him to remain present.
The respondents claim that the petitioner did not co operate in the opening unlocking of his mobile phone instrument.
It appears that the said instrument was eventually opened unlocked on 20012020 at Mumbai and its forensic examination was conducted.
The same led to the recovery of incriminating documents materials and the petitioner was summoned again.
His statement was again recorded under W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 Section 108 of the Customs Act 1962 on 31.01.20.
Thereafter a fresh proposal to preventively detain the petitioner was forwarded by the Sponsoring Authority dated 13032020.
On 05 June 2020 the impugned Preventive Detention Order bearing No. PD 12002 05 20 COFEPOSA was issued against the Petitioner by Respondent No.2 under Section 3 of the COFEPOSA Act.
10.
Since the petitioner moved this petition at the pre execution stage he sought interim protection against execution of the Detention Order during pendency of this writ petition.
We rejected the said application vide our order dated 04.08.2020 observing that the petitioner’s statement under Section 108 of Customs Act 1962 recorded as late as on 31.01.2020 which he claimed was recorded under duress and coercion had never been retracted.
Moreover the said statement had not been placed on record.
Therefore we prima facie could not conclude that the Detention Order is belated or that the live link between the prejudicial activity on the basis of which the Detention Order had been passed and the object of detention i.e. the need to detain the petitioner to prevent him from undertaking similar prejudicial activity in future has been snapped.
11.
At the time of filing of this petition the petitioner’s representation under Section 11 of COFEPOSA was pending consideration with the Detaining Authority.
On 28.09.20 we were informed that the reason for not considering the representation was the fact that the petitioner had not been taken into custody.
It was stated that till the time he is not taken into custody his representation would not be decided.
The petitioner placed reliance on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Mansuk W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 Chhagan Lal Bhatt Vs. Union of India and Anr. 1994DRJ317 which was subsequently relied upon in Bhavna Mehra Vs. Union of India and Ors. W.P.(Crl) 274 2009 decided on 25.5.2009.
This Court has taken the view in the aforesaid decisions that the consideration of the representation cannot be withheld by the Detaining Authority for such like reasons.
Even otherwise on a reading of Section 11 of the COFEPOSA Act 1974 it does not emerge that the consideration of the representation made by the detenu would be subject to his being detained or his surrendering in pursuance of the Detention Order.
On 28.09.20 we directed the Respondents to consider the representation and place the result of the said consideration before us on the next date of hearing.
On 07.10.20 we were informed that the said representation had been rejected and the rejection was placed on record.
Petitioner‟s Submissions: 12.
The only submission advanced by Mr. Aggarwal on behalf of the petitioner is that the impugned Detention Order was issued after an inordinate delay of 1 year and 4 months or about 490 Days and that this long delay is fatal to the Detention Order.
The contraband items found in the petitioner’s belongings were seized on the intervening night of 1st and 2nd February 2019 whereas the present Detention Order was issued only on 5th June 2020.
The initial proposal for detention of the petitioner was sent to the Joint Secretary COFEPOSA on 25th February 2019.
That proposal was not accepted as the materials placed by the Sponsoring Authority were not found to be sufficient to justify the petitioner’s preventive detention.
It is argued that the delay in the passing of a Detention Order is fatal to the W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 consequent detention as the nexus live link between the prejudicial activity and the purpose of detention snapped due to the delay which in this case is more than 16 months.
13.
Reliance is placed on Licil Antony Vs. State of Kerala & Anr 11 SCC 326.
Our attention is also drawn to Rajinder Arora versus Union of India 4 SCC 796 wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court had quashed the Detention Order as there was delay of approximately 10 months.
14.
Mr. Aggarwal further submits that the only justification now offered by the respondents is that they could unlock the mobile phone instrument of the petitioner only in January 2020.
The forensic examination of the mobile phone was conducted only on 20012020 after being seized from the petitioner on the night of 1st February 2019.
The submission of Mr. Aggarwal is that the inordinate time taken by the respondents to unlock the mobile phone instrument of the petitioner when that facility was available with them cannot be taken benefit of by the respondents to justify the immense delay.
There is no explanation as to why steps were not taken earlier to open unlock the mobile instrument of the petitioner.
Reliance is placed on Sumita Dev Bhatacharya Vs. Union of India and Ors CriLJ4287 where it was held: “59.
….
The petition must succeed even on the ground of not passing the Detention Order for a period of 8 months after the proposal was accepted on 28.6.2013.
The sole purpose of passing the Detention Order is that the live link between the occurrence and the order should not become stale.
By the time the proposal is sent it is deemed that the investigation is complete which is W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 enough to detain a person and any additional investigation which may have been carried out cannot be a ground to explain the delay.” 15.
Mr. Aggarwal submits that since the initial proposal for detention was sent on 25th February 2019 the Sponsoring Authority ie Office of the Commissioner Customs IGI Airport T 3 New Delhi believed that they had enough material to seek detention of the petitioner under the Act and therefore there cannot be any justification for the delay between the proposal of detention and the impugned Detention Order.
16.
Mr. Aggarwal further submits that admittedly the Sponsoring Authority had all the incriminating material by 31st January 2020.
As per the counter affidavit a fresh proposal for detention was forwarded on 13th March 2020 but the approval was only received on 19th May 2020.
However there is no explanation for delay of one month in initiating the proposal.
The nationwide lockdown on account of COVID 19 cannot be used as a justification for delay in matters pertaining to personal liberty.
In this regard reliance is placed on judgement of the Supreme Court in SKasi versus StateRespondent‟s Submissions: 17.
The Respondents have defended their action and it is contended that there is no delay in either sending the fresh proposal for detention in January 2020 or in its consideration.
They submit that they have been pursuing the matter with utmost diligence and have been investigating the case against the petitioner with a proactive approach and no delay has been caused.
Mr. Mahajan counsel for the Respondent 1 & 2 also submits that since the W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 challenge to the Detention Order is at pre execution stage firstly the aspect of delay in passing the Detention Order should not be gone into and secondly in any event there is no merit in the said pleas of the petitioner.
18.
The timeline of the developments in the matter from the initial stage of recovery of contraband items to the last stage of the issuance of the impugned Detention Order is sought to be explained by the Respondents.
The proposals of Sponsoring Authority for the preventive detention of the petitioner herein under the COFEPOSA Act 1974 were initially sent in February 2019.
They were considered by the Central Screening Committee CSC) in its meeting held on 26022019 and the Sponsoring Authority was apprised of the need to gather further evidence connected with the offences of smuggling of contraband items by the petitioner so as to consider the proposal in future.
In this regard letters dated 7.3.2019 23.4.2019 31.5.2019 6.9.2019 5.12.2019 and 212020 were sent to the Sponsoring Authority.
The proposal was reconsidered by CSC in its meeting held on 05022020 for its disposal and that proposal was disposed off.
The disposal was communicated to the Sponsoring Authority vide letter dated 1322020.
Thus the said initial proposal did not fructify into a Detention 19.
Consequent upon the forensic examination of the mobile phone of the petitioner which unearthed additional facts and incriminating materials a fresh proposal dated 130320 was forwarded by the Sponsoring Authority to the CEIB Department of Revenue Ministry of Finance for preventive detention of petitioner for being a repeat offender for indulging in smuggling of foreign currency cameras cigarettes etc.
The approval of the Chief W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 Commissioner of CustomsNew Delhi for the preventive detention of the petitioner was delayed on account of nationwide lockdown and finally the said approval came on 190520.
This proposal of Sponsoring Authority was then considered by CSC in its meeting held on 29052020.
Thereafter the proposal was examined by Detaining Authority with reference to the recommendation of the CSC.
After a careful consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case the nature of activities the material collected the propensity and potentiality of the petitioner to indulge in further smuggling activities the Detaining Authority passed the Detention Order on 05062020.
20.
Mr. Mahajan submits that the petitioner had not cooperated in the investigation and consequently forensic examination of his mobile phone was delayed.
He submits that it is apparent from the conduct of the petitioner that since the date of his voluntary statement given on 22042019 till the forensic examination of his phone on 20012020 the major reason for the delay caused in the investigation was due to non cooperation of the 21.
Mr. Mahajan submits that if the time lag in passing and executing the Detention Order is reasonably explained by the Respondents then the same cannot be called “delay” and it cannot be a ground for quashing a Detention Order.
Reliance is placed on the judgement in Union of India v. Muneesh Suneja 3 SCC 92 where the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that an order of detention cannot be quashed either on the ground of delay in passing the impugned order or delay in executing the said order since mere delay either in passing the order or execution thereof is not fatal if it stands W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 reasonably explained.
The Supreme Court further observed in Licil Antony supra) that even in a case of undue delay between the prejudicial activity and the passing of Detention Order the order of detention is not vitiated if the delay is satisfactorily explained.
The following extract of the judgment in Licil Antonyis relied upon by the respondents: “7.
Mr Raghenth Basant learned counsel for the appellant submits that there is inordinate delay in passing the order of detention and that itself vitiates the same.
He points out that the last prejudicial activity which prompted the detaining authority to pass the order of detention had taken place on 17 11 2012 whereas the order of detention has been passed on 6 5 2013.
He submits that delay in passing the order has not been explained.
8.
Mr MT George learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents does not join issue and admits that the sponsoring authority wrote about the necessity of preventive detention in its letter dated 17 12 2012 for the prejudicial activity of the detenu which had taken place on 17 11 2012 and the order of detention was passed on 6 5 2013 but this delay has sufficiently been explained.
He submits that mere delay itself is not sufficient to hold that the order of detention is illegal.
9.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions and we have no doubt in our mind that there has to be a live link between the prejudicial activity and the order of detention.
COFEPOSA intends to deal with persons engaged in smuggling activities who pose a serious threat to the economy and thereby security of the nation.
Such persons by virtue of their large resources and influence cause delay in making of an order of detention.
While dealing with the question of delay in making an order of detention the court is required to be circumspect and has to take a pragmatic view.
No hard and fast formula is possible to be laid or has been laid in this regard.
However one thing is clear that in case of delay that has to be satisfactorily explained.
After all the purpose of preventive W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 detention is to take immediate steps for preventing the detenu from indulging in prejudicial activity.
If there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial activity and making of the order of detention and the delay has not been explained the order of detention becomes vulnerable.
Delay in issuing the order of detention if not satisfactorily explained itself is a ground to quash the order of detention.
No rule with precision has been formulated in this regard.
The test of proximity is not a rigid or a mechanical test.
In case of undue and long delay the court has to investigate whether the link has been broken in the circumstances of each case.
11.
Further this Court had the occasion to consider this question in Rajinder Arora v Union of India4 SCC 796 :2 SCC 418] in which it has been held as follows: “20.
Furthermore no explanation whatsoever has been offered by the respondent as to why the order of detention has been issued after such a long time.
The said question has also not been examined by the Authorities before issuing the order of detention.
21.
The question as regards delay in issuing the order of detention has been held to be a valid ground for quashing an order of detention by this Court in T.A.
Abdul Rahman v. State of Kerala 1989) 4 SCC 741 : 1990 SCC76] stating:„10.
The conspectus of the above decisions can be summarised thus: The question whether the prejudicial activities of a person necessitating to pass an order of detention is proximate to the time when the order is made or the live link between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of detention is snapped depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
No hard and fast that would be rule can be precisely formulated applicable under all circumstances and no exhaustive guidelines can be laid down in that behalf.
It follows that the test of proximity is not a rigid or mechanical W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 test by merely counting number of months between the offending acts and the order of detention.
However when there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial activities and the passing of detention order the court has to scrutinise whether the detaining authority has satisfactorily examined such a delay and afforded a tenable and reasonable explanation as to why such a delay has occasioned when called upon to answer and further the court has to investigate whether the causal connection has been broken circumstances of each case.
throw considerable doubt on 11.
Similarly when is unsatisfactory and unexplained delay between the date of order of detention and the date of securing the arrest of the detenu such a delay would genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority leading to a legitimate inference that the detaining authority was not really and genuinely satisfied as regards the necessity for detaining the detenu with a view to preventing him from acting in a prejudicial 22.
The delay caused in this case in issuing the order of detention has not been explained.
In fact no reason in that behalf whatsoever has been assigned at all” 18.
From what we have stated above it cannot be said that there is undue delay in passing the order of detention and the live nexus between the prejudicial activity has snapped.
As observed earlier the question whether the prejudicial activity of a person necessitating to pass an order of detention is proximate to the time when the order is made or the live link between the prejudicial activity and the purpose of detention is snapped depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
Even in a case of undue or long delay between the prejudicial activity and the passing of detention order if the same is satisfactorily explained and a tenable and reasonable explanation is offered the order of detention is not vitiated.
We must bear in mind that W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 distinction exists between the delay in making of an order of detention under a law relating to preventive detention like COFEPOSA and in complying with procedural safeguards enshrined under Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
In view of the factual scenario as aforesaid we are of the opinion that the order of detention is not fit to be quashed on the ground of delay in passing the same.
the delay 19.
The conclusion which we have reached is in tune with what has been observed by this Court in M. Ahamedkutty v. Union of India2 SCC 1 : 1990 SCC258] .
It reads as follows: SCC p. 8 para 10) “10.
… Mere delay in making of an order of detention under a law like COFEPOSA Act enacted for the purpose of dealing effectively with persons engaged in smuggling and foreign exchange racketeering who owing to their large resources and influence have been posing a serious threat to the economy and thereby to the security of the nation the courts should not merely on account of the delay in making of an order of detention assume that such delay if not satisfactorily explained must necessarily give rise to an inference that there was no sufficient material for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority or that such subjective satisfaction was not genuinely reached.
Taking of such a view would not be warranted unless the court finds that the grounds are stale or illusory or that there was no real nexus impugned order of detention.
In that case there was no explanation for the delay between 2 2 1987 and 28 5 1987 yet it could not give rise to legitimate inference that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the District Magistrate was not genuine or that the grounds were stale or illusory or that there was no rational connection between the grounds and the order of detention.”(emphasis supplied) the grounds and W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 22.
Mr. Mahajan submits that the Supreme Court in Licil Antonywas mindful of the ratio laid down in Rajinder Aroraand yet held that delay in passing of Detention Order would not be fatal.
He also submits that the facts of Rajinder Arorawere completely different from the present case since in the said case the Detention Order was quashed on the ground of delay in execution of the Detention Order for which no reasonable explanation was tendered and not on the ground of delay in passing of the order.
23.
Reliance is also placed by Mr. Mahajan on T.A.
Abdul Rahman vs State of Kerala 4 SCC 741 where the Supreme Court held that: “10.
The conspectus of the above decisions can be summarised thus: The question whether the prejudicial activities of a person necessitating to pass an order of detention is proximate to the time when the order is made or the live link between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of detention is snapped depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
No hard and fast rule can be precisely formulated that would be applicable under all circumstances and no exhaustive guidelines can be laid down in that behalf.
It follows that the test of proximity is not a rigid or mechanical test by merely counting number of months between the offending acts and the order of detention.
However when there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial activities and the passing of detention order the court has to scrutinise whether the detaining authority has satisfactorily examined such a delay and afforded a tenable and reasonable explanation as to why such a delay has occasioned when called upon to answer and further the court has to investigate whether the causal connection has been broken in the circumstances of each case.” emphasis supplied) W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 Analysis and Conclusion: 24.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
We have examined the submissions made the documents and case law relied upon by learned counsels.
25.
A Detention Order can validly be assailed even at the pre execution stage though on limited grounds.
This position was recognized by the Supreme Court in Additional Secretary to Government of India and Others Vs. Smt. Alka Subhash Gadia and Anr Supp 1 SCC 496 which enlists some of the grounds on which the Detention Order could be assailed even prior to execution.
Those grounds are illustrative and not exhaustive as held in Deepak Bajaj v. State of Maharashtra and Another 16 SCC 14.
At the same time the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra & Ors. v. Bhaurao Punjabrao Gawande3 SCC 613 noted: “As a general rule an order of detention passed by a Detaining Authority under the relevant “preventive detention” law cannot be set aside by a writ court at the pre execution or pre arrest stage unless the court is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances specified in Alka Subhash GadiaSCC 496 : 1992 SCC301] .
The Court must be conscious and mindful of the fact that this is a “suspicious jurisdiction” i.e. jurisdiction based on suspicion and an action is taken “with a view to preventing” a person from acting in any manner prejudicial to certain activities enumerated in the relevant detention law.
Interference by a court of law at that stage must be an exception rather than a rule and such an exercise can be undertaken by a writ court with extreme care caution and circumspection.
A detenu cannot ordinarily seek a writ of mandamus if he does not surrender and is not served with an order of detention and the grounds in support of such order” W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 26.
Mr. Siddharth Agarwal learned counsel on behalf of the petitioner has argued that there is inordinate and unexplained delay in passing of the Detention Orders.
In support of this submission our attention is drawn to the fact that the petitioner was intercepted on the intervening night of 1st and 2nd February 2019 and as per the arrest memo he was apprehended on 3rd February 2019.
Yet the Detention Order came to be passed only on 05062020.
On the other hand Mr. Mahajan argues that firstly the issue of delay cannot be gone into at this pre execution stage and secondly that if the apparent delay time has been satisfactorily been explained then quashing of the Detention Order is not warranted.
In Muneesh Suneja the Supreme Court after noticing Alka Subhash Gadiaheld as follows: “7.
... ... ...
This Court has been categorical that in matters of pre detention cases interference of court is not called for except in the circumstances set forth by us earlier.
If this aspect is borne in mind the High Court of Punjab and Haryana could not have quashed the order of detention either on the ground of delay in passing the impugned order or delay in executing the said order for mere delay either in passing the order or execution thereof is not fatal except where the same stands unexplained.
In the given circumstances of the case and if there are good reasons for delay in passing the order or in not giving effect to it the same could be explained and those are not such grounds which could be made the basis for quashing the order of detention at a pre detention stage.
Therefore following the decisions of this Court in Addl.
Secy.
to the Govt. of India v. Alka Subhash GadiaSCC 496 : 1992 SCC 301] and Sayed Taher Bawamiya v. Jt.
Secy.
to the Govt. of India8 SCC 630 : 2001 SCC56] we hold that the order made by the High Court is bad in law and deserves to be set aside.”W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 28.
At this stage we may take note of the timeline of events as produced before us by the Respondents 1 & 2 in their Counter Affidavit.
The recovery of contraband items from the petitioner and co accused persons was done on the intervening night of 1st and 2nd February.
On 3rd February Respondent No. 3arrested the petitioner.
The petitioner was released on statutory bail on 6th April 2019 due to non filing of chargesheet within 60 days.
The petitioner was then summoned to appear before Air Customs Superintendent on 220419 where the Statement of the petitioner under Section 108 of the Customs Act 1862 was recorded.
The Respondents needed the password of the mobile phone belonging to the petitioner to be able to unlock the same and retrieve any relevant and incriminating material which would further establish his involvement in the acts of smuggling.
This led to issuance of summons to the petitioner dated 210519 but the petitioner failed to appear.
Hence summons dated 06.06.19 was issued in response to which the petitioner appeared on 120619.
The petitioner appeared but claimed that he did not remember the password of his mobile phone.
Hence forensic examination of the same could not be conducted.
29.
Since the password to the mobile phone belonging to the petitioner could not be recovered efforts were made to find a laboratory capable of unlocking and conducting forensic examination of the contents of the petitioner’s mobile phone even in absence of the password.
Letter dated 201119 was issued informing the petitioner about the forensic examination to be conducted at DRI Mumbai on 251119.
The letter remained unserved since the petitioner could not be found at his given address.
After the petitioner gave his new address another letter dated 17.01.20 was issued W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 informing him about the date of the forensic examination i.e. 200120.
The letter also mentioned that in case the petitioner or his authorized representative does not appear on the said date it will be presumed he is not willing to participate in the same.
The petitioner failed to turn up and forensic examination of his mobile phone was finally conducted on 200120.
The documents materials and the petitioner was summoned again and his statement was recorded under Section 108 of the Customs Act 1962 on 30.
Consequently a fresh proposal dated 130320 was forwarded by the Sponsoring Authority to the CEIB Department of Revenue Ministry of Finance for preventive detention of petitioner for being a repeat offender indulging in smuggling of foreign currency cameras cigarettes etc.
The Chief Commissioner of Customs New Delhi could not grant his approval on account of nationwide lockdown and finally gave its approval on 190520.
This proposal of the Sponsoring Authority was considered by CSC in its meeting held on 290520.
Thereafter the proposal was examined by Detaining Authority with reference to the recommendation of the CSC.
The impugned Detention Order came to be finally passed on 05.06.20 by the Detaining Authority.
31.
On a careful examination of all the facts present before us we find that the aforesaid timeline satisfactorily explains and justifies the time taken by the Respondents in undertaking investigation which finally culminated in passing of the impugned Detention Order.
The initial proposal sent by the Sponsoring Authority in February 2019 was not found sufficient to justify W.P.(Crl.)
NO. 1166 2020 the petitioner’s detention under Section 3 of the COFEPOSA Act.
The Sponsoring Authority therefore continued with its efforts to conduct further investigation and for that purpose retrieval of the contents of the mobile phone of the petitioner was crucial.
Vide his letter dated 230419 the petitioner desired that the forensic examination of his phone be done in his presence.
Vide summons dated 210519 he was asked to appear on 300519.
He did not appear.
Another summons dated 06.06.19 was issued on 120619.
He appeared on 120619.
However the petitioner did not cooperate.
He did not provide the code to unlock his mobile phone on his own.
He feigned ignorance and loss of memory with respect to the password code that left the respondents with no other option but to look for avenues to unlock the mobile phone even without the petitioner providing the password code.
The respondents have stated that ultimately it was found that the mobile phone of the petitioner could be unlocked at the Cyber Laboratory of DRI Mumbai.
The respondents have stated that DRI Mumbai is not a part of Air Customs.
Thus the submission that the respondents ought to have been aware of the existence of its facility at DRI Mumbai to unlock the mobile phone of the petitioner cannot be accepted on the basis of assumptions that the petitioner would like us to draw.
The petitioner was sent a letter dated 2011201