Crl.A.No.1821IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRASDATED : 26.04.2021C O R A MTHE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.VELMURUGANCrl.A.No.1821B.Balamurugan... AppellantVs.1.The Deputy Superintendent of Police Krishnagiri Krishnagiri District.2.The Inspector of Police All Women Police Station Krishnagiri Krishnagiri District.3.M.Ilakkiya...RespondentsPRAYER: Criminal Appeal is filed under Section 14(A)of Cr.PC to set aside the dismissal order passed in CMPNo4321 in Cr.No.21 by the learned Principal District Sessions Judge Krishnagiri dated 26.02.2021 and enlarge him on bail.1 7 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis Crl.A.No.1821For Appellant:Mr.T.S.ArthanareeswaranFor Respondents: Mrs.TPSavitha Government Advocatewould submit that during the pendency of the appeal the defacto complainant delivered a child.
The trial Court after hearing the arguments of both sides has rejected the application for bail petition by a well considered order and therefore no 3 7 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis Crl.A.No.1821interference is called for with the said order and the Appeal is liable to be dismissed.6.
Heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the materials placed on record.
7.
The case of the prosecution is that the appellant married the defacto complainant on 25022020 and after the marriage they lived at the house of the accused at Bodinaickenpatty.
During those days the appellant accused abused the complainant physically and thereafter absconded leaving the complainant alone.
On the basis of the complaint given by the complainant before the Edappadi Police Station the Police brought back the appellant accused and made him live with the complainant.
While so the appellant accused abused the complaint physically and mentally by insulting her by referring to her caste name in the presence of others and by abusing her using filthy language.
8.
It is to be noted that the appellant married the defacto complainant on 25022020 however not willing to live with the defacto complainant and 4 7 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis Crl.A.No.1821also not yet registered the marriage.
It is also to be noted that allegation against the appellant accused is that he abused the defacto complainant with filthy language tortured her both mentally and physically also intentionally insulted and abused by calling her caste name.
A perusal of the records it could be seen that it is not the first occasion the appellant accused abused the defacto complainant with filthy language and abused her by calling her caste name and on the earlier occasion also the appellant accused abused the defacto complainant.
9.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and also considering the serious nature of the offence and also considering the fact that the appellant accused abused the defacto complainant by calling her caste name this Court is not inclined to grant bail to the appellant accused accordingly the Appeal is dismissed.26.04.2021Speaking Order Non speaking orderIndex : Yes No.Internet : Yes.
r n s5 7 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis Crl.A.No.1821To1.The Principal District Sessions Judge Krishnagiri2The Deputy Superintendent of Police Krishnagiri Krishnagiri District.3.The Inspector of Police All Women Police Station Krishnagiri Krishnagiri District.4.The Public Prosecutor High Court of Madras Chennai.6 7 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis Crl.A.No.1821P.VELMURUGAN Jr n sCrl.A.No.182126.04.20217 7