Appeal No. 43521 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 43521 Sujeet Kumar CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 25 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005Are color blind persons eligible to join SEBI as Grade A SEBI accept color blind persons or not because it is mandatory in only defence.
The respondent in response to the queries informed that the same are in the nature of seeking clarification opinion and accordingly cannot be construed as seeking “information” as defined under section 2(f) of the RTI Act.
I have perused the query and the response provided thereto.
On consideration I agree with the observation of the respondent that the query is in the nature of eliciting a clarification or opinion of the respondent.
It is understood that the respondent is not supposed to create information or to interpret information or to furnish clarification to the appellant under the ambit of the RTI Act.
I find that the said queries cannot be construed as seeking ‘information’ as defined under section 2 of the RTI Act.
Consequently the respondent did not have an obligation to provide such clarification under the RTI Act.
In this context Appeal No. 43521 reference is made to the mater of Vineet Pandey vs. CPIO United India Insurance Company Limitedwherein similar observations were made by the Hon’ble CIC.
Further in the matter of Shri Shantaram Walavalkar vs. CPIO SEBII note that the Hon’ble CIC held: “... we would also like to observe that under the Right to InformationAct the citizen has the responsibility to specify the exact information he wants he is not supposed to seek any opinion or comments or clarifications or interpretations from the CPIO...”.
In view of the said observations I do not find any deficiency in the response.
6.
Notwithstanding the same I note that the relevant details with respect to Persons with Benchmark Disabilities including visual impairment blindness is categorically provided by SEBI in their Advertisement for recruitment of Officers in Grade A It is understood that the same is available on the SEBI website which is available in the public domain.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 19 2021 ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA