 on 25 09 CRM M 14780 2021 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA ATCHANDIGARH CRM M 14780 2021 Date of Decision: 24092021Ranjha Singh ....Petitioner(s)VersusState of Punjab .....Respondent(s)CORAM:HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE JASGURPREET SINGH PURIPresent:Mr. Parampreet Singh Brar Advocate for the petitioner.Mr.
Randhir Singh Thind DAG Punjab.
Through Video ConferencingJASGURPREET SINGH PURI J.The present petition has been filed under Section 439 CrPCfor the grant of regular bail to the petitioner in FIR No.110 dated 23112018under Sections 420 406 409 and 120 B IPC registered at Police StationSadar Kotkapura District Faridkot.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that thepetitioner is in custody since 25112020 which is more than 10 months.
Hehas further submitted that the investigation of the case is already completeand the challan has been presented on 22022021 and thereafter chargeshave been framed on 02082021.
He submitted that it is a case where thepetitioner was a Sarpanch of a village and the primary allegations with on 25 09 CRM M 14780 2021 2 regard to the non measurement of the land and allegations of someembezzlement has been made against the Panchayat Secretary who wassupposed to provide the utilization certificate regarding the grant and he wasthe Panchayat Secretary of the two villages.
He submitted that the entirerecord and the duty to measure and to provide the utilization certificatevested with the Panchayat Secretary and the petitioner being an illiterateSarpanch had no role to play.
He submitted that even otherwise also there isonly an allegation of embezzlement of money but there is no settlement ofany liability into that extent by administrative authority.
He submitted thathe is facing incarceration and the investigation of the case has already beencompleted and no useful purpose will be served in case the petitioner is keptin custody as the entire case is based upon the record which is already withthe police.
The learned counsel has submitted that the petitioner is 73 yearsof old man.
He further submitted that the petitioner is not involved in anyother case and therefore he may be considered for grant of regular bail.
On the other hand Mr. Randhir Singh Thind learned DAG Punjab has stated that it is correct that the petitioner is in custody since25112020 and investigation of the case is complete and after presentationof challan the charges have been framed and the entire case is dependedupon the documentary evidence.
He has however opposed the grant ofregular bail on the ground that the matter pertains to embezzlement and therefore the petitioner may not be granted bail.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The custody of the petitioner is not in dispute.
It is also not indispute that the investigation of the case is complete and the charges have on 25 09 CRM M 14780 2021 3 already been framed and the subject matter of the dispute pertains to therecord which according to the learned counsel for the petitioner is with thepolice.
The submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner thattill date even no administrative authority has ascertained any amount ofembezzlement if any committed by the accused persons.
He submitted thatthese are allegations which are to be adjudicated at the time of trial andsince the trial of the case would take long time the submissions made by thecounsel for the petitioner carries weight.
Furthermore the petitioner is 73years old man and there is no other case against the petitioner.
Furthermoreit is not the case of the State that in case the petitioner is released on bailthen he may influence any witness or may tamper evidence or may flee fromjustice.Therefore without commenting on the merit of the case andconsidering the totality of circumstance the present petition is allowed.
Thepetitioner shall be released on regular bail subject to furnishing bailbonds surety to the satisfaction of the learned trial Court Duty Magistrateconcerned.However anything observed hereinabove shall not be treated asan expression of opinion on merits of the case and is meant for the purposeof deciding the present petition only.
24.09.2021(JASGURPREET SINGH PURI)rakesh JUDGEWhether speaking:Yes NoWhether reportable:Yes No