IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No 32820 Arising out of SLPNo 71420 Sri Nilanjan Bhattacharya Appellant(s The State of Karnataka and Others JUDGMENT Dr Justice Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud This appeal arises from a judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka on a petition for habeas corpus filed by the appellant who is the father of a three and a half year old child.
The appellant is aggrieved by the conditions which were imposed by the High Court while allowing him to take the child back to the United States of America The appellant married the second respondent on 30 November 2012.
The marriage was registered at Aranmula in Kerala on 25 February 2013.
The appellant and the second respondent who were based in India at the time of the wedding moved to the US in April 2015.
The appellant relocated to the US at the behest of his employer.
Once the couple reached the US the WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 second respondent found employment as a management consultant in New Jersey.
The parties resided for a period of three years in New Jersey after which the respondent was employed as a Software Engineer in New York.
On 25 December 2016 Adhrit was born to the appellant and the second respondent.
The child is a US citizen.
In March 2019 the second respondent planned to travel to India for a short period with the child.
After reaching India the second respondent is alleged to have informed the appellant of her plans not to return to the US and to continue to reside in India together with the child.
The appellant came to Bengaluru on 28 March 2019 when he states that he made an effort to contact the second respondent.
On 13 April 2019 the appellant met the second respondent to explore an amicable resolution of the issues which the couple had faced in the marriage.
The appellant was given access to the child on 13 14 and 15 April 2019.
The efforts of the appellant to persuade the second respondent to return to the US have not succeeded.
On 16 April 2019 the appellant filed for custody and for the return of the minor child before the Superior Court of New Jersey Hudson County Chancery Division Family Part.
The second respondent was served on 26 April 2019.
On 21 May 2019 the Superior Court of New Jersey granted legal and temporary custody of the child to the appellant.
The appellant has also filed for divorce on 6 June 2019 before the court in New Jersey.
On 10 July 2019 the appellant filed a petition before this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution seeking writ of a habeas corpus.
The petition was withdrawn with liberty to move the appropriate forum which resulted in the filing of a habeas corpus petition before the High Court of Karnataka on 13 WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 August 2019.
By its judgment dated 7 April 2020 the Division Bench allowed the petition and granted the request of the appellant to allow him to take the minor child with him to the US.
While doing so the High Court imposed two conditions in paragraph 18 of its judgment and order dated 7 April 2020 which form the subject matter of the present proceedings.
Paragraph 18 of the judgment is extracted below “Under the circumstances this writ petition is allowed holding that the minor child Master Adhrit Bhattacharya is required to be repatriated to USA in compliance of the order of New Jersey Court However the repatriation shall not be made until normalcy is restored with reference to health scenario in USA in the aftermath of COVID 19 pandemic.
Therefore we would observe as under a) That the minor child shall be repatriated only after a certificate being issued by the Officer of the rank of District Health Office of Bengaluru in certifying that this Country is free of COVID 19 pandemic and it is safe for the travel of minor child to USA b) Simultaneously the petitioner herein shall also secure a certificate from the concerned Medical authority at USA in certifying that the condition in USA particularly in the region where the petitioner is residing is congenial for shifting the residence of minor child Master Adhrit Bhattacharya in compliance of the order passed by the Court of New c) On production of such documents the authorities concerned are directed to permit repatriation of the minor child Master Adhrit Bhattacharya from Bengaluru India to USA d) While doing so it is also observed that in the event if the respondent wife is reconsidering her decision in relocating herself to USA and settle there in the interest of the minor child all liberties are reserved to her to take the child along with her subject to securing the certificate as referred to supra and on reaching USA to approach the competent court which has passed the interim order of custody of minor child to the petitioner and also WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 for modification of the same by explaining the circumstances under which she is staking her claim for the custody of the child ” The appellant has challenged the correctness of conditions and andwhich have been imposed by the High Court in its impugned order While the Court is conscious of the fact that the Special Leave Petition merely challenges the conditions subject to which the habeas corpus petition has been allowed the welfare of a minor child of less than five years of age is involved in the present case.
Having regard to the nature of the jurisdiction of this Court we are of the view that the ends of justice would be served if an amicus curiae is appointed to assist the Court since the second respondent has not entered appearance through WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 counsel.
The office report dated 25 August 2020 indicates that service has been effected Prabhjit learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner states that the child is presently with the maternal grand parents at Vadodara.
We request Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija senior counsel to assist the Court as amicus curiae.
Ms Makhija would be at liberty to furnish the name of an advocate to the Registry who would assist her in the matter.
The Registry shall prepare and forward a complete set of papers to the amicus curiae List the Special Leave Petition on 9 On 9 September 2020 on the request of the amicus curiae we had granted liberty to her to establish contact with the second respondent in order to ascertain her desires and to enable a proper representation to be made on behalf of the respondent before this Court.
In pursuance of the previous order the amicus curiae has informed the Court that the Advocate on Record Mr. Gaurav Khanna communicated with the second respondent on email and thereafter the amicus curiae has also had a detailed conversation with the second respondent on telephone.
Ms. Makhija has informed the Court that the second respondent has informed her that she has no objection to complying with the order of the High Court to enable the child to travel with the appellant to New Jersey.
The second respondent has informed the amicus curiae that she has no desire to contest a legal battle Though the second respondent has not entered appearance despite being served with the proceedings this Court considered it necessary to take a view which is in the overarching interest of the minor child who is within its WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 jurisdiction.
In several recent decisions of this Court bearing on the issue it has been held that when confronted with a habeas corpus petition the existence of an order of the foreign court is one circumstance which is borne in mind by the Court.
The Court will have regard to whether the lawful custody of one of the spouses has been disturbed by the other.
The most significant consideration is the welfare of the child.
In Nithya Anand Raghvan vs. State8 SCC 454 WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 the case to ascertain the paramount welfare of the child leaving such inquiry to the foreign court.
However this Court clarified that “40...In either situation be it a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry the welfare of the child is of paramount consideration.” While discussing the powers of the High Court in issuing a writ of habeas corpus in relation to the custody of a minor child this Court further observed “46… Once again we may hasten to add that the decision of the court in each case must depend on the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case brought before it whilst considering the welfare of the child which is of paramount consideration The order of the foreign court must yield to the welfare of the child.
Further the remedy of writ of habeas corpus cannot be used for mere enforcement of the directions given by the foreign court against a person within its jurisdiction and convert that jurisdiction into that of execution In Prateek Gupta vs. Shilpi Gupta2 this Court clarified that even if there is a pre existing order of a foreign court with respect to the custody of the child the principles of comity of courts and “intimate contact and closest concern” are subservient to the predominant consideration of the welfare of the child.
In that case the parents and their minor child were residing in the US.
After the separation of the parents the father left the US with the child to come to India without any prior intimation.
A US Court passed an order that the mother has the sole physical and legal custody of the child and declared that the father will not have any visitation rights since he had violated an interim order of the Court directing him to return with the child to the 22 SCC 309 WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 Commonwealth of Virginia.
Thereafter the mother invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi seeking a remedy of the writ of habeas corpus against the father alleging that he has the child in unlawful custody The High Court observed that the most intimate contact of the parties and the child was with the US Court which had the closest concern with the well being of the child and directed the father to hand over the custody to the mother.
The decision of the High Court was set aside by this Court.
While referring to the doctrines of the principle of comity of courts and of “intimate contact and closest concern” this Court observed: “49…Though the principle of comity of court and aforementioned doctrines qua a foreign court from the territory of which the child is removed are factors which deserve notice in deciding the issue of custody and repatriation of the child it is no longer res integra that the ever overriding determinant would be the welfare and interest of the child 50.
The doctrines of “intimate contact” and “closest concern” are of persuasive relevance only when the child is uprooted from its native country and taken to a place to encounter alien environment language custom etc. with the portent of mutilative bearing on the process of its overall growth and grooming” 12 Where a child has been removed from their native country to India this Court has held that it would be in the best interests of the child to return to their native country if the child has not developed roots in India and no harm would be caused to the child on such return.
In V Ravi Chandran vs. Union of India3 this Court observed “32.
Admittedly Adithya is an American citizen born and brought up in the United States of America.
He has spent his initial years there.
The natural habitat of Adithya is in the United States of 31 SCC 174 WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 America.
As a matter of fact keeping in view the welfare and happiness of the child and in his best interests the parties have obtained a series of consent orders concerning his custody parenting rights maintenance etc. from the competent courts of jurisdiction in America 35… There is nothing on record which may even suggest that it would be harmful for the child to be returned to his native country 36.
It is true that the child Adithya has been India for almost two years since he was removed by the mother Respondent 6 contrary to the custody orders of the US court passed by the consent of the parties.
It is also true that one of the factors to be kept in mind in exercise of the summary jurisdiction in the interest of the child is that application for custody return of the child is made promptly and quickly after the child has been removed.
This is so because any delay may result in the child developing roots in the country to which he has been removed.
From the counter affidavit that been filed by Respondent 6 it is apparent that in the last two years Adhitya did not have education at one place.
He has moved from one school to another.
He was admitted in a school at Dehradun by Respondent 6 but then removed within a few months and the child has been admitted in some school in Chennai.
37…In these circumstances there has been no occasion for the child developing roots in this The respondent arrived in India with the child in March 2019.
The appellant filed for custody and for return of the minor child before the Superior Court of New Jersey Hudson County Chancery Division Family Part on 16 April 2019 which awarded him temporary custody on 21 May 2019.
On 10 July 2019 the appellant filed a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution seeking a writ of a habeas corpus before this Court.
This Court granted the appellant liberty to move the appropriate forum.
Thereafter the appellant filed a habeas corpus petition before the High Court of Karnataka on 13 August 2019.
The above sequence of events makes it evident that the appellant has acted promptly to WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 secure the custody of the child.
In such an event this Court is only required to conduct a summary inquiry to ascertain whether there is any harm if the child returns to the US where he was born and has been brought up.
The Court is required to engage in an elaborate inquiry on the merits of the case only if a considerable time has passed since the child has been removed and if the child has developed roots in India.
In either event the primary consideration of this Court is to ascertain the welfare of the child.
14 From this perspective Mr. Prabhjit Jauhar learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has filed a note of submissions indicating that the appellant has taken an active interest even during the time when the child was based in the US to ensure that he fully participates in the daily activities of the child.
The appellant has provided in a tabulated form instances of having exclusively taken the child either on vacation or otherwise for short periods.
The tabular statement is extracted below ALONE VACATIONS STAY OF MINOR CHILD WITH THE PETITIONER 30th March 2018 2nd April 2018 29th May 2018 1st June 2018 4th June 2018 6th June 2018 11th June 2018 15th June 2018 20th June 2018 Minor child alone went for holiday to Ocean City with Petitioner for petitioner’s birthday Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 29th June 2018 17th July 2018 28th July 2018 Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care Minor child alone stayed with petitioner and did not go to day care after Doctor’s appointment in the morning Minor child alone stayed with petitioner and did not go to day care after the petitioner took the child for his 05th September The minor child travelled with the petitioner to India and stayed with him for 6 weeks.
During this time the petitioner went to Kolkata first and then to Bangalore Also went to Masangudi forest for a weekend retreat 30th September 2nd October 2018 7th October 2018 12th October 2018 Minor child alone stayed with petitioner over the weekend and did not go to day care on Monday as the petitioner worked from home The child alone travelled with the petitioner and his visiting paternal grandmother aunt and uncle to vacation across the states of Vermont Massachusetts and New Hampshire 26th October 2018 28th October 2018 Minor child alone stayed with petitioner over the weekend and did not go to day care on Friday as the petitioner worked from home Minor child alone went for holiday to Cape May and Virginia Beach with petitioner for Thanksgiving holidays 21st November 25th November 25th December 27th December 12th February 16th February 20th February 24th February The minor child stayed alone with the petitioner on the child’s 2nd birthday when the petitioner threw a big Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care as the respondent was supposedly preparing appearing for Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care as the respondent was supposedly preparing appearing for WWWLIVELAWIN CA 3284 2020 27th February 2nd March 2019 14th March 2019 15th March 2019 17th March 2019 18th March 2019 Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care as the respondent was supposedly preparing appearing for Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care as the respondent was supposedly preparing appearing for Stayed with the petitioner alone including going with the petitioner to his office in the backup day care as the respondent was packing for a trip to Bengaluru for some wedding a week before the petitioner was supposed to go to Bengaluru himself 15 Moreover it has been stated that the appellant who is employed as a Vice President with Goldman Sachs in New Jersey on a remuneration of US 164 000 per annum has sufficient time at his disposal to look after the welfare of the child.
Mr. Jauhar has also stated before the Court that the appellant’s mother would be accompanying him to New Jersey to provide additional care and support for the welfare of the child.
However the Court been apprised of the fact that the appellant is ready and willing to provide financial assistance to enable the second respondent to travel to New Jersey if she is so inclined and if she does so the appellant would make arrangements for her residential accommodation and stay close to the place of the residence of the child.
Alternatively it has been submitted by Mr Jauhar that if the second respondent is not desirous of living in the US the appellant would be ready and willing to abide by such directions as may be issued by the Court to ensure that the second respondent has continued WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 access to the child.
During the course of the hearing the Court has been apprised of the fact that should the second respondent not be willing to relocate to the US the appellant shall provide access through video conferencing on Fridays Saturdays and Sundays to the second respondent for at least a duration of thirty minutes and even more should the child and the second respondent so the appellant would be ready and willing to bear the expenses of the second respondent for travel to the US for a period of ten days once in a year for the purpose of meeting the child and iii) the appellant would bring the child to India for a period of ten days on an annual basis when access would be provided to the second respondent 16 Before we address ourselves to the two conditions we must at the outset determine as to whether the arrangement which has been envisaged by the High Court in its judgment is in the interest of the welfare of the child Though the appellant only challenges the two conditions we are still inclined to enquire into this issue having regard to the parens patriae jurisdiction of this Court.
After hearing Mr. Prabhjit Jauhar learned Counsel for the appellant and Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija Senior Counsel appearing as amicus curiae we are of the view that the interest and welfare of the child would be subserved by affirming the direction of the High Court to enable the appellant to take the child with him to the US.
The child was born in the US Undoubtedly the child is less than four years of age today.
Equally the Court has borne in mind the fact that the second respondent has not shown WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 any particular inclination to retain the child with her in India.
The appellant has provided extensive details of his association with the child and the steps which he has taken since the birth of the child to be associated with the upbringing of the child.
In fact during the course of the hearing Mr. Jauhar learned Counsel for the appellant even offered that the appellant would share on the video conferencing platform the videos which the appellant has of his association with numerous activities of the child.
The Court has come to the conclusion that the welfare of the child would best be served by his accompanying the appellant to the US.
The child was born in the US and is a citizen of the US by birth.
The appellant has taken the responsibility for shared parenting while the child was in the US.
The respondent left US shores for a brief sojourn but has unilaterally resolved not to return.
Both the appellant and the respondent are qualified professionals who have been employed in the US and the appellant continues to be employed there.
Faced with the departure of his spouse and child the appellant moved the court of jurisdiction in New Jersey for orders of temporary custody.
He has followed their tracks to India and invoked judicial remedies here.
The child has remained here for a short period and it would not be contrary to his interest to allow the appellant to take him back.
Hence independent of the desire communicated by the respondent to the amicus curiae that she does not wish to contest the proceedings the Court has concluded that the direction of the High Court to allow the child to return to the US is in the interest of his welfare.
We have enquired into this aspect though the Special Leave Petition by the petitioner is only as regards the conditions for return imposed by the High Court.
This Court has an WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 overarching duty to ensure and preserve the welfare of a minor child within 17 The principal challenge in the appeal relates to the two conditions which have been imposed by the High Court while allowing the appellant to take the child with him to the US.
The conditions which have been imposed by the High Court have been assailed on the ground that they are unenforceable Conditionrequires the appellant to obtain a certificate from an officer of the rank of the District Health Officer of Bengaluru certifying that “this country” that is to say India is free of the Covid 19 pandemic and it is safe for the minor child to travel to the US.
Requiring the appellant to obtain a certificate of this nature that India is free of the Covid 19 pandemic serves no purpose.
In the Special Leave Petition that has been filed before this Court the appellant has in fact tendered an undertaking that it is only if and when the Government of India and the Government of Karnataka lift the lock down and permit international travel that the appellant would venture to take the child to the US.
Moreover it has been stated that the appellant would comply with all prevailing regulations including public health regulations facilitating the journey to the US.
The second condition which has been imposed in the judgment of the High Court similarly requires the appellant to secure a certificate from “the concerned medical authority” in the US certifying the condition in the US particularly in the region where the appellant is residing and of its being congenial for shifting of the residence of the minor child to New Jersey.
The appellant has submitted and with justification that it will be impossible to obtain a certificate of this nature in the absence of any particular authority being entrusted with the jurisdiction to issue a certificate WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 of this kind.
Moreover the appellant has filed on the record a statement indicating that at present there are only nine positive cases of Covid 19 in Bayonne New Jersey where the appellant has his ordinary place of resident The conditions which were imposed by the High Court were the consequence of a well meaning exercise.
But that does not render them proper or correct.
18 Before concluding the Court record its appreciation of the objective assistance rendered by Ms Vibha Datta Makhija Senior Counsel as amicus 19 Having thus heard Counsel for the appellant and the amicus curiae we are of the view that the conditions which have been imposed by the High Court in clausesandof paragraph 18 of the judgment and order dated 7 April 2020 do not sub serve the interests of justice.
The conditions shall accordingly stand set aside.
We however record the undertaking of the appellant that in traveling to the US with the child the appellant shall make all necessary arrangements in accordance with the prevailing regulations prescribed by the Indian and US governments for international travel between India and the US.
20 We accordingly allow the appeal in terms of the following directions Conditionsandin paragraph 18 of the judgment and order of the High Court dated 7 April 2020 shall stand set aside and conditionabove is subject to the undertaking of the appellant WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 that the appellant shall comply with the regulations in force for facilitating travel between India and the US on the date of travel In order to ensure the interest and welfare of the child the following arrangement shall remain in place until modified by a court of competent jurisdiction in regard to the custody of the child In the event that the second respondent desires to relocate to the US the appellant shall provide for her expenses for travel and for her lodging and boarding at a place conveniently situated to the residence of the appellant and the child in New Jersey or at such other place where it becomes necessary subsequently In the event that the second respondent is not desirous of relocating to the US the following arrangement shall remain in The appellant shall allow the child to communicate with the second respondent on a suitable video conferencing platform on Fridays Saturdays and Sundays of every week for at least thirty minutes and beyond it subject to the mutual convenience of the mother and the child ii) Should the second respondent be desirous of traveling to the US to meet the child the appellant shall once every year meet the expenses of the second respondent for travel to and residence in the US close to the place of residence of the child for a period not exceeding ten days on each occasion WWW.LIVELAW.IN CA 3284 2020 iii) The appellant agrees and undertakes to bring the child to India once a year for a period of at least ten days when the child will have access to the second respondent and the family at her ordinary place of residence in India and iv) Condition(d) which has been set out in paragraph 18 of the judgment and order of the High Court is maintained and the arrangement which has been made above shall abide by such final directions as may be issued by the appropriate court in matters of custody access and visitation The second respondent shall in compliance with the present order extend all necessary cooperation to implement the terms of the above order inter alia by handing over the passport and other relevant documents as required to facilitate the travel and onward journey of the child with the appellant to The appeal is allowed in the above terms Pending applications if any stand disposed of.
SECTION IV A S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS Petition(s) for Special Leave to AppealNo.7146 2020 Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 07 04 2020 in WPHC No. 93 2019 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at NILANJAN BHATTACHARYA Petitioner(s VERSUS THE STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS. Respondent(s With appln.(s) for interim relief exemption from filing c c of the impugned judgment exemption from filing affidavit appropriate orders directions permission to file additional documents facts Date : 23 09 2020 These matters were called on for hearing today CORAM : HON BLE DR. JUSTICE DY CHANDRACHUD HON BLE MS. JUSTICE INDU MALHOTRA HON BLE MR. JUSTICE KM JOSEPH Ms Vibha Datta Makhija Sr Adv.
(SAROJ KUMARI GAUR AR cum PS BRANCH OFFICER Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file