IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No63921 Harendra Ram Son of Ram Ayodhya Ram Resident of Village Badki Tenduni Post Baligaon P.S.
Ayar District Bhojpur ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar Through the Principal Secretary Food and Public Distribution System Patna Bihar The District Magistrate Ara Bhojpur The Sub Divisional Officer Ara The Office of The Sub Divisional Officer Ara Bhojpur The Block Development Officer Garhani Bhojpur The Union of India Through the Post Master General Patna Bihar The Superintendent of General Post Office Ara Bhojpur 8.
Veena Devi Wife of Mukesh Kumar Ram Resident of Village Dhamania Block Garhani District Bhojpur ... Respondent s For the Petitioner s For the Respondent s Mr. Rajendra Nath Sinha Advocate Mr. S Raza Ahmad AAG 5 Mr. Alok Kumar AC to AAG 5 CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE and HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S KUMAR Per: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE Date : 04 01 2022 Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Petitioner has prayed for the following relief(s): Patna High Court CWJC No.63921 dt.04 01 2022 Venting out his grievance petitioner has already approached the District Magistrate vide application dated 27.01.2021received by the authority within the stipulated time or not and also as to whether the petitioner was erroneously disqualified and his name not included in the list of the applicants.
Statement accepted and taken on record.
As such petition stands disposed of in the following mutually agreeable terms: a) Respondent No. 10 namely the District Patna High Court CWJC No.63921 dt.04 01 2022 Magistrate Ara Bhojpur shall positively consider and decide the petitioner’s applicationexpeditiously by a reasoned and speaking order preferably within a period of four weeks from the date of production of a copy of this order before him b) Needless to add while considering such request principles of natural justice shall be followed and due opportunity of hearing afforded to the parties c) Also the reasoned and speaking order passed by the appropriate authority shall be supplied to the parties d) Equally liberty is reserved to the petitioner to take recourse to such alternative remedies as are otherwise available in accordance with law e) We are hopeful that as and when petitioner takes recourse to such remedies as are otherwise available in law before the appropriate forum the same shall be dealt with in accordance with law and with reasonable dispatch g) Liberty reserved to the petitioner to challenge the order before the appropriate forum should the need so arise subsequently All issues are left open h) We have not expressed any opinion on merits Patna High Court CWJC No.63921 dt.04 01 2022 The petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid Interlocutory Application(s) if any stands disposed (S Kumar J