 IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2567 OF 2020 PAPPU DEO YADAV NARESH KUMAR AND ORS. JUDGMENT S RAVINDRA BHAT J The appellant questions a decision of the High Court of Delhi1.
On 18052012 the appellant was injured in a motor accident while travelling to Hapur as a passenger in a bus having paid the requisite fare.
At about 130 pm when the bus reached village Sadikpur PS Hafizpur Hapur Uttar Pradesh the driver of the offending bussought to overtake the bus in which the appellant was travelling from the wrong side and zipped the appellant’s bus scratching it.
This rash and negligent act caused a dent in the bus where the appellant was seated as a result of which he suffered injuries.
The appellant was removed to Dr. Khan’s Rehan hospital and thereafter AIIMS Trauma Center.
The appellant claimed compensation impleading the owner the driver of the vehicle and the insurer.
During the course of proceedings before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal he applied for ascertainment of his disability.
The disability reportshowed that he suffered 89% disability in relation to his right upper limb which had to be amputated.
The report also went on to say that the condition was “non progressive not likely to improve.
Reassessment is not recommended”.
A first information report regarding the accident was registeredas case Crime No. 255 12 Hazifpur Police Station Hapur Uttar Pradesh under Sections 279 and 338 of the Indian Penal Code 1860.
The appellant at that time unmarried was working as a data entry operator typist at Tis Hazari Courts.
Prior to the injury he earned an amount of ₹ 12 000 per month.
He had applied for grant of compensation under Sections 166 and 140 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 claiming a sum of ₹ 50 lakhs with interest at the rate of 12% per annum against the first respondent the second respondentand third respondentrejected the insurer’s objection regarding its jurisdiction and further held that the appellant had suffered serious injuries due to rash and negligent driving of the respondent.
It awarded compensation in the following terms: 1.
Compensation for medical expenses 11 000 2.
Compensation for pain and suffering 30 000 3.
Compensation for special diet attendant 30 000 and conveyance charges 4.
Loss of future earning capacity income 11 66 400 5.
Loss of amenities and enjoyment of life 15 000 3 6.
Compensation for disfigurement 7.
Loss of income during treatment 8.
Future medical expenses 9.
TOTAL 25 000 48 000 1 00 000 14 25 400 3.
While assessing loss of earning capacity the Tribunal took the appellant’s income to be ₹ 8000 per month and added 50% towards future prospects.
At the time of the accident the appellant was only 20 years of age.
Therefore a multiplier of 18 was applied.
The physical disability was assessed to be 45% by the Tribunal.
The High Court to which the claimant appealed and the insurer cross appealed) revised this head of compensation by doing away with the addition of 50% towards future prospects and reassessed the compensation for loss of earning capacity as ₹ 7 77 60016 SCC 860.
3 4 SCC 571 4 Supra n.2 4 followed in Jagdish5 by a three judge Bench which had ruled that the benefit of future prospects should not be confined only to those who have a permanent job and would extend to self employed individuals and in case of self employed persons an addition of 40% of established income should be made where the age of the victim at the time of the accident was below 40 years.
It was urged that the decision in Anant s o of Sidheshwar Dukre v. Pratap s o Zhamnnappa Lamzane & Anr6 relied on by the High Court did not assess future prospects.
However that per se did not preclude claims by persons incurring permanent disablement as a consequence of motor accidents from seeking such heads of compensation.
It is urged that the High Court misread and created a distinct category of cases where addition in income towards "future prospects" can only be given in case of death and not for injury which cannot be the intention of this court as no such observation is made.
It was argued that the High Court should have reassessed and not reduced the loss of future earning capacity of the appellant from ₹ 11 66 400 to ₹ 7 77 600 on the wrongly depressed income of ₹ 8000 .
Learned counsel submitted that the assessment of monthly income should have been Rs.12 000 and not Rs8 000 .
It was submitted that the courts below ignored the fact that in 2012 persons earning Rs12 000 per month did not have to file income tax returns or pay tax.
The High Court further erred in assessment of physical permanent disability of injured as 45% even though it was 100%.
Counsel for the insurer who contested the appeal urged this court not to interfere with the impugned judgment and stated that the assessment of compensation was made by the High Court in conformity with this Court’s decisions.
It was highlighted that permanent disability of loss of one arm 5 Supra n.3 6 2018SCC 450 5 cannot lead to loss of earning capacity of up to 90% and consequently the assessment of compensation on the head of loss of earning capacity was correctly fixed at 45%.
He also argued that as far as income is concerned although the appellant relied on the independent testimony of a lawyer there was no proof of payment of income tax to support the claim that the appellant earned ₹ 12 000 per month.
The production of the PAN card ipso facto did not establish income at the level claimed.
Further the counsel urged that the impugned judgment correctly appreciated the law and loss of alleged future earning capacity was turned down.
The principle consistently followed by this court in assessing motor vehicle compensation claims is to place the victim in as near a position as she or he was in before the accident with other compensatory directions for loss of amenities and other payments.
These general principles have been stated and reiterated in several decisions7 Two questions arise for consideration: one whether in cases of permanent disablement incurred as a result of a motor accident the claimant can seek apart from compensation for future loss of income amounts for future 7 Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Co Ltd10 SCC 683.
This court referred to the pronouncements in RD Hattangadi v. Pest Control(P) Ltd 1995) 1 SCC 551 Nizam s Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S Dhananka6 SCC 1 Reshma Kumari v. Madan Mohan13 SCC 422 Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar 1 SCC 343.
Govind Yadav spelt out these principles by stating that the courts should “in determining the quantum of compensation payable to the victims of accident who are disabled either permanently or temporarily.
If the victim of the accident suffers permanent disability then efforts should always be made to award adequate compensation not only for the physical injury and treatment but also for the loss of earning and his inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the disability caused due to the These decisions were also followed in ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co Ltd v. Ajay Kumar Mohanty 2018) 3 SCC 686. prospects too and two the extent of disability.
On the first question the High Court no doubt is technically correct in holding that Pranay Sethi8 involved assessment of compensation in a case where the victim died.
However it went wrong in saying that later the three judge bench decision in Jagdish9 was not binding but rather that the subsequent decision in Anant10 to the extent that it did not award compensation for future prospects was binding.
This court is of the opinion that there was no justification for the High Court to have read the previous rulings of this court to exclude the possibility of compensation for future prospects in accident cases involving serious injuries resulting in permanent disablement.
Such a narrow reading of Pranay Sethi11 is illogical because it denies altogether the possibility of the living victim progressing further in life in accident cases and admits such possibility of future prospects in case of the victim’s death.
This court has emphasized time and again that “just compensation” should include all elements that would go to place the victim in as near a position as she or he was in before the occurrence of the accident.
Whilst no amount of money or other material compensation can erase the trauma pain and suffering that a victim undergoes after a serious accident monetary compensation is the manner known to law whereby society assures some measure of restitution to those who survive and the victims who have to face their lives.
In Santosh Devi v. National Insurance Company Limited12 this Court held that: 8 Supra n.2 9 Supra n.3 10 Supra n.6 11 Supra n.2 12 6 SCC 421 2012) 6 SCC 421. “14.
We find it extremely difficult to fathom any rationale for the observation made in paragraph 24 of the judgment in Sarla Verma s case that where the deceased was self employed or was on a fixed salary without provision for annual increment etc. the Courts will usually take only the actual income at the time of death and a departure from this rule should be made only in rare and exceptional cases involving special circumstances.
In our view emoluments income of a person who is self employed or who is employed on a fixed salary without provision for annual increment etc. would remain the same throughout his life.
it will be nave the wages or to say 15.
The rise in the cost of living affects everyone across the board.
It does not make any distinction between rich and poor.
As a matter of fact the effect of rise in prices which directly impacts the cost of living is minimal on the rich and maximum on those who income emoluments.
They are the worst affected people.
Therefore they put extra efforts to generate additional income necessary for sustaining their families.
self employed or who 16.
The salaries of those employed under the Central and State Governments and their agencies instrumentalities have been revised from time to time to provide a cushion against the rising prices and provisions have been made for providing security to the families of the deceased employees.
The salaries of those employed in private sectors have also increased manifold.
Till about two decades ago nobody could have imagined that salary of Class IV employee of the Government would be in five figures and total emoluments of those in higher echelons of service will cross the figure of rupees one lac.
those employed the wages income of 17.
Although unorganized sectors has not registered a corresponding increase and has not kept pace with the increase in the salaries of the Government employees and those employed in private sectors but it cannot be denied that there has been incremental enhancement in the income of those who are self employed and even those engaged on daily basis monthly basis or even seasonal basis.
We can take judicial notice of the fact that with a view to meet the challenges posed by high cost of living the persons falling in the latter category periodically increase the cost of their labour.
In this context it may be useful to give an example of a tailor who earns his livelihood by stitching cloths.
If the cost of living increases and the prices of essentials go up it is but natural for him to increase the cost of his labour.
So will be the cases of ordinary skilled and unskilled labour like barber blacksmith cobbler mason etc. that while making 18.
Therefore we do not observations in the last three lines of paragraph 24 of Sarla Verma s judgment the Court had intended to lay down an absolute rule that there will be no addition in the income of a person who is self employed or who is paid fixed wages.
Rather it would be reasonable to say that a person who is self employed or is engaged on fixed wages will also get 30 per cent increase in his total income over a period of time and if he she becomes victim of accident then the same formula deserves to be applied for calculating the amount of compensation.” In Jagdish13 the victim a carpenter suffered permanent disablement and his claim for compensation including for loss of future prospects was considered by a three judge bench16 SCC 680] this Court has held that the benefit of future prospects should not be confined only to those who have a permanent job and would extend to self employed individuals.
In the case of a self employed person an addition of 40% of the established income should be made where the age of the victim at the time of the accident was below 40 years.
Hence in the present case the appellant would be entitled to an enhancement of Rs 2400 towards loss of future prospects.
13 Supra.n.3 14 Supra n.2 14.
In making the computation in the present case the court must be mindful of the fact that the appellant has suffered a serious disability in which he has suffered a loss of the use of both his hands.
For a person engaged in manual activities it requires no stretch of imagination to understand that a loss of hands is a complete deprivation of the ability to earn.
Nothing—at least in the facts of this case—can restore lost hands.
But the measure of compensation must reflect a genuine attempt of the law to restore the dignity of the being.
Our yardsticks of compensation should not be so abysmal as to lead one to question whether our law values human life.
If it does as it must it must provide a realistic recompense for the pain of loss and the trauma of suffering.
Awards of compensation are not law s doles.
In a discourse of rights they constitute entitlements under law.
Our conversations about law must shift from a paternalistic subordination of the individual to an assertion of enforceable rights as intrinsic to human dignity.
15.
The Tribunal has noted that the appellant is unable to even eat or to attend to a visit to the toilet without the assistance of an attendant.
In this background it would be a denial of justice to compute the disability at 90%.
The disability is indeed total.
Having regard to the age of the appellant the Tribunal applied a multiplier of 18.
In the circumstances the compensation payable to the appellant on account of the loss of income including future prospects would be Rs 18 14 400.
In addition to this amount the appellant should be granted an amount of Rs 2 lakhs on account of pain suffering and loss of amenities.
The amount awarded by the Tribunal towards medical expensesfor extra nourishment and for attendant s expenses Rs 1 lakh) is maintained.
The Tribunal has declined to award any amount towards future treatment.
The appellant should be allowed an amount of Rs 3 lakhs towards future medical expenses.
The appellant is thus awarded a total sum of Rs 25 38 308 by way of compensation.
The appellant would be entitled to interest at the rate of 9% pa. on the compensation from the date of the filing of the claim petition.
The liability to pay compensation has been fastened by the Tribunal and by the High Court on the insurer owner and driver jointly and severally which is affirmed.
The amount shall be deposited before the Tribunal within a period of 6 weeks from today and shall be paid over to the appellant upon proper identification.” 10.
The recent decision in Parminder Singh v. New India Assurance Co Ltd15 involved an accident victim who underwent surgery for hemiplegia16.
According to the treating medic he could not work as a labourer or perform any agricultural work or work as a driverthe assessment of his disability was at 75% and of a permanent nature.
The court held that: “5.2.
On the basis of the affidavit filed by the employer of the appellant we accept that the income of the appellant was Rs 10 000 pm at the time of the accident for the purpose of computing the compensation payable to him.
51.
The appellant has however produced an affidavit by his employer in this Court.
As per the said affidavit the appellant was earning Rs 10 000 pm at the time of the accident.
53.
Taking the income of the appellant as Rs 10 000 pm with future prospects @ 50% as awarded by the High Court the total income of the appellant would come to Rs 15 000 pm 54.
The appellant was 23 years old at the time when the accident occurred.
Applying the multiplier of 18 the loss of future earnings suffered by the appellant would work out to Rs 15 000 × 12 × 18 = Rs 32 40 000.
57.
In K Suresh v. New India Assurance Co Ltd12 SCC 274 this Court held that17: is noteworthy that an adjudicating to state “10.
It authority while compensation has to keep in view the sufferings of the injured person which would include his inability to lead a full life his incapacity to enjoy the normal amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries and his ability to earn as much as he used to earn or could have 15 7 SCC 217 17 at page 279 para 10 16 Weakness of one half of the body on the left side in this case caused by an accident.
earned.
Hence while computing compensation approach of the Tribunal or a court has to be broad based.
Needless to say it would involve some guesswork as there cannot be any mathematical exactitude or a the quantum of to determine compensation.
In determination of compensation the fundamental criterion of “just compensation” should be 59.
In the present case it is an admitted position that it is not possible for the appellant to get employed as a driver or do any kind of manual labour or engage in any agricultural operations whatsoever for his sustenance.
In such circumstances the High Court has rightly assessed the appellant s functional disability at 100% insofar as his loss of earning capacity is concerned.
The appellant is therefore awarded Rs 32 40 000 towards loss of earning capacity” 11.
Yet later and more recently in an accident case which tragically left in its wake a young girl in a life long state of paraplegia this court in Kajal v. Jagdish Chand 18 reiterated that in addition to loss of earnings compensation for future prospects too could be factored in and observed that: “14.
In Concord of India Insurance Co Ltd v. Nirmala Devi4 SCC 365 : 1979 SCC996 : 1980 ACJ 55] this Court held :“2.
… the determination of the quantum must be liberal not niggardly since the law values life and limb in a free country in generous scales.” 15.
In RD Hattangadi v. Pest Control P) Ltd.(P) Ltd. 1 SCC 551 : 1995 SCC250] dealing with the different heads of compensation in injury cases this Court held thus :18 4 SCC 413. speaking while the amount of “9.
Broadly compensation payable to a victim of an accident the damages have to be assessed separately as pecuniary damages and special damages.
Pecuniary damages are those which the victim has actually incurred and which are capable of being calculated in terms of money whereas non pecuniary damages are those which are incapable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations.
In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary damages may include expenses incurred by the claimant:medical attendance loss of earning of profit up to the date of trial other material loss.
So far as non pecuniary damages are concerned they may include : damages for mental and physical shock pain and suffering already suffered or likely to be suffered in the future damages to compensate for the loss of amenities of life which may include a variety of matters i.e. on account of injury the claimant may not be able to walk run or sit damages for loss of expectation of life i.e. on account of injury the normal longevity of the person inconvenience hardship discomfort disappointment frustration and mental stress in is shortened 16.
In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar1 SCC 343 :1 SCC164 :1 SCC1161] this Court laid down the heads under which compensation is to be awarded for personal injuries :“6.
The heads under which compensation is awarded in personal injury cases are the following: Pecuniary damagesi) Expenses relating to treatment hospitalisation medicines and miscellaneous transportation ii) Loss of earningswhich the injured would have made had he not been injured comprising: a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.
iii) Future medical expenses.
Non pecuniary damagesfood iv) Damages for pain suffering and trauma as a consequence of the injuries.
v) Loss of amenitiesLoss of expectation of life (ii)(a) and iii) andrelating to loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability future medical expenses loss of amenities and loss of expectation of life.” 17.
In K Suresh v. New India Assurance Co Ltd.12 SCC 274 :2 SCC279 :4 SCC638] this Court held as follows :“2.
… There cannot be actual compensation for anguish of the heart or for mental tribulations.
The quintessentiality lies in the pragmatic computation of the loss sustained which has to be in the realm of realistic approximation.
Therefore Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 stipulates that there should be grant of “just compensation”.
Thus it becomes a challenge for a court of law to determine “just compensation” which is neither a bonanza nor a windfall and simultaneously should not be a pittance.” Loss of earnings 20.
Both the courts below have held that since the girl was a young child of 12 years only notional income of Rs 15 000 pa. can be taken into consideration.
We do not think this is a proper way of assessing the future loss of income.
This young girl after studying could have worked and would have earned much more than Rs 15 000 pa. Each case has to be decided on its own evidence but taking notional income to be Rs 15 000 pa. is not at all justified.
The appellant has placed before us material to show that the minimum wages payable 14 to a skilled workman is Rs 4846 per month.
In our opinion this would be the minimum amount which she would have earned on becoming a major.
Adding 40% for the future prospects it works to be Rs 678440 per month i.e. 81 41280 pa.
Applying the multiplier of 18 it works out to Rs 14 65 430.40 which is rounded off to Rs 14 66 000.” In view of the above decisive rulings of this court the High Court clearly erred in holding that compensation for loss of future prospects could not be awarded.
In addition to loss of future earningsthe appellant is also entitled to compensation for loss of future prospects @ 40%incurred permanent disability i.e. loss of his right handleads to near extinction of income generation.
If the age of the victim is beyond 40 the scope of rehabilitation too diminishes.
These individual factors are of crucial importance which are to be borne in mind while determining the 15 earning capacity.
extent of permanent disablement for the purpose of assessment of loss of In Neerupam Mohan Mathur v. New India Assurance Company19 this court considered the case of a victim whose injury was assessed to 70% as loss of earning capacity for amputation of the arm he was a postgraduate diploma holder in mechanical engineering 32 years of age and earning about ₹ 3000 per month.
This court held approving the High Court’s order as follows: “12.
In the present case the percentage of permanent disability has not been expressed by the doctors with reference to the full body or with reference to a particular limb.
However it is not in dispute that the claimant suffered such a permanent disability as a result of injuries that he is not in a position of doing the specialised job of designing refrigeration and air conditioning.
For the said reason the claimant s services were terminated by his employer but that does not mean that the claimant is not capable to do any other job including the desk job.
Having qualification of BSc degree and postgraduate diploma in Mechanical Engineering he can perform any job where application of mind is required than any physical work.
13.
In view of the forgoing discussion we find no grounds made out to interfere with the finding of the High Court which determined the percentage of loss of earning capacity to 70% adopting the percentage of loss of earning capacity as per the Workmen s Compensation Act.
The total loss of income was thus rightly calculated by the High Court at Rs 6 04 800.” 15.
Later in another judgment i.e. Jakir Hussein v. Sabir20 this court had to consider the correctness of a compensation assessment based on the High Court’s analysis of the injury to the victim 14 SCC 15 20 7 SCC 252 incapable of driving any vehicle).
The High Court had assessed permanent disablement at 30% though the doctor had certified it to be 55%.
This court reversing the High Court order observed inter alia that: “… Due to this injury the doctor has stated that the appellant had great difficulty to move his shoulder wrist and elbow and pus was coming out of the injury even two years after the accident and the treatment was taken by him.
The doctor further stated in his evidence that the appellant got delayed joined fracture in the humerus bone of his right hand with wiring and nailing and that he had suffered 55% disability and cannot drive any motor vehicle in future due to the same.
He was once again operated upon during the pendency of the appeal before the High Court and he was hospitalised for 10 days.
The appellant was present in person in the High Court and it was observed and noticed by the High Court that the right hand of the appellant was completely crushed and deformed.
In view of the doctor s evidence in this case the Tribunal and the High Court have erroneously taken the extent of permanent disability at 30% and 55% respectively for the calculation of amount towards the loss of future earning capacity.
No doubt the doctor has assessed the permanent disability of the appellant at 55%.
However it is important to consider the relevant fact namely that the appellant is a driver and driving the motor vehicle is the only means of livelihood for himself as well as the members of his family.
Further it is very crucial to note that the High Court has clearly observed that his right hand was completely crushed and deformed.
16.
In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar1 SCC 343 this Court specifically gave the illustration of a driver who has permanent disablement of hand and stated that the loss of future earnings capacity would be virtually 100%.
Therefore clearly when it comes to loss of earning due to permanent disability the same may be treated as 100% loss caused to the appellant since he will never be able to work as a driver again.
The contention of the respondent Insurance Company that the appellant could take up any other alternative employment is no justification to avoid their vicarious liability.
Hence the loss of earning is determined by us at Rs 54 000 per annum.
Thus by applying the appropriate multiplier as per the principles laid down by this Court in Sarla Verma v. DTC6 SCC 121 :2 SCC770 :2 SCC1002] the 17 total loss of future earnings of the appellant will be at Rs 54 000 × 16 = Rs 8 64 000.” 16.
Recently in Anthony Alias Anthony Swamy v. Managing Director K.S.R.T.C21 where the victim was a painter by profession a three judge bench had followed Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar22 and Nagarajappa v. Divisional Manager Oriental Insurance Company Limited23.
The High Court had assessed the injury to be 25% permanent disability although the treating doctor had said that the injury incurred by the bus passenger was 75% of the left leg and 375% for the whole body.
In Raj Kumar24 the physical disability of the upper limb was determined as 68% in proportion to 22 23% of the whole body.
The High Court had assessed the injury as 25% and granted compensation.
However this court assessed the injury on the basis that the disability was 75% stating as follows: to assess it proper this reduction in percentage much “9.
PW3 had assessed the physical functional disability of the left leg of the appellant at 75% and total body disability at 375%.
The High Court has physical disability at 25% of the whole body only.
There is no less any permanent functional disability suffered by the appellant.
The extent of physical functional disability in the facts of the case has to be considered in a manner so as to grant just and proper compensation to the appellant towards loss of future earning.
The earning capacity of the appellant as on the date of the accident stands completely negated and not reduced.
He has been rendered permanently incapable of working as a painter or do any manual work.
Compensation for loss of future earning therefore has to be proper and just to enable him to live a life of dignity and not compensation which is elusive.
If the 75% physical disability has rendered the appellant permanently disabled from pursuing his normal vocation 21 SCC OnLine SC 493.
22 1 SCC 343 23 13 SCC 323.
24 Supra n.22 or any similar work it is difficult to comprehend the grant of compensation to him in ratio to the disability to the whole body.
The appellant is therefore held entitled to compensation for loss of future permanent physical earning based functional disability recalculated with the salary of Rs. 5 500 with multiplier of 14 at Rs. 6 93 000 .” 17.
The question of amount of compensation payable to one suffering injury as a result of motor vehicle accident was considered in Syed Sadiq & Ors. v. Divisional Manager United Insurance Company Limited 25 when this Court had to apply the correct standard for awarding compensation for loss of future prospects for a vegetable vendor whose right leg had to be amputated as a result of a motor accident.
The High Court had considered the disability to be 65%.
This court held as follows: “7.
Further the appellant claims that he was working as a vegetable vendor.
It is true that a vegetable vendor might not require mobility to the extent that he sells vegetables at one place.
However the occupation of vegetable vending is not confined to selling vegetables from a particular location.
It rather involves procuring vegetables from the whole sale market or the farmers and then selling it off in the retail market.
This often involves selling vegetables in the cart which requires 100% mobility.
But even by conservative approach if we presume that the vegetable vending by the appellant claimant involved selling vegetables from one place the claimant would require assistance with his mobility in bringing vegetables to the market place which otherwise would be extremely difficult for him with an amputated leg.
We are required to be sensitive while dealing with manual labour cases where loss of limb is often equivalent to loss of livelihood.
Yet considering that the appellant claimant is still capable to fend for his livelihood once he is brought in the market place we determine the disability at 85% to determine the loss of 8.
The appellant claimant in his appeal further claimed that he had been earning 2 SCC 735 19 document to establish his loss of income.
It is difficult for us to convince ourselves as to how a labour involved in an unorganized sector doing his own business is expected to produce documents to prove his monthly income.” In Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co Ltd26 the appellant at the time of accident was a final year engineeringdegree student in a reputed college.
He was a brilliant student and had passed all his semester examinations with distinction.
He suffered grievous injuries and remained in a coma for about two months his studies were disrupted as he was moved to different hospitals for surgeries.
For many months his condition remained serious his right hand was amputated and vision seriously affected.
This court accepted his claim and held that he was permanently disabled to the extent of 70%.
In Mohan Soni v. Ram Avtar Tomar27 again a case of injury entailing loss of a leg the court held that medical evidence of the extent of disability should not be mechanically scaled down: “8.
On hearing the counsel for the parties and on going through the materials on record we are of the view that both the Tribunal and the High Court were in error in pegging down the disability of the appellant to 50% with reference to Schedule I of the Workmen s Compensation Act 1923.
In the context of loss of future earning any physical disability resulting from an accident has to be judged with reference to the nature of work being performed by the person suffering the disability.
This is the basic premise and once that is grasped it clearly follows that the same injury or loss may affect two different persons in different ways.
Take the case of a marginal farmer who does his cultivation work himself and ploughs his land with his own two hands or the puller of a cycle ricks