Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned writ petition preferred by the appellant herein and has confirmed the order passed by the Presiding Officer Labour Court IV U.P.
Kanpur Nagar under Section 33(C of the Industrial Disputes Act the original writ difference of wages from 01.04.2006 to 31.032012.
The said application was contested by the appellant herein categorical stand of the appellant that respondent No.2 the establishment as a salesman.
That by order dated 28.11.2017 the learned Presiding Officer Labour Court allowed the said application and directed the appellant passed by the learned Presiding Officer Labour Court Court.
By the impugned judgment and order the High dismissing the writ petition and confirming the order and respondent No.2 and that it was seriously disputed that respondent No.2 was at any point of time in have entertained allowed the application under Section order passed by the Labour Court is completely without jurisdiction.
Therefore the High Court ought to have set India and another Vs. Kankuben By Lrs.
and Others 9 SCC 292 in support of his submissions that in a proceeding under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act the Labour Court cannot adjudicate the dispute of entitlement or the basis of the 32 Making the above submissions and relying on the above The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Dr. Vinod W­6 to show that respondent No.2 was working as a salesman with the appellant.
It is submitted that the appellant came out with a false case to get out of the application.
It is therefore submitted that when on appreciation of evidence and considering the material It is submitted that when on the face of the record available it was found by the Labour Court that was found a difference in the salary pay for the period At the outset it is required to be noted that respondent No.2 herein filed an application before the Labour Court under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act demanding difference of wages from 01.04.2006 to No.2 that he was working with the appellant as a stand that respondent No.2 was never engaged by the appellant.
It was specifically the case on behalf of the appellant that respondent No.2 had never worked in the establishment in the post of salesman.
Therefore once there was a serious dispute that respondent No.2 had very serious dispute raised by the appellant that claimed by respondent No.2 thereafter it was not open for the Labour Court to entertain disputed questions and adjudicate upon the employer­employee relationship between the appellant and respondent No.2.
As per the has no jurisdiction and cannot adjudicate dispute of is based.
As held by this Court in the case of Ganesh Razak and Anr. the labour court’s jurisdiction law without prior adjudication or recognition of the disputed claim of the workmen proceedings for In the case of Kankuben it is observed and a pre­existing benefit or one flowing from a pre­existing right.
The difference between a pre­existing right or benefit on one hand and the right or benefit which is no prior adjudication on the issue whether respondent salesman and the documents relied upon by respondent appropriate proceedings by way of reference and get his right crystalized and or adjudicate upon.
Therefore the order passed by the Labour Court was beyond the jurisdiction conferred under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The High Court has not appreciated the aforesaid facts and has confirmed the same without adverting to the scope and ambit of the present appeal succeeds.
The impugned judgment and hereby quashed and set aside.
Respondent No.2 is under the Industrial Disputes Act including that of reference to adjudicate his right as an employee of the appellant as claimed by him.
As and when such proceedings are initiated the same to be considered in anyway being influenced by the present order as this parties on the aspect of employer­employee relationship