1.
The present Writ Petition arises out of the incident dated 5012022 wherein on a visit to Hussainiwala District the country and takes up causes that are in public interest “(a) Take cognizance of the serious and deliberate lapse on part of the Respondent Nos. 1 2 ad 3 Direct the learned District Judge Bhatinda to collect all official documents and materials from all possible sources pertaining to the movements and deployment of Punjab Police in connection with the or direction fixing responsibility of the Respondent No. 2 and Respondent No. 3 and place them under 3.
Petitioner contends that the incident constitutes a very grave 4.
Given the seriousness of the subject matter and the need to security apparatus we took up the matter on the 07th January General on behalf of Union of India and Mr. DS Patwalia on behalf of the Petitioner the learned Solicitor General Mr. Tushar Mehta and the learned Advocate security of WP(C)No.13 2022 the Hon’ble Prime deem it appropriate for the time being to direct the Prime Minister’s scheduled tour of Punjab on 05th 3.
We direct the Director General of Police Union General to be nominated by the Director General National Investigation Agency to assist the Registrar Group and any other Central State agencies to cooperate and to provide necessary assistance in 5.
We direct the Registrar General Punjab and Haryana High Court to keep the records in his safe order electronically forthwith to the Registrar General Punjab and Haryana High Court the Director General of Police Union Territory of Chandigarh the Director General National Investigation Agency and the Principal Secretary Home State of Punjab been submitted wherein it has been stated that the relevant records have been received seized and secured.
The same 6.
On the previous date of hearing it was also brought to our carry out a thorough probe into the lapses that occurred during the Firozpur visit of the Hon’ble Prime Minister.
The Committee comprised of a Former Judge of the Punjab and Justice Government of Punjab.
It was urged on behalf of the constitution of an Enquiry Committee by the State was 7.
The State of Punjab on the other hand has placed on record India Ministry of Home Affairs Internal Security­I Division Punjab including its Chief Secretary and Director General of within 24 hours as to why disciplinary action under the All be initiated against them for their “omissions and commissions”.
The learned Advocate General for the State of India has in a way already held the officers of Government of Punjab ‘guilty’ of the alleged negligence and or breach of security of the Hon’ble Prime Minister.
He maintained that discredit the State Government.
All the same the learned more than willing to have an independent enquiry of the length and studied the provisions of the Special Protection Group Act 1988 along with the relevant quite comprehensive with respect to ensuring proximate security of the Prime Minister or a former Prime Minister or their family members as the case may be.
The Blue Book contains an unambiguous and detailed procedure to be observed by the State Authorities and the Special Protection object is to avoid any human error negligence or any willful his visit to Firozpur on 5th January 2022 is not seriously disputed by either party.
There is however a blame game between the State and Central Government as to who is 10.
We therefore find merit in the submission of Shri Maninder are the Officer(s) Authority responsible for the above­stated 11.
The learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India supported the submission of the Petitioner and prayed for a 12.
Keeping the above submissions made by the parties in view we left to be resolved through one­sided enquiries.
A judicially trained independent mind duly assisted by officers who are well acquainted with the security considerations and the pursuant to our earlier order would be best placed to 13.
We therefore deem it appropriate to appoint an Enquiry ii.
Director General or his nominee not below the rank of Inspector General of Police of National Investigation iii.
Director General of Police Union Territory of Registrar General Punjab and Haryana High Court­ 14.
The following are the Terms of Reference for the Enquiry ii.
Who are responsible for such a breach and to what safety and security of other Constitutional Any other incidental issue that the Committee may 15.
The Enquiry Committee is requested to submit its report at 16.
Let the entire record seized pursuant to our order dated 7th January 2022 be handed over to the Chairperson of the They shall be provided full secretarial assistance official car 18.
Till conclusion of the proceedings of the Enquiry Committee constituted above the enquiries ordered by the Central Government and the State Government shall be kept in 19.
List the matter after receipt of the Report of the Enquiry