 Mithun Sl.
No05 D L Ct.No30.
CRM 2717 2021 In re: An application under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in connection with GR Case No.61 21 arising out of Hemnagar Coastal Police Station Case No02 21 dated 05012021 under Section 14 14C of the Foreigners Act 1946 In the matter of : Khadija Begam Mr.Satadru Lahiri Adv Mr.Safdarv Azam Adv Mrs. Faria Hossain Adv.
Ms. Baisali Basu Adv … for the petitioner …for the State Pressing a bail of the petitioner it is submitted by the learned Advocate for the petitioner that one Biplab Dey SI of Police Hemnagar Costal Police Station has submitted a report on 23rd March 2021 in compliance with the order dated 17th March 2021 wherein he submitted that accused petitioner produced voter identity card and Aadhaar card before this Court for the first time to claim her citizenship of this Country.
However he has produced the certified copy of the order sheets of GR Case No621 wherefrom it is learnt that the said documents were actually produced before the learned Magistrate who directed the Investigating Officer to conduct enquiry and submit a report with regard to the said documents.
But without submitting a report the Investigating Officer submitted charge sheet in G.R.Case No.61 of 2021 which prompted the learned Magistrate to reject the application for bail of the petitioner under Section 437 of the Code of Criminal Procedure It is frankly submitted by the learned Advocate for the petitioner that in the EPIC card the name of her husband is shown as Roshith Khan but in the F.I.R. as per the statement of the petitioner the name of her husband was recorded as Late Salam Hauladar.
This discrepancy was sought to be clear from the Investigating Agency.
The Investigating Agency has mentioned the discrepancy in the EPIC Card and the statement of the accused with regard to husband’s name of the petitioner Learned Advocate for the petitioner submits that this is merely a typographical error and it can be rectified at any point of time.
However the petitioner is a resident of Bangalore.
A rent agreement was executed between the petitioner and her landlord at Bangalore.
Local Tahsildar issued a residential certificate in the name of the petitioner Therefore the learned Advocate for the petitioner has prayed for further enquiry into the matter by Investigating Officer and a report It is needless to say that residential certificate may be obtained by any resident he may be an Indian National or Foreign National if he stays at a particular place.
Residential certificate is not a proof of citizenship.
I have already recorded that the Advocate for the petitioner has prayed for further enquiry with regard to the name of the husband of the It is already recorded that charge sheet has been submitted in this case.
The petitioner is at liberty to make such prayer before the learned Trial Court during trial of the case and in such event the learned Trial Court will cause enquiry during the trial on the basis of the evidence on record At this stage I do not find any merit in the application for Prayer for bail is thus rejected (Bibek Chaudhuri J