IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4690 OF 2018 Arising out of SLP(C) No.167817 AMEET LALCHAND SHAH AND OTHERS …Appellants RISHABH ENTERPRISES AND ANOTHER ...Respondents JUDGMENT R. BANUMATHI J This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 17.04.2017 passed by the Delhi High Court in FAO(OS)No817 in and by which the Division Bench affirmed the order of the Single Judge dismissing the application filed under Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996by holding that the agreements between the parties are not inter connected with the principal agreement dated 05.03.2012 and therefore the parties cannot be referred to arbitration as per the decision in Sukanya HoldingsLtd.
v. Jayesh H Pandya and anotherthe sole proprietorship concern of the second respondent Dr. AM Singhvi entered into two agreements with M s Juwi India Renewable Energies Pvt. Ltd.namely: Equipment and Material Supply Contract for purchase of power generating equipments to the tune of Rs.8 89 80 730 and Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract for installation and commissioning of the Solar Plant for Rs.2 20 19 270 .
Both these agreements contain arbitration clause.
The first respondent Rishabh entered into Sale and Purchase Agreement dated 05.03.2012 with the second appellant company Astonfield Renewables Private Limited for purchasing CIS Photovoltaic products to be leased to appellant No.3 Dante Energy Pvt Ltd.to be installed at the Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh.
As per the agreement these products were valued for Rs.25 16 00 000 .
The second appellant Astonfield received Rs.21 40 49 999 from the respondents under various cheques issued by the Rishabh.
This agreement dated 05.03.2012 does not contain the arbitration clause.
According to the appellants an amount of Rs10 00 00 000 by cash was paid back to the sons of Dr. AM Singhvi i.e. Rs2 50 00 000 to Mr. Avishkar Singhvi and Rs.7 50 00 000 to Mr. Anubhav Singhvi.
An Equipment Lease Agreement dated 14032012 was entered into between the Rishabh and Dante Energy whereby Dante Energy agreed to pay the Rishabh Rs.13 50 000 as lease rent for March 2012 and from April 2012 onwards the said rent payable was Rs.28 26 000 .
The Solar Plant at Jhansi has been commissioned and energized on 16.03.2012 Gist of the agreements are as under: S.No.
DATE OF entered into two M s. Juwi India Energies Pvt into agreement with M s. Aston into agreement with M s Dante Energy Pvt Ltd appellant no3) PURPOSE OF CONTRACT i) Rishabh Rs8 89 80 730 to purchase ii) Engineering and commission of the at Rs.2 20 19 270 Jhansi Photovoltaic products to be leased to Dante Energy energizing solar plant installed at Rs.21 40 49 999 Jhansi no3 Both agreements contain arbitration Parties agreed that the seat of arbitration shall be does not contain Dante agreed to pay Rs.13 50 000 as lease rent for the equipment for March 2012 and from April 2012 onwards Rs.28 26 000 per contains arbitration clause.
Parties have agreed that the seat of arbitration shall be Dispute arose between the parties when respondents alleged that appellant No. 3 Dante Energy has defaulted in payment of rent and that Astonfield committed fraud by inducing the Rishabh to purchase the Photovoltaic products by investing huge amount.
The respondents have also alleged that the appellants have committed misrepresentation and criminal breach of trust so far as the equipments procured and leased to Dante Energy.
The respondents have also filed a criminal complaint before the Economic Offences Wing at Delhi against the appellants based on which FIR No. 30 of 2015 was registered.
The appellants have filed writ petition bearing CWP No.619 of 2016 before the High Court of Delhi seeking quashing of the said FIR which is sub judice There was also an enquiry by the Income Tax Authorities seeking explanation from the appellants regarding transfer of money to the sons of Dr. AM Singhvi i.e. Rs2 50 00 000 to Mr. Avishkar Singhvi and Rs.7 50 00 000 to Mr. Anubhav Singhvi.
Appellant No.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah was summoned by the Income Tax Authorities seeking explanation with regard to transfer of the said money to the sons of Dr Owing to the dispute between the parties appellant No.3 Dante Energy issued notice dated 13022016 invoking arbitration clause and nominated Justice Sujata Manohar former Judge Supreme Court of India as the Arbitrator.
The respondents namely the Rishabh and its sole proprietor preferred a Civil SuitNo.1916 before the High Court on 11032016 against all the appellants levelling various allegations including fraud and misrepresentation.
In the suit multiple reliefs were claimed: for a declaration that Sale and Purchase Agreement dated 05032012 Equipment and Material Supply Contract Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract both dated 01.02.2012 and Equipment Lease Agreement dated 14032012 are vitiated by serious fraud committed by the appellants and that the agreements are void for recovery of a sum of Rs.32 22 80 288 which the appellants are jointly and severely liable to pay to the respondents to pay a sum of Rs.19 31 74 804 as the interest on the aforesaid amount of Rs.32 22 80 288 at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of the agreement i.e. 01.02.2012 till the date of the realization andto pay arrears of lease rent On receipt of notice and summons in the suit the appellants defendants preferred application IA No41516 under Section 8 of the Act seeking for reference of the dispute between the parties to arbitration pertaining to all the four agreements.
The appellants sought for reference to arbitration of all the four agreements by contending that the Sale and Purchase Agreementis the main agreement and that other three agreements are inter connected as they are executed between the same parties and the obligations and the performance of the terms of the agreements are inter connected viz commissioning of the Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi U.P.
The respondents Rishabh and Dr. AM Singhvi resisted the application by contending that the suit is for declaration that the agreements are vitiated due to fraud and misrepresentation and while so the matter cannot be referred to arbitration.
It was further averred that the suit is neither concerned about the agreement dated 01.02.2012 with Juwi India nor concerned about Equipment Lease Agreement 14032012) whereas the suit is concerned about the false assurances and fraud played by the appellants Ameet Lalchand Shah and Dante Energy regarding which a criminal case has also been registered and hence the dispute is not referable to arbitration.
The learned Single Judge by order dated 15.03.2017 dismissed the application filed under Section 8 of the Act holding that the Equipment Lease Agreement between Rishabh and Dante Energy cannot be treated as the mother principal agreement and the agreements between the respondents and Astonfield and Juwi India cannot be said to be ancillary agreements to the same.
The learned Single Judge further held that not only the respondents accuse the appellants of fraud but appellants also accuse the respondents of fraud concealment and suppression of material facts and that there was also a registration of a criminal case based on the complaint filed by the respondents and also the enquiry by the Income Tax Authorities regarding transfer of Rs10 00 00 000 to the sons of Dr. AM Singhvi and when there are such serious issues between the parties they cannot be referred to arbitration.
10.
Being aggrieved by the dismissal of the application the appellants preferred appeal before the Division Bench which came to be dismissed The Division Bench pointed out the difference in the language between Section 8 and Section 45 of the Act and after referring to Chloro Controls India Private Limited v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc and others 1 SCC 641 observed that Sukanya Holdings was not overruled.
The Division Bench further pointed out that in spite of amendment brought in under Section 8 since the main principal agreementSale and Purchase Agreementdoes not contain an arbitration clause the matter cannot be referred to arbitration.
After referring to A Ayyasamy v A Paramasivam and others 10 SCC 386 the Division Bench held that in view of serious allegations of fraud arbitration of such dispute is excluded.
11.
We have heard Mr. Shanti Bhushan learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr. Kapil Sibal learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents.
Upon consideration of the rival submissions the following points arise for consideration in this appeal: 1.
Whether all the four agreements viz. Equipment and Material Supply Contractbetween Rishabh and Juwi India Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract between Rishabh and Juwi India iii) Sale and Purchase Agreement between Rishabh and Astonfield andEquipment Lease Agreement 14032012) between Rishabh and Dante Energy are inter connected to refer the parties to arbitration though there is no arbitration clause in the Sale and Purchase Agreement 05.03.2012) between Rishabh and Astonfield 2.
Whether reference of the dispute between the parties to arbitration is to be refused on the ground of allegations of fraud levelled against the appellants by the respondents in the plaint or whether the agreements ought to be taken as commercial undertaking of the parties “with a sense of business efficacy” as held in Ayyasamy case First the Rishabh entered into two agreements with Juwi India dated 01.02.2012: Equipment and Material Supply Contract andalso contains arbitration clausebetween Rishabh and Astonfield for Rs.25 16 00 000 does not contain the arbitration clause.
The fourth agreement namely Equipment Lease Agreementbetween Rishabh and Dante Energy contains arbitration clauseEquipment and Material Supply Contract ii) Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract Sale and Purchase Agreement andEquipment Lease Agreement shows that all the four agreements were for the single purpose to commission 2 MWp Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh to be purchased by Rishabh and leasing the equipments to The averments in the plaint also prima facie indicate that all the four agreements are inter connected and that appellant No.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah is stated to be the promoter and controlling man of both Astonfield as well as Dante Energy.
We may usefully refer to the relevant averments in the plaint which read as under: “Defendant No1 Mr. Ameet Lalchand Shah is the Promoter of the Defendant Nos. 2 and 3 Companies.
Through his other group companies Defendant No1 is also the controlling shareholder of Defendant Nos. 2 and 3.
He is involved in running the day to day affairs of the said companies and it is on his instructions and directions and under his overall control and dictation that the said companies are run.
He is the co founder and the co chairman of the “Astonfield Group” consisting of various companies incorporated both outside of and in India it will be found that it is in fact Defendant No1 only who is the real entity behind all the other defendants and it is on his directions that the others have made played their respective roles in and or participated in the transactions in question .
Further Defendant No1 has also been corresponding with the plaintiffs on behalf of Defendant Nos 2 and 3. … The said Defendant No1 is also responsible for running the day to day affairs of this Company which is run on his directions and under his control.
Defendant No.2 entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement with the Plaintiffs the transaction under which is vitiated by serious fraud.
” Though there are two agreements individual parties to the Sale and Purchase Agreementand the Equipment Lease Agreement Dante Energy) are one and the same .
Though Juwi India is not the defendant as discussed infra Equipment and Material Supply Contract and Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract with Juwi India itself were for the purpose of commissioning Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh The clauses in the Equipment and Material Supply Contract 01.02.2012) between Rishabh and Juwi India clearly indicate that the Rishabh has entered into Lease Agreement with Dante Energy and that the Rishabh proposes to source Photovoltaic products panels etc. and similar Solar Power generating equipments for onward lease of those goods to Dante Energy.
The following clauses in the said Equipment and Material Supply Contract would clearly establish the link of Equipment and Material Supply Contract with the main Lease Agreement with Dante “This Equipment and Material Supply contract is between M s Rishabh Enterprises ..Juwi India Renewable Energies Private Limited ..(the Whereas: The Client is entering into Lease Agreement with M s Dante Energy Pvt Ltd. and the Lesseehas necessary authorizations to develop own operate and commercially exploit a 2 MWp thin film photovoltaic solar plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi UP transmission line from power plant to the Grid Substation bay extension work at the Grid Substation including all of the infrastructure and relevant installations required to connect the electricity producing equipment to the distribution transmission grid at the Grid Substation in UP Indiaproposes to source Photovoltaic Products Panels Inverters Transformers and similar solar power generating equipments etc. for sale of goods to the Client and the Client wishes to engage the Supplierfor supply of Equipment and materials with respect to the development of the Solar Park The M s Dante Energy Private Limitedwill have the right to inspect the respective goods to be sourced by the Clientand based on the confirmation from the M s Dante Energy Private Limitedthe respective goods will be purchased by the Clientfor onward sale to M s Dante Energy Private Limited and will be consigned to the project site The Supplier is aggregable to supply the Equipment and Materials to the Client in accordance with the terms of this Contract.” Likewise clauses in the agreement for Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract between Rishabh and Juwi India 01022012) also clearly indicate that the agreement was entered into for the purpose of commissioning Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh.
Clause of the agreement that the Rishabh has entered into Equipment Lease Agreement with M s Dante Energyreiterates that the second agreement with Juwi India for engineering installation and commissioning is integrally connected with Equipment Lease Agreementis the owner of certain Photovoltaic products Panels Inverters Transformers and similar solar power generating equipments etc. and is entering into an Equipment Lease Agreement with M s Dante Energy Pvt Ltd.has necessary authorizations to develop own operate and commercially exploit a 2 MWp thin film photovoltaic solar plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi UP transmission line from power plant to the Grid Substation bay extension work at the Grid Substation including all of the infrastructure and relevant installations required to connect the electricity producing equipment to the distribution transmission grid at the Grid Substation in UP Indiaproposes to purchase the Client’s Equipment as required by the Lessee for onward lease to the Lesseerequires the services for design engineering construction erection testing commissioning and handing over of the Facility to the Clientand accordingly the Clienthas agreed to identity the competent Contractor for undertaking the The Contractor has represented to the Client Rishabh) and the Lessee that the Contractor has the requisite experience expertise resources and skills for undertaking and performing all the activities and services required for design engineering construction erection testing commissioning and handing over of the Facility and has submitted an offer to the Client in response to the Technical Specifications as set out by the Clientthe Clientwishes to appoint the Contractor to undertake the Services and to perform all the activities and services required for design engineering construction erecting testing commissioning and handing over of the Facility and the Contractor has agreed to such appointment and to undertake such other duties and obligations as mentioned in this Contract.” The above clauses in the very commencement of the agreement with Juwi India dated 01.02.2012 clearly state that the agreement itself was for the purpose of commissioning Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh for which Dante Energywith Dante Energy.
16.
Equally the Sale and Purchase Agreementbetween M s Astonfield and Rishabh is also for the purpose of onward leasing of goods to Dante Energy as seen from the following clauses: “Sale and Purchase Agreement Astonfiled Renewable Pvt. Ltd. ….. AND Rishabh Enterprises .. agree to sell and to purchase the following products which are required for onwards leasing of goods by the Buyerto Dante Energy Private Limited.
… Lessee) under the terms and conditions stated below Transaction) effective as of the date of last signature below Effective Date): Buyer: Rishabh Enterprises Seller: Astonfield Renewables Private Limited Transaction: The parties agree that this Transaction shall be governed by this Sale and Purchase Agreement and its The products under this Agreement shall be used for the 2 MWp grid connected solar PV power project being set up by the Lessee at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradeshis purchasing the above goods for onward supply lease to lesseewill have the right to inspect the respective goods and based on the confirmation from the Lesseethe respective goods will be purchased by the Buyerfor onward sale to Lesseeand will be consigned to the Project Site.” Though the Sale and Purchase Agreementdoes not have any arbitration clause by the above clauses it is clearly linked with the main agreement Equipment Lease Agreementbetween Rishabh and Dante Energy is only a follow up of all the above three agreements as is clear from the various clauses in the Equipment Lease Agreement.
The relevant clauses of Equipment Lease Agreement are as “Equipment Lease Agreement M s Rishabh Enterprises ….
AND M s Dante Energy Pvt. Ltd ….. is setting up a 2 MWp grid connected solar PV power project at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar PradeshWhereas the Lessor is the owner of certain Photovoltaic products Panels Inverters Transformers and similar solar power generating equipments etc. more particularly described in the First Schedule hereunder written And whereas the Lessee has necessary authorizations to develop own operate and commercially exploit a 2 MWp thin film photovoltaic solar plant on the Sitetransmission line from power plant to the Grid Substation bay extension work at the Grid Substation including all of the infrastructure and relevant installations required to connect the electricity producing equipment to the distribution transmission grid at the Grid Substation in Jhansi Uttar Pradesh India as specified in the Second Scheduleand for this purpose they are in requirement of the Equipments as mentioned in the First Schedule And whereas the Lessee being desirous of obtaining from the Lessoron lease the specified nature of Equipments more particularly described in the First Schedule hereunder written has approached the Lessorand has requested the Lessorto lease out the Equipments to the Lessee on the terms covenants and conditions Delivery Commencement and disbursement It is expressly understood by the Lesseeand Lessor that in the present case the respective Equipments are being sourced from the supplier of Solar Photovoltaic Modular located in the State of Maharashtra ie Astonfield Renewables Private Limited and supplier of other solar power generating equipments like inverters transformers etc. in the State of Karnataka i.e. Juwi India Renewable Energies Private Limited.
These goods have been inspected by the Lesseeand are found suitable for its commercial use of the same Pursuant to this lease agreement the respective Equipments will be purchased by the Lessorfrom the respective Supplier and accordingly the Equipments will be consigned directly to the project site in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Accordingly in the present case the delivery of respective Equipments will be effected by Endorsement of the consignment Note in the favour of Lessee by the Lessorin Article 4 in the Equipment Lease Agreement that delivery and installation shall be at the cost and risk of Rishabhis clearly linked with the Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract between Rishabh and Juwi India The High Court placed reliance upon Sukanya Holdings for dismissal of the application filed under Section 8 of the Act.
In Sukanya Holdings the suit was filed for dissolution of the partnership firm and accounts and inter alia challenged the conveyance deed executed by the partnership firm in favour of M s West End Gymkhana Limited.
An application filed under Section 8 of the Act was opposed by respondent No1 thereon by contending that the subject matter of the suit was not between the contracting parties and that the reliefs claimed are not only against respondents No. 1 and 2 who are the contracting parties but are claimed against the remaining twenty three parties who are the purchasers tenants of disputed flats.
This Court held that if all the parties to the suit are not parties to the agreement then the matter cannot be referred to arbitration since there is no provision in the Act for partly referring the dispute to arbitration.
This Court noted that the buyers were not parties to the arbitration agreement and that the non signatories cannot be referred to arbitration.
In Sukanya Holdings in parasand 16) this Court held as under: “15.
The relevant language used in Section 8 is: “in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement”.
The court is required to refer the parties to arbitration.
Therefore the suit should be in respect of “a matter” which the parties have agreed to refer and which comes within the ambit of arbitration agreement.
Where however a suit is commenced — “as to a matter” which lies outside the arbitration agreement and is also between some of the parties who are not parties to the arbitration agreement there is no question of application of Section 8.
The words “a matter” indicate that the entire subject matter of the suit should be subject to 16.
The next question which requires consideration is — even if there is no provision for partly referring the dispute to arbitration whether such a course is possible under Section 8 of the Act.
In our view it would be difficult to give an interpretation to Section 8 under which bifurcation of the cause of action that is to say the subject matter of the suit or in some cases bifurcation of the suit between parties who are parties to the arbitration agreement and others is possible.
This would be laying down a totally new procedure not contemplated under the Act.
If bifurcation of the subject matter of a suit was contemplated the legislature would have used appropriate language to permit such a course.
Since there is no such indication in the language it follows that bifurcation of the subject matter of an action brought before a judicial authority is not allowed.” 19.
Mr. Sibal learned senior counsel for the respondents submitted that the High Court rightly relied upon Sukanya Holdings as it relates to Part I of the Act that the parties who are not signatories to the arbitration agreementof Chloro Controls this Court held as under: “73.
A non signatory or third party could be subjected to arbitration without their prior consent but this would only be in exceptional cases.
The court will examine these exceptions from the touchstone of direct relationship to the party signatory to the arbitration agreement direct commonality of the subject matter and the agreement between the parties being a composite transaction.
The transaction should be of a composite nature where performance of the mother agreement may not be feasible without aid execution and performance of the supplementary or ancillary agreements for achieving the common object and collectively having bearing on the dispute.
Besides all this the court would have to examine whether a composite reference of such parties would serve the ends of justice.
Once this exercise is completed and the court answers the same in the affirmative the reference of even non signatory parties would fall within the exception afore discussed.” for commissioning of the Solar Plant is the principal main agreement.
The two agreements of Rishabh with Juwi India: Equipment and Material Supply Contract 01.02.2012) and Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contractand the Rishabh’s Sale and Purchase Agreement with Astonfieldare ancillary agreements which led to the main purpose of commissioning the Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh by Dante Energybetween Rishabh and Astonfield does not contain arbitration clause it is integrally connected with the commissioning of the Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi U.P.
by Dante Energy.
Juwi India even though not a party to the suit and even though Astonfield and appellant No.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah are not signatories to the main agreement viz. Equipment Lease Agreementit is a commercial transaction integrally connected with commissioning of Photovoltaic Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi U.P.
Be it noted as per clause(v) of Article 4 parties have agreed that the entire risk cost of the delivery and installation shall be at the cost of the RishabhEngineering Installation and Commissioning Contract and the parties to Sale and Purchase Agreement between Rishabh and Astonfield are one and the same as that of the parties in the main agreement namely Equipment Lease Agreement executed through several agreements contracts.
In such a case all the parties can be covered by the arbitration clause in the main agreement i.e. Equipment Lease Agreementis the main agreement.
The High Court in our view erred in not keeping in view the various clauses in all the three agreements which make them as an integral part of the principal agreement namely Equipment Lease Agreementand the impugned order of the High Court cannot be sustained Amendment to Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 24.
Arbitration and ConciliationAct 2015 has brought in amendment to Section 8 to make it in line with Section 45 of the Act.
In view of the observation made in Sukanya Holdings Law Commission has made recommendation for amendment to Section 8 of the Act Consequent to 2015 Amendment Act Section 8 is amended as under: “8.
Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.
A judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall if a party to the arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under him so applies not later than when the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute then notwithstanding any judgment decree or order of the Supreme Court or any court refer the parties to arbitration no valid arbitration agreement exists unless it finds that prima facie The application referred to in sub section shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy thereof Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available with the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub section and the said agreement or certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement then the party so applying shall file such application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court.
Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub section and that the issue is pending before the judicial authority an arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral award made “Principally four amendments to Section 8(1) have been introduced by the 2015 Amendments the relevant "party" that is entitled to apply seeking reference to arbitration has been clarified amplified to include persons claiming "through or under" such a party to the arbitration agreement scope of examination by the judicial authority is restricted to a finding whether "no valid arbitration agreement exists" and the nature of examination by the judicial authority is clarified to be on a "prima facie basis the cut off date by which an application under Section 8 is to be presented has been defined to mean "the date of" submitting the first statement on the substance of the dispute andthe amendments are expressed to apply notwithstanding any prior judicial precedent.
The proviso to Section 8(2) has been added to allow a party that does not possess the original or certified copy of the arbitration agreement on account of it being retained by the other party to nevertheless apply under Section 8 seeking reference and call upon the other party to produce the same.” at page 695 published by LexisNexis 26.
Amendment to Section 8 by the Act 2015 are to be seen in the background of the recommendations set out in the 246th Law Commission Report.
In its 246th Report Law Commission while recommending the amendment to Section 8 made the following “LC Comment: The words “such of the parties….
to the arbitration agreement” and provisoof the amendment have been proposed in the context of the decision of the Supreme Court in Sukanya Holdings Pvt. Ltd. v. Jayesh H Pandya and Anr5 SCC 531 in cases where all the parties to the dispute are not parties to the arbitration agreement the reference is to be rejected only where such parties are necessary parties to the action and not if they are only proper parties or are otherwise legal strangers to the action and have been added only to circumvent the arbitration agreement.
Provisoof the amendment contemplates a two step process to be adopted by a judicial authority when considering an application seeking the reference of a pending action to arbitration The amendment envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if it finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and void.
If the judicial authority is of the opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally determined by the arbitral tribunal.
However if the judicial authority concludes that the agreement does not exist then the conclusion will be final and not prima facie.
The amendment also envisages that there shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration agreement is null and void 2) The application referred to in sub section shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy thereof or a copy accompanied by an affidavit calling upon the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or duly certified thereof in circumstances where the original arbitration agreement or duly certified copy is retained only by the other party LC Comment: In many transactions involving Government bodies and smaller market players the original duly certified copy of the arbitration agreement is only retained by the former.
This amendment would ensure that the latter class is not prejudiced in any manner by virtue of the same” of the Act would apply notwithstanding any prayer judgment decree or order of the Supreme Court or any other Court.
The High Court laid emphasis upon the word ".....unless it finds that prima facie no valid agreement exists".
The High Court observed that there is no arbitration agreement between Astonfield and Rishabh After referring to Sukanya Holdings and the amended Section 8 and Section 45 of the Act the High Court pointed out the difference in language of Section 8 and Section 45 of the Act.
The High Court distinguished between Sukanya Holdings and Chloro Controls and observed that Sukanya Holdings was not overruled by Chloro Controls.
In paraof the impugned judgment it was held as under: 23.
......The change in Section 8 is that the Court is to in cases where arbitration agreements are relied on to refer the disputes in the suit to arbitration "notwithstanding any judgment decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists".
The Court is of opinion that Sukanya is not per se overruled because the exercise of whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties in relation to the disputes that are the subject matter of the suit has to be carried out.
If there are causes of action that cannot be subjected to arbitration or the suit involves adjudication of the role played by parties who are not signatories to the arbitration agreement it has to continue because prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists" between such non parties and others who are parties 28.
Re: contention: allegations of fraud disable an arbitration: Yet another ground based on which the High Court declined to refer the parties to arbitration is the allegations of fraud levelled by respondents plaintiffs in their plaint against Astonfield and appellant no.1 The High Court held that the respondents levelled allegations of fraud against the appellants which raise serious triable issues of fraud and hence the matter cannot be referred to arbitration.
29.
According to the respondents it is not a case where “fraud is alleged merely to disable an arbitration”.
Mr. Sibal learned senior counsel for respondents contended that the plaint is based on the averments that from inception the intention of appellants defendants was to cheat the respondents and the respondents were made to part with large sums of money on the basis of the misrepresentation made by the appellants.
It was submitted that alternative prayer in the plaint will not convert the fraud suit to a regulatory suit because of alternative prayer since alternative prayer ‘lease rental’ has been projected only as an alternative remedy.
Placing reliance upon Arundhati Mishrav.
Sri Ram Charitra Pandey 2 SCC 29 it was submitted that it is settled law that it is open to the parties to raise mutually inconsistent pleas and the relief could be granted on the alternative plea so raised 30.
Refuting the above contentions Mr. Shanti Bhushan learned senior counsel for the appellants placed reliance upon Ayyasamy case to contend that there are no serious allegations in the plaint to decline reference of the matter to arbitration.
It was submitted that mere allegations of fraud were not sufficient to detract from the performance of the obligation of the parties in terms of the agreement and refer the matter to arbitration.
31.
Under the Act an arbitration agreement means an agreement which is enforceable in law and the jurisdiction of the arbitrator is on the basis of an arbitration clause contained in the arbitration agreement However in a case where the parties alleged that the arbitration agreement is vitiated on account of fraud the Court may refuse to refer the parties to arbitration.
In Ayyasamy case this Court held that mere allegation of fraud is not a ground to nullify the effect of arbitration agreement between the parties and arbitration clause need not be avoided and parties can be relegated to arbitration where merely simple allegations of fraud touched upon internal affairs of parties is levelled Justice AK Sikri observed that it is only in those cases where the Court finds that there are serious allegations of fraud which make a virtual case of criminal offence and where there are complicated allegations of fraud then it becomes necessary that such complex issues can be decided only by the civil court on the appreciation of evidence that needs to be produced.
In paraof Ayyasamy case Justice Sikri held as under: “25…..Therefore the inquiry of the Court while dealing with an application under Section 8 of the Act should be on the aforesaid aspect viz. whether the nature of dispute is such that it cannot be referred to arbitration even if there is an arbitration agreement between the parties.
When the case of fraud is set up by one of the parties and on that basis that party wants to wriggle out of that arbitration agreement a strict and meticulous inquiry into the allegations of fraud is needed and only when the Court is satisfied that the allegations are of serious and complicated nature that it would be more appropriate for the Court to deal with the subject matter rather than relegating the parties to arbitration then alone such an application under Section 8 should be rejected.” 32.
While concurring with Justice Sikri Justice DY Chandrachud pointed out that the duty of the Court is to impart “sense of business to the commercial transactions pointing out that mere allegations of fraud were not sufficient to decline to refer the parties to arbitration.
In paraof Ayyasamy case Justice DY Chandrachud held as under: “48.
The basic principle which must guide judicial decision making is that arbitration is essentially a voluntary assumption of an obligation by contracting parties to resolve their disputes through a private tribunal.
The intent of the parties is expressed in the terms of their agreement.
Where commercial entities and persons of business enter into such dealings they do so with a knowledge of the efficacy of the arbitral process.
The commercial understanding is reflected in the terms of the agreement between the parties.
The duty of the court is to impart to that commercial understanding a sense of business efficacy.” all the agreements contracts contain clauses referring to the main agreement.
It is the duty of the Court to impart the commercial understanding with a “sense of business efficacy” and not by the mere averments made in the plaint.
The High Court was not right in refusing to refer the parties on the ground of the allegations of fraud levelled in the It is only where serious questions of fraud are involved the arbitration can be refused.
In this case as contended by the appellants there were no serious allegations of fraud the allegations levelled against Astonfield is that appellant no.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah misrepresented by inducing the respondents to pay higher price for the purchase of the equipments.
There is of course a criminal case registered against the appellants in FIR No.315 dated 05.03.2015 before the Economic Offences Wing Delhi.
The appellant no.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah has filed Criminal Writ Petition No6116 before the High Court of Delhi for quashing the said FIR.
The said writ petition is stated to be pending and therefore we do not propose to express any views in this regard lest it would prejudice the parties.
Suffice to say that the allegations cannot be said to be so serious to refuse to refer the parties to arbitration In any event the Arbitrator appointed can very well examine the allegations regarding fraud 35.
Main agreement Equipment Lease Agreement for leasing and commissioning of Solar Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh contains arbitration clause and Sale and Purchase Agreement 05.03.2012) between Rishabh and Astonfield are integrally connected with the commercial understanding of commissioning the Solar Project at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh and to resolve the dispute between the parties they are to be referred to arbitration.
The order of the High Court declining to refer the parties to arbitration cannot be sustained and is liable to be set aside.
The four agreements namely: between Rishabh and Juwi India Engineering Installation and Commissioning Contract 01.02.2012) between Rishabh and Juwi India Sale and Purchase Agreement between Rishabh and Astonfield and between Rishabh and Dante Energy and the parties thereon are referred to arbitration.
36.
As per the terms of Equipment Lease Agreement appellant No.3 Dante Energy has to pay lease rentals of Rs.13 67 500 for the month of March 2012 and with effect from April 2012 to pay lease rentals of Rs.28 26 000 per month for a period of fifteen years Learned Senior Counsel for respondents Mr. Sibal has submitted that appellant No.3 Dante Energy has not paid the rentals as per the terms and conditions of Equipment Lease Agreement.
Mr. Sibal has also drawn our attention that Astonfield Solar Rajasthan Pvt Ltd. has transferred 9999% of its shares to ARRLLtd.and Ameet Lalchand Shah has only one shareLtd.
and that Ameet Lalchand Shah has only one share (001%).
It was also submitted that the appellant No.1 Ameet Lalchand Shah was subsequently removed from the Board of Directors of Astonfield Solar Gujarat Pvt Ltd. by the shareholders by EGM dated 17122016.
We do not propose to go into the merits of this contention however keeping in view that Astonfield has transferred its shareholdings qua Rajasthan and Gujarat Solar Power units in our view the interest of the respondents is to be protected till the matter is resolved by the arbitrator by directing the appellants to pay the arrears of lease rent and also to pay the future lease rent for the equipments at the rate of Rs.28 26 000 per month The impugned order of the High Court is set aside and this appeal is allowed.
All the aforesaid four agreements and the parties thereon are referred to arbitration.
By notice dated 13022016 appellants have nominated Justice Sujata Manohar former Judge of the Supreme Court of India as their Arbitrator.
We leave it open to the parties as to the choice of the Arbitrator.
If the parties are not in a position to arrive at consensus as to the Arbitrator the parties shall approach the appropriate High Court for appointment of the Arbitrator.
Appellants are jointly and severely liable to pay the arrears of lease rent and also to pay the future lease rent for the equipments of the PV Solar Power Plant at Dongri Raksa District Jhansi Uttar Pradesh at the rate of Rs.28 26 000 per month till the disposal of the arbitration proceedings.
Such payment of lease rent shall be without prejudice to the contentions of both parties and shall be subject to the final outcome of arbitration proceedings Since parties are referred to arbitration commercial Suit No.817 filed by the respondents on the file of Delhi High Court shall stand disposed of.
No cost [RANJAN GOGOI [R. BANUMATHI New Delhi May 03 2018