These petitions which were heard through video conferencing have been filed by Satish and Vikky @ Vikendra alias Virendra seeking special leave to appeal against a common order dated against conviction under Section 364­A of the Indian Penal Code 1860 and consequential sentence of life The undisputable facts of the case are that on the evening of 12.06.2002 when one Vishal Sarawatwas on his way to Ramvir’s house where he was threatened with a pistol and forcibly was subsequently coerced to write a letter dated 04.07.2002 to his father seeking a ransom of Rs 2 crores.
In the meanwhile the victim’s police regarding his son.
Vikky telephoned the victim’s father on help of Ramvir as an intermediary and cautioned him against complainant to Ramvir’s home on 14072002.
Both the petitioners were present in the house with Vikky having counted the ransom rescued and Rs.31.70 lakhs were recovered.
Although the police witnessed them talking to Ramvir and VishalAshok Satish and Vikky managed to escape from the spot.
They were however The case was after investigation committed to the Additional Sessions Judge Fast Track Court I Ghaziabad.
Eleven witnesses deposed on behalf of the prosecution which included the victim complainant bystanders and various police officers.
In addition one Call Detail Records seized ransom money and a revolver recovered at Placing reliance on a wealth of electronic evidence the trial each accused for the crime of kidnapping for ransom besides All four accused appealed against their convictions before the for ransom have been proved beyond doubt.
But the High Court The High Court thus dismissed the appeals and confirmed the sentence of life imprisonment under Section 364­A of IPC but The aggrieved petitioners Vikky and Satish have filed separate Special Leave Petitions before us which have been heard at considerable length.
On 06092019 this Court tacitly declined to interfere with their conviction for kidnapping and accordingly regarding the petitioners’ entitlement to premature release.
The respondent­State on 18.12.2019 inter­alia informing that Satish’s proposal for premature release under Section 2 of the UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act 1938 was still under consideration whereas Nevertheless keeping in mind the long­period of incarceration prayers for premature release as highlighted by their counsels this Court on 08.06.2020 directed fresh consideration of their cases for “Taking into consideration the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties we direct the learned counsel No.73619 which is stated to be pending before the State as Virendra) in Special Leave Petition No8326 of 2019 which It was brought to the notice of this Court on the next date of hearing that the respondent­State had without due application of mind passed an unreasoned Order dated 13.07.2020 rejecting on 29.01.2018.
This was contended to be in contravention of the individual dignity.
Similar allegations of evasive compliance and mechanical rejection of Vikky’s case for premature release vide Government Order dated 29.07.2020 despite his long incarceration of the order dated 06092019 of this Court learned counsel(s) for 10.
Finding that earlier orders directing fresh consideration of petitioners’ cases for premature release had not been faithfully complied with this Court on 25.08.2020 once more directed the reasoned orders within a week.
Since the petitioner’s prayer for premature release has again been declined vide Government Orders dated 01092020 hence learned counsel for the parties have been 11.
Over the course of the final hearing on 08.09.2020 it has been submitted by learned State counsel that the Probation Board considered afresh Satish’s case and has refused probation for the reasons that first the crime is heinous second petitioner is hardly 53­54 years old and can repeat the crime third informant has serious apprehensions against his release and fourth governmental direct adverse effect on the society.
Likewise for Vikky on grounds of his age of 43 years healthy physical condition apprehensions of informant and nature of crime his mercy petition had not been rationale and reasons embodied in both the Government Orders.
It Act 1938 but the mandatory factors of ‘antecedents’ and ‘conduct in non­application of mind.
The lengthy imprisonment lack of antecedents and good conduct in jail were again underscored by peaceful and fearless life without free­roaming criminals creating is the foundation of reformative theory which propounds that a civilised society cannot be achieved only through punitive attitudes and vindictiveness and that instead public harmony brotherhood and mutual acceptability ought to be fostered.
Thus first­time offenders 14.
The Constitution of India through Articles 72 and 161 embody Governor of a State to suspend remit or commute sentences of convicts.
Further Section 432 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 15.
The UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act 1938 also lays down 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898where his conduct in the prison that he is likely to abstain from crime and lead a peaceable life if he is released from prison Government for this purpose provided such other person institution matter of right2 However in the present case the circumstances are existing provisions regarding premature release.
Clearly once a law authorities are found to have failed to discharge their statutory obligations despite judicial directions it would then not be three­factor evaluation of antecedents conduct during 2 of the UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act 1938 have been given and are vague cursory and merely unsubstantiated opinions of state the original crime can’t be the sole basis for refusing premature release must be based on antecedents as well as conduct of the the victims and witnesses.3 As per the State’s own affidavit the conduct of both petitioners has been more than satisfactory.
They have no material criminal antecedents and have served almost 16 and 43 years old they still have substantial years of life remaining but that doesn’t prove that they retain a propensity for committing despite the petitioners having met all statutory requirements for down by this Court in Shor v. State of Uttar Pradesh4 which has “A reading of the order dated 22012018 shows that the Joint of Police and the District Magistrate confirming that the remission we do not wish to drive the petitioner to a further proceeding challenging the order dated 22012018 when we find that the order has been passed mechanically and without It seems to us that the petitioners’ action of kidnapping was viewed through a prism of positivity.
They retain the ability to re­ disciplined and normal human life.
Such a hopeful expectation is further concritised by their conduct in jail.
It is revealed from the Vikky) that during the course of his incarceration in jail he has passing his Intermediate Examination learning computer hardware obtaining a degree in Bachelor of Arts as well as numerous certificates infood and nutrition human rights (vi environmental studies.
Vikky’s conduct shines as a bright light of hope and redemption for many other incarcerated prisoners nearly two decades of incarceration and have thus suffered the consequences of their actions a balance between individual and premature release subject to their continuing good conduct.
This 22.
For the reasons stated above the Special Leave Petitions are disposed of with a direction that the petitioners be released on probation in terms of Section 2 of the UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act 1938 within a period of two weeks.
The respondent­ State shall be at liberty to impose conditions as it may deem fit to