 on 25 01 CRM M 442720 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH CRM M 442720Date of Decision: 05012021Gagandeep Sharma....PetitionerVersusState of Punjab ....RespondentCORAM: HON BLE MR. JUSTICE AVNEESH JHINGANPresent: Mr. Inderjit Sharma Advocate for the petitioner.Ms.
Samina Dhir DAG Punjab.Mr.
Ritesh Pandey Advocate for the complainant.
Avneesh Jhingan Jto submit that the prosecutrix had relations with the petitioner.
It is contended that uncle of the petitioner lodged FIR No. 69dated 13.6.2018 under Section 420 IPC registered at Police Station SadarGurdaspur against the parents of the prosecutrix the matter was compromisedduring the pendency of bail petition in this Court in 2019 and the present FIRis a counter blast.
The argument is that there is delay of three months inregistering the FIR.Though the complainant has not been impleaded as party butMr.
Ritesh Pandey Advocate puts in appearance on behalf of the complainantand submits that the matter was investigated by the Cyber Crime and it was onreceiving the report that FIR was registered hence there was delay of threemonths.Learned counsel for the State submits that during theinvestigation it has been found that the petitioner has uploaded certain materialon whatsapp which is objectionable.The fact that the petitioner and the prosecutrix were known to eachother does not entitle the petitioner to misuse the social media and circulatedobjectionable material.
Reliance on photographsdoes notenhance the case of the petitioner.
There is no date on the photographs andmoreover even assuming that these photographs were earlier in time this is notenough to permit the petitioner to malign the image of a girl.
The allegationthat the present FIR is a counter blast to the earlier FIR registered by the uncleof the petitioner prima facie does not appear to be correct.
The matter wascompromised way back in 2019 the present FIR is of 9122020.
It is verydifficult to swallow such allegations would be made as a counter blast.
Thereis another aspect of the matter during investigation it is found thatobjectionable material was used by petitioner on social media.The delay in registering the FIR will not itself be fatal.
The matterwas investigated by the Cyber Cell and on receiving the report the FIR wasregistered.
on 25 01 CRM M 442720 3 Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that apart from Section354 A IPC the offences are bailable.
This would not be stage to decide themerits of Section 354 A IPC.
Considering the seriousness of the allegationsand this being a case where custodial interrogation would be necessary torecover the material available with the petitioner against the prosecutrix nocase is made out for anticipatory bail.The petition is dismissed.
(AVNEESH JHINGAN) JUDGE05012021mk Whether speaking reasoned YesWhether reportable Yes