 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Judgment delivered on: 27.01.2021 .....Appellant .....Respondent CRL.
A.
331 2017 CHHOTU KUMAR @ CHOTE FAUJI STATEAdvocates who appeared in this case: For the Appellant For the Respondent HON’BLE MR JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU VIBHU BAKHRU J Mr. Akshay Bhandari and Mr. Digvijay Singh Advocates.
Mr. Amit Gupta APP for State.
The appellant has filed the present appeal impugning a judgment dated 30112016 whereby the appellant Chhotu Kumar @ Chote Fauji was convicted of the offences punishable under Sections 186 353 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act 1959rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten years along with a fine of ₹25 000 and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of one year for committing CRL.
A.
331 2017 an offence punishable under Section 307 of the IPC rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years along with a fine of ₹5 000 and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of one month for committing an offence punishable under Section 353 of the IPC rigorous imprisonment for a period of three months along with a fine of ₹500 and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of ten days for committing an offence punishable under Section 186 of the IPC rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years along with a fine of ₹5 000 and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of three months for committing an offence punishable under Section 25(1B)(a) of the Arms Act andrigorous imprisonment for a period of five years along with a fine of ₹15 000 and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of six months for committing an offence punishable under Section 27(1) of the Arms Act.
All the sentences were directed to run concurrently.
The case of the prosecution is that on 05072015 SI Krishan Kumar received secret information in the office of Special Cell to the effect that the appellant a Constable with Sashatra Seema Balwho was absconding would come at about 730 800 P.M in a Maruti Wagon R vehiclefor delivering illegal arms and ammunition for distribution in Delhi and Haryana with the aid of a friend at Rajiv Nagar Bus Stand near the under construction Signature Bridge Delhi.
He also informed that the appellant is a CRL.
A.
331 2017 as well.
resident of Uttar Pradesh and is involved with gangsters and in various criminal cases including murder attempted murder looting smuggling of weapons.
And he is quite capable of attacking the police The information received was entered as DD No. 13.
The secret informer was produced before Inspector Govind Sharma and on his instructions a team comprising of ten officials ASI Ajaibir SI Krishan Kumar HC Rajkumar HC Umesh HC Sandeep HC Rajiv HC Sanjeev HC Surender HC Narender and Ct. Anshu was constituted.
The said team left for the spot along with arms and ammunitions as well as the IO kit.
The secret informer accompanied the said team.
The police team used three vehicles a Government police gypsy a private car and one motorcycle.
The team reached the spot and SI Krishan Kumar briefed the members of the team and deployed them at various spots.
According to the prosecution a Maruti Wagon R vehicle bearing registration No.DL 3CZ 3444 arrived at the spot at about 0735 pm from the direction of Khajuri and was going towards Rajiv Nagar Bus Stand and stopped about 15 20 meters from where the police vehicle was stationed.
One person got out from the said vehicle.
The secret informer identified the said person as the CRL.
A.
331 2017 appellant which he was using to take cover.
The police officials alleged that there was a moment when the appellant attempted to change the magazine of his pistol and he was overpowered at that moment.
SI Krishan Kumar snatched his pistol and he found that the pistol still contained one live round in its chamber.
He also snatched the magazine from the appellant which had six live cartridges.
After being apprehended the appellant disclosed his name and address.
The vehicleused by him was checked and a travelling bag containing thirty pistols was found kept on the rear seat.
The appellant allegedly disclosed that he had brought the same at the instance of one Lokender from Khargaun Madhya Pradesh for delivering the same in Delhi.
Each of the pistols had magazines inside them.
The pistols seven live cartridges and two magazines were recovered from the appellant and their sketches were prepared.
The police officials claimed that the magazines and the pistols were kept in separate plastic containers with two pistols each.
They were then sealed with the help of a doctor tape.
SI Krishan Kumar prepared a rukka and sent the same through HC Raj Kumar for registration of the FIR.
After the FIR was registered the investigation was assigned to SI Amrik Singh.
SI Amrik Singh prepared a site plan of the spot at the instance of SI Krishan Kumar.
Five empty cartridges were also recovered CRL.
A.
331 2017 which allegedly pertained to the bullets fired by the appellant.
They were kept in a separate sealed container.
Four empty cartridges from the bullets fired by the members of the police team were also recovered from the spot and were sealed and seized.
The bullet proof vests allegedly worn by the four police officials were also seized and sealed.
10.
The vehicle used by the appellant was found to be stolen and a subject matter of FIR No.2645 registered with PS Crime Branch Delhi.
The same was seized under Section 201 of the Cr.PC.
Thereafter the accused was taken for his medical examination to All India Institute of Medical Sciences 13.
Shri Pramod Kumar Mendiratta the owner of the Wagon R vehicle bearing registration No.DL 3CZ 3444 was examined as PW6 and he proved that he was the owner of the vehicle and the said vehicle was stolen on 25052015.
He also testified that at his instance an FIR regarding theft of his vehicle had been registered.
14.
HC Rajesh was examined as PW1 and he testified that he had driven a police gypsy bearing no.DL 1CJ 3486 to CFSL CBI for his forensic examination by the Ballistics Department Division at CGO Complex.
He testified that the said vehicle was examined and thereafter he drove the vehicle back to the Special Cell on 08072015.
15.
Ct. Anshu Choudhary was examined as PW8.
He testified that on 09.07.2015 he was posted with the Special Cell Lodhi Colony and on that date he had collected 22 pullandas from the malkhana.
16 pullandas were sealed with the seal of SPL CELL NDR 31 and 3 pullandas were sealed with the seal of SPL CELL NDR 21.
The remaining 3 pullandas were sealed with the seal of AIIMS.
He testified that he had also collected the FSL Forms and he deposited the said 22 pullandas with CFSL CBI CGO Complex Lodhi Road.
He had transported the same under RC Number 84 21 15.
He deposed that CRL.
A.
331 2017 he had secured a receipt of the pullandas from the CFSL CBI CGO Complex and had deposited the same to MHC(M) HC Sanjeev.
16.
The three reports received from CFSL CBI New Delhi which were marked as Ex.PX1 Ex.PX2 and Ex.PX3 were not disputed by the appellant.
The report marked as Ex.PX1 indicated that one country made pistol which was sealed in parcel No.A was an arm and seven 765 mm cartridges the said parcel were ammunition.
The CFSL report marked as Ex.PX2 indicated that the fifteen parcels received by CFSL contained country made pistols and magazines which were firearms.
The CFSL report marked as Ex.PX3 indicated that the three parcels which contained the cotton swabs taken from the accused had traces of nitrite which is one of the main constituents of gunshot residue.
17.
SI Mahipal Singh who was posted as the General Store In charge of PS Special Cell was examined as PW2.
He testified that he had issued four bullet proof jackets to HC Umesh for his team on 03.07.2015.
He also produced the relevant entries made in the BP Jacket Article Register for issuance of the said jackets.
In addition he testified that on 05072015 he had issued one Glock Pistol No.AADP081 with ten rounds of 9 mm to SI Krishan Kumar one 9 mm pistol No.1621 2041 with butt no. 5159 with 10 rounds to HC Umesh Kumarone 9 mm pistol No.1621 2074 with butt no. 5192 with 10 rounds to SI Ajayveer Singh and one 9 mm pistol No.1621 2065 with butt no. 5183 with ten rounds to HC Raj Kumar sent by SI Krishan Kumar through HC Raj Kumar and on the basis of the said rukka an FIR bearing no. 46 2015was recorded in his presence.
19.
HC Sanjeev Kumar was examined as PW11.
He testified that on 06.07.2015 he was posted at PS Special Cell as MHC(M).
He testified that the IO SI Amrik Singh had deposited fifteen plastic containers containing pistols and cartridges which were sealed with a doctor tape and were bearing the seal of SPL CELL NDR 31.
In addition SI Amrik Singh had also deposited three other plastic containers sealed with a similar seal along with the FSL Form.
The said containers contained empty cartridges.
One of them also contained a pistol and a magazine.
He further stated that SI Amrik Singh had also deposited four bullet proof jackets marked as BP1 BP2 BP3 and BP4 which were kept in two white plastic sacks and were duly sealed with the seal of SPL CELL NDR 21.
CRL.
A.
331 2017 Evidence of the eyewitness 20.
SI Krishan Kumar deposed as PW 4.
He deposed that prior to the incident in question the officers of Special Cell had raided and arrested several accused persons who had been involved in supplying arms and ammunitions.
He stated that by conducting such raids more than one hundred accused persons had been arrested and arms and ammunitions in large quantities had been recovered.
He stated that on 05072015 he was present in the office of Special Cell when one secret informer informed him that one absconding constable from Sastra Seema Bal who was engaged in supplying arms and ammunitions to miscreant elements will bring illegal arms and ammunitions from Khargaun Madhya Pradesh in a Wagon R vehicle bearing registration number 3444).
He stated that the secret informer had further informed him that the constable will come between 7:30 8:00 pm in the said car near Rajiv Nagar Bus Stand under construction Signature Bridge behind Nanaksah Gurudwara Delhi for the purpose of supplying the same.
The secret informer had further stated that the accused would not be afraid to attack the police team and further he had been involved with gangsters as well as in cases of dacoities murder attempt to murder and other crimes.
He deposed that he produced the secret informer before Inspector Govind Sharma and was asked by him to take action regarding the said information.
He stated that he reduced the said information into writing in the rojnamancha and thereafter he had organised a raiding team under the supervision of Inspector Govind Sharma which comprised of ASI CRL.
A.
331 2017 Ajaybir HC Rajkumar HC Umesh HC Sandeep HC Rajiv HC Sanjeev HC Surender HC Narender Ct. Anshu and himself.
He further deposed that at about 06:00 pm they had left the office of Special Cell along with the secret informer in a government gypsy one private vehicle and one motor cycle.
He deposed that they had also carried the IO kit bullet proof jackets and arms and ammunitions.
He further deposed that on the way to the spot he contacted few public persons to become witnesses to the raid but none agreed.
He deposed that he had briefed the members of the raiding team and deployed them at the spot.
He testified that at about 7:35 pm the said Wagon R vehicle came from the side of Khajuri towards Rajiv Nagar Bus Stand and stopped there and thereafter one person alighted from the said car who was identified by the secret informer to be the accused Chhotu @ Fauji.
The said accused appeared to be waiting for someone.
He stated that thereafter hecame out from the gypsy and gave a signal to the raiding team to surround the accused.
He deposed that the accused smelled their presence and immediately got into his Wagon R vehicle and drove the same towards the Signature Bridge.
He stated that they chased the said Wagon R vehicle in the gypsy being driven by HC Umesh and intercepted the said Wagon R after a distance of about 250 300 yards.
He stated that they warned the accusedthat he was surrounded by the police team and they had information that he was carrying illegal arms.
Upon hearing this the accused had come out from his car and took out a pistol from his dub and loaded the same.
PW4 further deposed that they had warned the accused to not use the weapon however he fired a shot CRL.
A.
331 2017 which had hit the mudguard of the left wheel of the gypsy.
He stated that thereafter he and HC Rajkumar alighted from the gypsy and took out their respective weapons and moved towards the accused.
He stated that upon moving ahead to apprehend the accused the accused fired by taking an aim towards him and the bullet hit his bullet proof jacket in the chest portion.
He deposed that he also fired a shot from his service revolver in his self defence.
Thereafter HC Rajkumar tried to overpower him but the accused also fired at him which had resulted in the bullet hitting his bullet proof jacket in the chest portion.
He stated that ASI Ajaybir and HC Umesh Kumar came forward while covering for them but the accused fired on them as well.
The bullets fired by the accused resulted in hitting their bullet proof jacket.
He affirmed that in their self defence ASI Ajaybir HC Rajkumar and HC Umesh Kumar also fired one shot each.
He deposed that they overpowered the accused when he paused to change the magazine of his pistol.
He deposed that he snatched the pistol from the hands of the accused and upon checking it one live round was found in the chamber.
He stated that he had also snatched the magazine from the hands of the accused and six live cartridges were found in it.
He further deposed that he interrogated the accused and the accused disclosed his name and address as Chhotu Kumar @ Chhote Fauji S o Shaligram R o Village Kacchotpura PS Gonda Dist.
Aligarh UP He stated that he had also conducted a cursory search of the accused but no other weapon or ammunition was found on him.
He further stated that one red colour trolly travelling bag was recovered from the rear seat of the said car and upon checking the bag thirty pistols CRL.
A.
331 2017 wrapped in newspapers and covered by cloth were found.
He stated that upon interrogation the accused disclosed that he brought the said pistols at the instance of one Lokender from Khargaun Madhya Pradesh and the same had to be supplied in Delhi with the assistance of Lokender.
He stated that he had prepared the sketch of one pistol seven live cartridges and two magazines recovered from the accused Ex PW4 A) and thereafter he had kept the pistol cartridges and magazines in a transparent plastic container and sealed the same with the help of a doctor tape and applied the seal of SPL CELL NDR 31 and marked the same as Mark A He seized the same vide seizure memo which were recovered from the said car and prepared sketches of the pistols and magazines and marked them as SI No. 1 to 30and thereafter he had kept the pistols in fifteen transparent plastic containers and marked the container as SI No. 1 to 15 and sealed the same with the help of doctor tape and applied the seal of SPL CELL NDR 31.
He seized the same vide seizure memo and handed over the same to HC Rajkumar for registration of the FIR.
He further deposed that he had handed over the seizure memos sketches 16 containers and FSL forms along with the accused to SI Amrik Singh and he had prepared the site plan at his instance.
He deposed that during the course of the investigation the IO had collected 5 empty cartridges of the bullets fired by the accused from the ground and had kept the same in a transparent dabbi container CRL.
A.
331 2017 sealed with the seal of SPL CELL NDR 21 and had marked the pullandas as F1.
He seized the same vide seizure memoto the IO and ASI Ajaybir and HC Umesh handed over the bullet proof jackets to the IO.
Thereafter the IO prepared two pullandas of the jackets and sealed the same with the seal of SPL CELL NDR 21 and marked them as K1 and K2.
He took the same into possession vide seizure memounder Section 102 of the Cr.PC by the IO as the same was found stolen in a case bearing FIR no. 2645 registered with PS Crime Branch Delhi.
The IO also arrested the accused and conducted his personal search vide search memowas highly improbable.
He stated that in all the appellant is alleged to have fired five bullets.
The first had hit the police vehicle at the mudguard.
The next four bullets had allegedly struck the four concerned police officials constituting a part of the raiding team that had accosted the appellant with each police official being struck by one bullet.
He submitted that none of the police officials were hurt.
They allegedly retaliated and each of CRL.
A.
331 2017 them fired shots at the appellant but none of the shots struck the appellant or the vehicle.
26.
Next he submitted that apart from the improbability of such an event the testimonies of PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 were not similar but absolutely identical.
This included the sentences punctuation and also the spelling errors.
He stated that it was evident that the testimony of a witness had been copied as testimonies of other witnesses and the only changes made were regarding their names.
27.
Next he submitted that all of the aforesaid police officials were from the same police station and despite the seriousness of the event as alleged the crime team had not been called.
Further he submitted that in addition to the testimonies of PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 the Trial Court had also based the decision on the FSL reports which indicated that the bullet recovered from the bullet proof vests worn by the officers were fired from the pistol used by the accused.
However the said report was never tendered and therefore could not have been considered as evidence.
He submitted that while such evidence may be admissible under Section 293 of the Cr.PC it nonetheless is required to be tendered.
He relied on the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Dharampal and Anr. v. State: Crl A 140 1999 decided on 28072011 in support of this contention.
CRL.
A.
331 2017 28.
Lastly he contended that the sentence awarded to the appellant was harsh and onerous.
The impugned order on sentencing indicates that the Trial Court had awarded a higher sentence on the ground that the appellant was involved in other cases.
However the appellant had not been convicted in any case and therefore taking an adverse view against him on the ground that he was being prosecuted was not permissible.
He stated that the Cr.PC only permits taking previous convictions into account and not merely FIRs which are in the nature of mere allegations.
29.
He referred to the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in State v. Bashir Ahmed Ponnu and Ors.: Crl A 1065 2014 decided on 08122014 whereby the role attributed to the co accused Shahid Gafoor was similar to the allegations against the appellant.
Although the court had convicted him it had sentenced him to five years of rigorous imprisonment for an offence punishable under Section 307 of the IPC.
He submitted that in that case the co accused was stated to be involved in terrorist activities.
Therefore in the event the appellant’s conviction is sustained the sentence awarded to him ought to be reduced.
30.
Mr. Amit Gupta learned APP appearing for the State countered the aforesaid submissions.
He submitted that it was not open for the appellant to now object to the manner in which the evidence of PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 was recorded.
He submitted that the Trial Court CRL.
A.
331 2017 had considered their testimonies and had apparently copied the same while making certain necessary changes regarding the names of the witnesses and the officers involved.
He submitted that this was well within the knowledge of the counsel of the appellant but no objection was raised in this regard.
He also relied on Section 465 of the CrPC and submitted that the appellant cannot challenge the judgment convicting him in view of the manner in which the evidence was recorded unless he is able to establish that he has been prejudiced by the same.
Reasons and Conclusion 31.
As noticed above the learned counsel appearing for the appellant has restricted the present appeal to impugn the appellant’s conviction for an offence punishable under Section 307 of the IPC only.
Therefore this Court has confined its examination to the said aspect alone.
It is relevant to note that the appellant had admitted certain documents including the Ballistic Report CFSL 2015 F 978CFSL 2015 F 979and CFSL 2015 F 981and the same has been recorded by the Trial Court in its order dated 19102015.
However it appears that thereafter two other CFSL reports were received:Report bearing no. CFSL 2015 F 973 dated 15.10.2015 and Report bearing no. CFSL 2015 F 980 dated CRL.
A.
331 2017 16102015.
The said reports were not marked and the appellant had not admitted to the said documents.
The additional statement of the appellant under Section 313 of the Cr.PC was recorded on 22112016 and all the CFSL reports were put to him.
He responded by stating that no firearms were recovered from his possession but the contents of the reports were a matter of record.
33.
The appellant’s conviction under Section 307 of the IPC is premised on the basis that he had fired four shots at the police officials SI Krishan Kumar HC Raj Kumar ASI Ajaibir PW7) and HC Umesh Kumar In all trials before a Court of Session the evidence of each witness shall as his examination proceeds be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or by his dictation in open Court or under his direction and superintendence by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative but the presiding Judge may in his discretion take down or cause to be taken down any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.
3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form part of the record.” 35.
As it is apparent from a plain reading of Section 276(1) of the Cr.PC.
the evidence of each witness is required to be taken down “as his examination proceeds”.
Plainly this has not been done in this case.
36.
Whilst there is merit in the contention that the said procedure could have been objected to at the time when the evidence was being recorded and the fact that the learned counsel for the appellant had not done so would be a relevant factor in determining whether there has been a failure of justice as a result thereof however this Court is of the view that the issue of absolutely identical examinations in chief CRL.
A.
331 2017 not only highlights procedural irregularity but also raises a question to the credibility of the testimonies of the witnesses.
The examination in chief of the witnesses which are identical both in their construct and content would in normal circumstances lead to a doubt that the witnesses may have rehearsed their testimony in consultation with one another.
37.
Having stated the above this Court is of the view that the testimony of the said witnesses cannot be disregarded or ignored only for the reason that their examination in chief is identical.
It would be necessary to examine the evidence led as a whole before ascertaining whether the prosecution has established its case beyond any reasonable doubt.
The fact that the testimonies of certain police officials are identically worded would certainly be a factor while evaluating their evidence.
In the present case a raiding team was constituted on the secret information received by SI Krishan Kumar “near Rajiv Nagar bus stand under construction signature bridge behind Nanaksah Gurdwara Delhi”.
However the said entrymerely mentions that as per the secret informer the appellant would come to Delhi no specific locality or place is mentioned in the entry.
40.
PW4 testified that the said raiding team was under the overall supervision of Inspector Govind Sharma who had also accompanied the team.
He testified that the raiding team had left in three vehicles: A Government vehiclea private car and one motor cycle.
The departure of the said raiding team had been entered as DD No.15 on 05072015 as DL 1CJ 3486 but the particulars of the private vehicle and the motorcycle are not mentioned.
41.
As noted above the testimonies of HC Raj KumarASI Ajaibirand HC Umesh Kumarare identical to that of SI Krishan Kumarwas examined as PW8.
It is material to note that he did not testify as to him being a part of the raiding team or CRL.
A.
331 2017 any of the events of 05072015.
He also did not affirm that he was a part of the raiding team or was deployed to apprehend the appellant.
He did not mention that he was posted at the Special Cell on 05072015.
He merely stated that he was posted at the Special Cell on 09072015 and on the instructions of the IO he had collected 22 pullandas and taken them to CFSL CBI CGO Complex Lodhi Road.
43.
The fact that none of the members of the raiding team travelling in the private vehicle or on the motorcycle testified to the events that transpired on 05072015 does raise some doubts.
These are compounded by the fact that Ct. Anshu who according to the prosecution had travelled in the private vehicle chose not to mention anything about the events of 05072015.
It is apparent that the prosecution had for reasons known to them decided not to examine any of the six police officials that had formed a part of the raiding team regarding the events leading to the apprehension of the appellant.
Accordingly Ct. Anshu who appeared as a witness was also not examined regarding the events of 05072015 but only regarding transporting the pullandas to FSL.
44.
According to the prosecution the raiding team had left the office of the Special Cell along with the secret informer at about 06:00 pm.
PW4 had testified that he had on the way to the spot near Rajiv Nagar Bus Stand contacted a few public persons to be witnesses to the raid but none of them had come forward and had left the spot CRL.
A.
331 2017 without disclosing their names and addresses.
Thus even though the raiding team was deployed at a spot which was not isolated no public persons were joined as independent witnesses to the proceedings.
It is relevant to note that one of the police officials of the raiding teamwas in fact deputed right next to the bus standyet none of the persons standing at the bus stop had joined the proceedings.
The site plan also indicates that Gurudwara Nanaksah was located nearby.
However none of the witnesses from the said Gurudwara were also included in the proceedings.
On the contrary in the testimony PW4 had stated that the Gurudwara was at some distance away.
However that would not the officials from including witnesses from the said Gurudwara if they wanted to include independent witnesses.
45.
Although the examination of the four police officials are identical and all of the said witnesses had affirmed that on the way SI Krishan Kumar had contacted a few public persons to become witnesses their statements in their cross examination are not similar.
PW4 in his cross examination had stated that at the spot he had contacted 5 6 passersby to witness the raid but none had come forward.
However it is material to note that in his examination in chief he had stated that he had contacted persons on the way and not at the spot.
ASI Ajaibir in his cross examination further improved his testimony and stated that the IO had contacted the public persons to become witnesses to the raid thrice and in addition also contacted public persons at the spot but none had CRL.
A.
331 2017 come forward.
PW9 had stated in his cross examination that SI Krishan Kumar had asked public persons to join the investigation at the spot but they had refused.
It is well settled that evidence of the police officers cannot be rejected only on the ground that it is not supported by independent witnesses.
However non examination of independent witnesses does cast an added duty on the court to scrutinize the evidence of the police officers were examined regarding the events leading to the apprehension of the appellant.
Curiously they are the only officials who had been issued bullet proof vests.
The prosecution has also led evidence to establish that they were issued arms and ammunitions however no evidence had been led to establish whether the other members of the raiding team were also armed.
PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 were questioned on this aspect but they stated that they were not aware whether the other members of the raiding team were carrying arms or not.
47.
There is no explanation whatsoever as to why the other members of the raiding team did not come to the spot from where the CRL.
A.
331 2017 accused was apprehended within a reasonable time.
According to PW4 the raiding team was led by Inspector Govind Sharma.
He remained inside the private car which had not pursued the appellant.
According to the witnesses PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 have varying accounts as to when the remaining members of the raiding team arrived at the spot where the encounter with the appellant had allegedly taken place.
According to PW4 the other members of the raiding team arrived at the spot after about fifteen to twenty minutes according to PW5 the other members came to the spot after about five to ten minutes according to PW9 Inspector Govind Sharma arrived at the spot about ten minutes after they had apprehended the appellant.
PW10 stated that the staff arrived after ten to fifteen minutes.
The alleged spot where the encounter had taken place is stated to be about 250 to 300 yards away from where the raiding team was initially deployed.
The site plan also indicates that the spot where the encounter took place was straight ahead from where the raiding team was deployed.
According to the prosecution the entire team had left the spot to apprehend the appellant.
However there is no explanation as to why the other members of the raiding team did not immediately proceed to the spot even though it was at a visible distance from where they were deployed.
Even if the team had walked to the spot they would have covered the distance in less than ten minutes.
48.
As noticed above the team leader was inside a private car which was stationed right behind the official gypsy.
Yet only the gypsy pursued the appellant when he attempted to CRL.
A.
331 2017 flee and the other members of the raiding team took fifteen to twenty minutes to cover a short distance of 250 to 300 yards meters.
49.
As observed earlier Ct. Anshu was examined as a witness.
However he did not even mention that he was posted with the Special Cell on the date of the incident.
It is thus clear that the prosecution had specifically ensured that none of the other members of the raiding team testify as to the incident even though they were relevant witnesses.
This coupled with the fact that the official witnesses of the raiding team who did testify did so in a manner where their examination in chief is identical does raise doubts as to the evidence led by the prosecution.
It is also relevant to note that there are certain minor differences in the statements of their cross examination.
One of the aspects on which their statements made in the cross examination are not consistent is related to the initial stage of the encounter.
In his cross examination PW4 stated that the accused had driven his vehicle on a road which was closed ahead due to construction and when he reached the end point the accused stopped the vehicle on a kaccha road.
It is stated that they challenged the accused and told him that they were police officials and asked him not to flee.
It is stated that they had also told him that they had information that he had been carrying illegal arms.
Despite stating so the accused came out of his vehicle and suddenly fired on the members of the police team.
He CRL.
A.
331 2017 stated that they did not return the fire after the first shot was fired.
He volunteered that the first shot hit the police gypsy and they reversed the vehicle for about five meters.
He stated that he was the first to get out of the police vehicle and just about that time HC Raj Kumar also got down.
In the examination in chief which is common between PW4 PW7 PW9 and PW10 PW4 had testified that they had in