IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI BALMER LAWRIE & COMPANY LTD .....
Decree Holder Through: Mr Pramod K. Singh Advocate SARASWATHI CHEMICALS PROPRIETORS SARASWATHI LEATHER CHEMICALSLTD Judgement Debtor Through: Mr P D Gupta Senior Advocate with Mr Atul Gupta Advocates for HON BLE MR. JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU O R D E R VIBHU BAKHRU J The above captioned petition has been filed under section 36 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 for enforcing the arbitral award dated 24072000 entered in favour of the Decree Holderand against the Judgement Debtordescribed as “Saraswathi Chemicals Proprietors Sawaswati leathers ChemicalsLtd.” This is an application filed on behalf of the DH inter alia praying for amending the execution petition.
Essentially the DH seeks to implead the Directors of JD: Shri Shanker Mundhra Shri Vijay Mundhra Shri Krishan Mundhra and Shri Arun Mundhra all sons of Late Shri G D Mundhra as JD Nos2 3 4 & 5 The DH alleges that the JD is essentially a concern of the Mundhra family and all sons of Late Shri G D Mundhra are involved in the business It is further alleged that the DH had acted on the representations of the Late Shri G D Mundhra and Shri Krishan Mundhra and consequently Shri Krishan Mundhra and legal heirs of Late G D Mundhra are responsible for satisfying the arbitral award The DH has also alleges that the proposed JDs have siphoned off the assets of the JD company and therefore ought to be held responsible for satisfying the arbitral award Mr Singh the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the JD s description varies in several documents.
He submitted that in the Stockist Agreement dated 01081995 the JD was described as "M s Saraswathi Chemicals Partnership firm having Office at 7 Deputy Ganj Sadar Bazar Delhi 110006" but in other documents M s Saraswati Chemicals has been described as a proprietorship concern of Saraswati Leather Chem Pvt Ltd.
He contended that in the circumstances proposed JD s were the real persons behind the corporate facade It is seen that the present petition is for enforcement of the arbitral award dated 24072000 which was rendered in the context of disputes that had arisen inter alia in relation to the ‘Stockist Agreement’ dated 01081995.
A bare perusal of the said agreement indicates that M s Saraswati Chemicals was described as partnership firm.
However this was corrected as recorded in the Minutes of the Meeting held between the parties on 15011993.
The relevant extract of which reads as under: “(6) The 6th line of the Stockist agreement page No1 should be read as M s Saraswati Chemicalshaving their office ...........Ltd Thus there can be no dispute that JD is a company and not a firm.
It is also not the case of DH that the JD is not a private company on the contrary it is the DH s case that corporate veil must be lifted and the members of the Mundhra family must be impleaded as JDs for the reasons stated in the application.
Mr Singh has also referred to the decision of this Court in V. K. Uppal v. M s Akshay International Pvt Ltd.: 2010 SCC OnLine Del 538 in support of his contention that in a given case the Court can lift corporate veil and execute the decree against the persons who are operating behind the corporate facade In view of the above the only question that needs to be addressed in the present petition is whether this Court can lift the corporate veil while enforcing the arbitral award and whether the necessary grounds for doing so have been established In the first instance it is doubtful whether this Court could enforce the arbitral award against non parties to the arbitration agreement.
It is trite law that an arbitral tribunal draws its jurisdiction from the agreement between the parties and persons who are not party to the arbitration agreement cannot be proceeded against by an arbitral tribunal.
Thus an arbitral award made by an arbitral tribunal against any person who is not a party to the arbitration agreement would be wholly without jurisdiction and unenforceable.
There may be exceptional cases where a court may compel persons who are not signatories to an arbitration agreement to arbitrate provided it is established that the non signatory(ies) are either claiming through signatory(ies) or there was clear intention to be bound as parties1 SCC 641).
However an arbitrator cannot lift the corporate veil and proceed against non parties.
An arbitration is consensual.
It is based on the agreement between parties.
The arbitrator derives his jurisdiction to adjudicate disputes from the consent of parties therefore he is not in a position to enlarge the scope of his influence and extend his jurisdiction to non parties by exercise of his limited jurisdiction based on the consent of Though a court can lift the corporate veil the same can be done only in extraordinary circumstances and by due adjudicatory process.
It is trite law that an executing court cannot go behind the decree it must be enforced as it is.
Thus it is not open for a petitioner to claim that although the decree is against one entity it must be enforced against another.
However there may be cases where it is found that the assets of the judgement debtor have been secreted siphoned off or by a fraudulent device ostensibly placed outside the control of the judgement debtor in an endeavour to frustrate the enforcement of the decree.
In such cases the court is not powerless to extend its reach to third parties to enforce the decree however this is limited for recovering the assets of the judgement debtor.
In the event a corporate facade is used to perpetuate such fraud the corporate veil may be lifted In the present case none of the grounds for lifting the corporate veil are established.
The DH has not made out a case of egregious fraud the same has been neither been pleaded nor established.
Thus there is no occasion for this Court to examine the question of lifting the corporate veil The statement that the Mundhra family members have been conducting the affairs of the JD company is no ground for piercing the corporate veil.
The decision of the Bench of this Court in V. K. Uppal v. M s Akshay International Pvt Ltd.is also of no assistance to the petitioner.
On the contrary in that case this Court had observed that "This court as the executing court cannot execute the decree against anyone other than the judgement debtor or against the assets properties of anyone other than the judgement debtor.
The identity of a Director or a shareholder is distinct from that of the company 16.
Mr Singh had contended that although no case of fraud was pleaded or established the DH was seeking that the corporate veil be lifted on the ground of improper conduct.
The ground of improper conduct for lifting the corporate veil is synonymous to fraud and is available only where the incorporated vehicle is used to commit a fraud or to perpetrate a dishonest act.
This court is at a loss to ascertain as to how the allegations made in the application established improper conduct sufficient for the court to further examine the question of lifting the corporate veil Plainly a mere allegation that the Directors have siphoned off the assets without any particulars cannot be accepted as the ground for improper conduct.
As noted above the error in describing the JD as the firm in Stockist Agreement was ex facie an inadvertent error which was corrected subsequently.
There is no materialthat the DH had been defrauded by the description of the JD as a firm and subsequently as a company.
The DH had never dealt with the JD as a firm this is established by the bills invoices correspondence as well as the statutory formsNos.10 2013 11 2013 & 13 2013 These are applications filed by the proposed JDshas been filed inter alia praying that the order passed on 27082012 directing attachment of the properties bearing No.E 865 Saraswati Vihar Pitam Pura New Delhi 110034 and b) 16 23 & 24 Third Floor Block B behind Shiva Market Pitam Pura Delhi 110034 be lifted.
EA(OS) No11 2013 has been filed seeking a stay of the order dated 27082012 till the disposal of the objectionsNo.340 2013 above would also be the questions involved in the present applications Accordingly the present applicationis allowed and the order dated 27082012 to the extent that the properties in questionE 865 Saraswati Vihar Pitam Pura New Delhi 110034 and16 23 & 24 Third Floor Block B behind Shiva Market Pitam Pura Delhi 110034 are attached is vacated and the attachment so directed is lifted In view of the above EA(OS) 11 2013 does not survive EA(OS) 13 2013 is filed by the JD inter alia impugning the attachment of the above mentioned properties on the ground that the same do not belong to the JD.
In view of the above no further orders are required to be passed in this application The applications are disposed of List for further proceedings on 11.07.2012 MARCH 17 2017 VIBHU BAKHRU J Page