Reportable IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION Civil Appeal No. 17621 Arising out of SLPNo.
67321) The Chief Election Commissioner of India ....Appellant MR Vijayabhaskar & Ors. ....Respondents JUDGMENT Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud J This judgment has been divided into the following sections to facilitate analysis: A Factual Background B Proceedings before the Supreme Court C Legal Position & Analysis C.1 Open Courts and the Indian Judiciary C.2 Freedom of Expression of the Media C.3 Public Discourse Media Reporting and Judicial Accountability C.4 Freedom and constraints of judicial conduct D Conclusion PART A Leave granted.
Factual Background A delicate question of balancing the powers of two constitutional authorities in this appeal has raised larger issues of the freedom of speech and expression of the media the right to information of citizens and the accountability of the judiciary to the nation.
The authority of a judge to conduct judicial proceedings and to engage in a dialogue during the course of a hearing and the freedom of the media to report not just judgments but judicial proceedings have come up for discussion.
What are the contours which outline judicial conduct What are the concerns courts must be alive to in an age defined by the seamless flow of information What purpose does the media serve in a courtroom Above all in a constitutional framework founded on a classical scheme of checks and balances can a constitutional body in this case the Election Commission of India1 set up a plea that constitutional status is an immunity from judicial oversight Each of these components will be addressed in this judgment.
This Special Leave Petition2 arises from an order dated 30 April 2021 of a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Madras.
The High Court entertained a writ petition3 under Article 226 of the Constitution to ensure that COVID related protocols are followed in the polling booths at the 135 Karur Legislative Assembly Constituency in Tamil Nadu.
During the hearings the Division Bench is alleged to have made certain remarks attributing responsibility to the EC for the present surge in the number of cases of COVID 19 due to their 1 ―EC‖ 2 ―SLP‖ 3 WP No. 104421 PART A failure to implement appropriate COVID 19 safety measures and protocol during the elections.
At issue are these oral remarks made by the High Court which the EC alleges are baseless and tarnished the image of the EC which is an independent constitutional authority.
On 26 February 2021 the EC announced general elections to the Legislative Assemblies of Tamil Nadu Kerala West Bengal Assam and Puducherry4.
The schedule of elections in the State of Tamil Nadu involved polling on 6 April 2021 and counting of votes on 2 May 2021.
While preparing for the elections the EC issued a letter dated 12 March 20215 to the presidents and general secretaries of all national and State political parties emphasizing on the observance of instructions related to COVID 19 protocol during the elections.
During the polling phase the EC issued another letter dated 9 April 20216 to political parties stating that norms of social distancing wearing of masks and other COVID 19 related restrictions were not being followed by candidates set up by political parties.
It also noted that in case the breach of norms continued the EC would consider banning public meetings and rallies.
Eventually the EC by an order dated 16 April 20217 banned rallies public meetings and street plays during the days of the campaign between 7 pm and 10 am.
Another letter8 was issued on the same day re emphasizing strict adherence to COVID 19 related safety protocols.
4 Press Note No. ECI PN 16 2021 5 Letter No. 4 21 2021 SDR VOL I 6 Letter No. 4 2021 SDR Vol.I 7 Order No. 464 WB LA 2021 8 Letter No. 464 WB LA 2021 PART A A writ petition was filed before the Madras High Court by the respondent who is the District Secretary and was a candidate of the AIADMK for the 135 Karur Legislative Assembly Constituency.
Given the surge in the number of COVID 19 cases the respondent had sent a representation on 16 April 2021 to the EC to take adequate precautions and measures to ensure the safety and health of officers in the counting booths.
Since no response was received the respondent approached the High Court and sought a direction to ensure fair counting of votes on 2 May 2021 at the 135 Karur Legislative Assembly Constituency by taking effective steps and arrangements in accordance with COVID 19 protocols.
The petition was heard by a Division Bench of the High Court comprising of Justice Sanjib Banerjee Chief Justice of the Madras High Court and Justice Senthilkumar Ramamoorthy on 26 April 2021 and an order was passed in the following terms: ―4.Even though the polling was by and large peaceful in this State on April 6 2021 it must be observed that the Election Commission could not ensure that political parties adhered to the Covid protocol at the time of election campaigns and rallies.
Despite repeated orders of this Court going on like a broken record at the foot of almost every order on an election petition that Covid protocol ought to be maintained during the campaign time the significance of adhering to such protocol may have been lost on the Election Commission going by the silence on the part of the Election Commission as campaigning and rallies were conducted without distancing norms being maintained and in wanton disregard of the other requirements of the protocol.
5.
In view of the rapid surge in the number of cases on a daily basis albeit this State not yet being as badly affected as some other States the measures to be adopted at the time of the counting of votes on May 2 2021 which is about a week away should already have been planned in the light PART A is distressing importance and of the grim situation now prevailing.
At no cost should the counting result in being a catalyst for a further surge politics or no politics and whether the counting takes place in a staggered manner or is deferred.
Public health is of Constitutional authorities have to be reminded in such regard.
It is only when the citizen survives that he enjoys the other rights that this democratic republic guarantees unto him.
The situation is now one of survival and protection and everything else comes thereafter.
6.
As far as the Karur constituency is concerned it is submitted on behalf of the Election Commission that two halls one measuring about 3500 sq.ft and the other measuring in excess of 4000 sq.ft have been arranged.
Upon the Court‘s query whether such spaces would be adequate if most of the 77 candidates were to engage agents at the time of counting the Election Commission claims that all but two of the independent candidates have indicated that they would not engage any agents at the time of counting and only seven out of nine major political parties have confirmed in writing that they would be appointing agents.
7.
In such a scenario the Election Commission does not expect that Covid protocol and appropriate measures cannot be taken if counting is conducted at the two designated halls.
The Election Commission says that six additional counting tables have been organized so that distancing norms can be maintained.
8.
Similar appropriate measures have to be adopted at every counting centre and it is only upon maintaining regular sanitization proper hygienic conditions mandatory wearing of mask and adherence to the distance norms should any counting begin or be continued.
The State Health Secretary and the Director of Public Health should be consulted by the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officer responsible in the State to put appropriate measures in place immediately.
9.
The matter will appear on April 30 2021 to review the situation when a complete picture as to adequate steps having been taken at all counting centres should be indicated by the Election Commission.9 WMP No. 12062 & 120620 PART B The matter was heard again by the Madras High Court on 30 April 2021 when the High Court disposed of the petition in view of the measures taken by the EC for observance of COVID 19 protocols at the time of the counting of votes on 2 May 2021 particularly in the 135 Karur Constituency.
The miscellaneous application was also closed in light of this order.
Aggrieved by the order of 30 April 2021 the EC has approached this Court.
The grievance is that its miscellaneous application has not been evaluated on merits and its grievance in regard to the oral observations made during the previous hearing have not been addressed.
Proceedings before the Supreme Court Before this Court the EC has challenged the order dated 30 April 2021.
An IA for amendment has been filed to challenge the earlier order which has now merged in the final order.
By way of interim relief a stay has been sought on the order dated 30 April 2021 besides which the following relief has been sought in terms of an interlocutory direction : the Election Commission of ―b) direct that no coercive action be taken against the officials of connection with the Complaint dated 27042021 filed by in Charge Smt. Nandita Sinha before the Officer Khardah Police Station Kolkata13 Mr Rakesh Dwivedi learned Senior Counsel who appeared with Mr Amit Sharma on behalf of the EC urged the following submissions: The High Court ought not to have made disparaging oral observations that PART B the EC is the “the institution that is singularly responsible for the second wave of COVID 19” and that the EC “should be put up for murder charges”: a) These observations bear no relevance to the nature of the controversy before the High Court which related to the need to make arrangements for safe counting of votes consistent with COVID 19 protocols at the 135 Karur Legislative Assembly Constituency b) The polling had already been completed and only the counting of votes remained on 2 May 2021 c) These observations were made without giving the EC an opportunity to explain the steps it had taken for maintenance of COVID 19 protocols and it had no notice that its conduct of the elections during the campaign would engage attention during the hearing d) The High Court has made disparaging oral observations without proof or material and e) The High Court disposed of the writ petition without addressing the miscellaneous application filed by the EC The remarks made by the High Court were widely reported in the media and have tarnished the image of the EC as an independent constitutional authority.
These remarks have reduced the faith of the people in the EC and undermined the sanctity of its constitutional authority The scope of judicial review over the EC in matters pertaining to the conduct of elections is limited and courts should exercise restraint while PART B making observations about the EC or the electoral process as it falls within the domain of another expert constitutional authority iv) The EC had conducted various State elections during the pandemic and had taken adequate measures to enforce protocols relating to COVID 19.
The actual enforcement of protocols and safety measures on the ground is in the hands of the State machinery.
The EC does not take over governance by the States even during elections and has a limited number of personnel at its disposal v) When the decision to conduct elections in Tamil Nadu was taken in February 2021 and during campaigningthe number of cases of COVID 19 was under control and an analysis of the data would indicate that the elections were not a significant factor in the surge of cases.
States where no elections were held such as Maharashtra Delhi and Karnataka have witnessed a severe surge in cases vi) The EC had formulated adequate guidelines for campaigning during the pandemic and had restricted the scope of electioneering vii) The observations of the High Court during the oral hearings which are not part of the written judicial record have caused undue prejudice to the EC viii) The media must ensure there is accurate reporting of court proceedings and proceedings must not be sensationalized leading to a loss of public confidence.
Directions and guidelines must be framed on the manner of reporting court proceedings PART C ix) A balance must be maintained between the conduct of court proceedings and the freedom of the media.
Media reporting which suggests that a court has cast aspersions on any person or functionary is incorrect and Though the views of a court are reflected through its judgments oral comments of judges are quoted in the mainstream media which may give an impression of an institutional opinion.
This exceeds the boundaries of judicial propriety.
14 Opposing the submissions Mr Pradeep Kumar Yadav appearing on behalf of respondent on caveat stressed on the fact that the EC enjoys wide ranging powers in a State during the time of an election including powers to deploy para military forces suspend or replace officers such as District magistrates police officers and even the Director General of Police to ensure that their directives are followed.
Thus the EC was responsible for the implementation of safety measures and protocols related to COVID 19 during the elections.
15 We shall now consider the submissions of the counsel from the perspective of the issues this case has raised.
Legal Position & Analysis Before this Court the EC is aggrieved by the oral observations of the High Court during the course of the hearing and by it not having addressed the merits of its miscellaneous application.
In its miscellaneous application the EC soughtmedia reporting of only what forms a part of the judicial record before the Madras High Court and not the oral observations of the judges anda direction that no PART C coercive action be taken against the officials of the EC on the complaint filed before the Khardah Police Station Kolkata.
At the outset it must be noted that the second prayer noted above was thoroughly misconceived.
If an FIR has been registered in Kolkata the person aggrieved has recourse to remedies under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
There are remedies under the law including but not limited to quashing under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
The EC cannot have a grievance if it opted for a misconceived course of action which the High Court could not possibly have entertained.
18 We must now deal with the heart of the matter which is the first prayer that the EC has raised that of seeking a restraint on the media on reporting court proceedings.
The basis of its application was that nothing apart from what forms a part of the official judicial record should be reported.
This prayer of the EC strikes at two fundamental principles guaranteed under the Constitution open court proceedings and the fundamental right to the freedom of speech and expression.
C.1 Open Courts and the Indian Judiciary Courts must be open both in the physical and metaphorical sense.
Save and except for in camera proceedings in an exceptional category of cases such as cases involving child sexual abuse or matrimonial proceedings bearing on matters of marital privacy our legal system is founded on the principle that open access to courts is essential to safeguard valuable constitutional freedoms.
The concept of an open court requires that information relating to a court proceeding must be available in the public domain.
Citizens have a right to know about what PART C transpires in the course of judicial proceedings.
The dialogue in a court indicates the manner in which a judicial proceeding is structured.
Oral arguments are postulated on an open exchange of ideas.
It is through such an exchange that legal arguments are tested and analyzed.
Arguments addressed before the court the response of opposing counsel and issues raised by the court are matters on which citizens have a legitimate right to be informed.
An open court proceeding ensures that the judicial process is subject to public scrutiny.
Public scrutiny is crucial to maintaining transparency and accountability.
Transparency in the functioning of democratic institutions is crucial to establish the public‘s faith in them.
In Mohammed Shahabuddin vs State of Bihar10 the concurring opinion noted: ―… even if the press is present if individual members of the public are refused admission the proceedings cannot be considered to go on in open courts…an ―open court‖ is a court to which general public has a right to be admitted and access to the court is granted to all the persons desirous of entering the court to observe the conduct of the judicial There are multiple ways in which an open court system contributes to the working of democracy.
An open court system ensures that judges act in accordance with law and with probity.
Lord Widgery‘s remarks in R vs Socialist Workers Printers ex p Attorney General11 sum up the role public hearings play on the conduct of the judge in the following terms: ―The great virtue of having the public in court courts is that discipline which the presence of the public imposes upon the court itself.
When the court is full of interested members of 104 SCC 653 113 WLR 801 PART C the public…it is bound to have the effect that everybody is more careful about what they do everyone tries just that little bit harder and there is disciplinary effect on the court which would be totally lacking if there were no critical members of the public or press present.
When one has an order for trial in camera all the public and press are evicted at one fell swoop and the entire supervision by the public is gone.‖ Public scrutiny fosters confidence in the process.
Public discussion and criticism may work as a restraint on the conduct of a judge.
In his dissenting opinion in Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar vs State of Maharashtra12 Justice M Hidayatullahobserved how an open court paves the way for public evaluation of judicial conduct: ―129.
Hearing in open court of causes is of the utmost importance for maintaining confidence of the public in the impartial administration of it operates as a wholesome check upon judicial behaviour as well as upon the conduct of the contending parties and their witnesses.‖ Cases before the courts are vital sources of public information about the activities of the legislature and the executive13.
An open court serves an educational purpose as well.
The court becomes a platform for citizens to know how the practical application of the law impacts upon their rights.
In Swapnil Tripathi vs Supreme Court of India14 a three Judge Bench stressed upon the importance of live streaming judicial proceedings.
One of usanalyzed the precedent from a comparative perspective : ―82.
Through these judicial decisions this Court has recognised the importance of open courtrooms as a means of allowing the public to view the process of rendering of justice.
First hand access to court hearings enables the 123 SCR 744 hereinafter referred to as ―Mirajkar‖ 13 Cunliffe Emma "Open Justice: Concepts and Judicial Approaches"40 Fed L Rev 385.
1410 SCC 639 hereinafter referred to as ―Swapnil Tripathi‖ PART C However there are certain exceptions to the rule of open courts in India.
In MirajkarChief Justice PB Gajendragadkar observed: public and litigants to witness the dialogue between the Judges and the advocates and to form an informed opinion about the judicial process.
83.
The impact of open courts in our country is diminished by the fact that a large segment of the society rarely has an opportunity to attend court proceedings.
This is due to constraints like poverty illiteracy distance cost and lack of awareness about court proceedings.
Litigants depend on information provided by lawyers about what has transpired during the course of hearings.
Others who may not be personally involved in a litigation depend on the information provided about newspapers and in the electronic media.
When the description of cases is accurate and comprehensive it serves the cause of open justice.
However if a report on a judicial hearing is inaccurate it impedes the public s right to know.
Courts though open in law and in fact become far removed from the lives of individual citizens.
This is anomalous because courts exist primarily to provide justice to them."
judicial decisions emphasis supplied) ―21.
… While emphasising the importance of public trial we cannot overlook the fact that the primary function of the judiciary is to do justice between the parties who bring their causes before it.
If a Judge trying a cause is satisfied that the very purpose of finding truth in the case would be retarded or even defeated if witnesses are required to give evidence subject to public gaze is it or is it not open to him in exercise of his inherent power to hold the trial in camera either partly or fully If the primary function of the court is to do justice in causes brought before it then on principle it is difficult to accede to the proposition that there can be no exception to the rule that all causes must be tried in open court.
If the principle that all trials before courts must be held in public was treated as inflexible and universal and it is held that it admits of no exceptions whatever cases may arise where by following the principle justice itself may be defeated.
That is why we feel no hesitation in holding that the High Court has inherent jurisdiction to hold a trial in camera if the ends of justice clearly and necessarily require the adoption of such a course.
It is hardly necessary to emphasise that this inherent power must be exercised with great caution and it is only if the court is satisfied beyond a doubt that the ends of justice themselves would be defeated if a case is tried in open court that it can pass an order to hold the trial in camera.‖ PART C Hence while in camera proceedings may be necessary in certain exceptional circumstances to preserve countervailing interests such as the rights to privacy and fair trial for instance in a sexual assault case public scrutiny of the court process remains a vital principle for the functioning of democracy.
C.2 Freedom of Expression of the Media Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution guarantees every citizen the right to freedom of speech and expression.
Over six decades ago in 1958 a Constitution Bench of this Court in Express Newspaper Limited vs Union of India15 explained that Article 19(1)(a) would carry within it implicitly the right to freedom of the press.
The Court held: ―As with all freedoms press freedom means freedom from and freedom for.
A free press is free from compulsions from whatever source governmental or social external or internal.
From compulsions not from pressures for no press can be free from pressures except in a moribund society empty of contending forces and beliefs.
These pressures however if they are persistent and distorting — as financial clerical popular institutional pressures may become — approach compulsion and something is then lost from effective freedom which the press and its public must unite to restore.
A free press is free for the expression of opinion in all its phases.
It is free for the achievement of those goals of press service on which its own ideals and the requirements of the community combine and which existing techniques make possible.
For these ends it must have full command of technical resources financial strength reasonable access to sources of information at home and abroad and the necessary facilities for bringing information to the national 15 1959 SCR 12 market.
The press must grow to the measure of this emphasis supplied) PART C The Constitution guarantees the media the freedom to inform to distill and convey information and to express ideas and opinions on all matters of interest.
Free speech and expression is subject to the regulatory provisions of Article 19(2).
The decision in LIC vs Manubhai D Shahof the Constitution.
It follows that a citizen for propagation of his or her ideas has a right to publish for circulation his views in periodicals magazines and journals or through the electronic media since it is well known that these communication channels are great purveyors of news and views and make considerable impact on the minds of the readers and viewers and are known to mould public opinion on vital issues of national importance…‖ emphasis supplied) Freedom of speech and expression extends to reporting the proceedings of judicial institutions as well.
Courts are entrusted to perform crucial functions under the law.
Their work has a direct impact not only on the rights of citizens but also the extent to which the citizens can exact accountability from the executive whose 163 SCC 637 PART C duty it is to enforce the law.
Citizens are entitled to ensure that courts remain true to their remit to be a check on arbitrary exercises of power.
The ability of citizens to do so bears a direct correlation to the seamless availability of information about what happens in a court during the course of proceedings.
Therein lies the importance of freedom of the media to comment on and write about proceedings.
This principle was recognized in the Madrid Principles on the Relationship between the Media and Judicial Independence17.
The first principle is formulated ―1.
Freedom of expressionconstitutes one of the essential foundations of every society which claims to be democratic.
It is the function and right of the media to gather and convey information to the public and to comment on the administration of justice including cases before during and after presumption of innocence.‖ trial without violating This principle is recognized within Indian jurisprudence where the media has full freedom to report on ongoing litigation before the Courts within certain limitations bearing on the need to ensure that justice between parties is not derailed.
The media has over the years transitioned from the predominance of newspapers in the printed form to radio broadcasts television channels and now to the internet for disseminating news views and ideas to wide audiences extending beyond national boundaries.
The internet including social media have refashioned and in significant ways revolutionized the means through which information is relayed.
At every stage of this transition new questions have been 17 These principles were issued by a group of 40 distinguished legal experts and media representatives who met in a meeting convened by the International Commission of Jurist‘s Centre for the Independence of Judges and Lawyers and the Spanish Committee of UNICEF available at https: www.icj.org wp content uploads 1994 01 madrid principles on media and judicial independence publication 1994 eng.pdf> PART C raised about how court processes will adapt to the change so that the rights of the parties before the courts and processes of justice are not affected18.
However while these are valid concerns they should never be a good enough reason for Courts to not engage with evolving technology.
Technology has shaped social economic and political structures beyond description.
The world is adapting to technology at a pace which is often difficult to catalogue and many of our citizens are becoming digital natives from a young age.
It is understandable that they will look towards modern forms of media such as social media websites and applications while consuming the news.
This understandably would also include information reported about the functioning of courts.
Hence it would do us no good to prevent the new forms of media from reporting on our work.
It was keeping this principle in mind that the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales in the context of the use of live text based forms of communication to report on court proceedings noted thus19: ―It is presumed that a representative of the media or a legal commentator using live text based communications from court does not pose a danger of interference to the proper administration of justice in the individual case.
This is because the most obvious purpose of permitting the use of live text based communications would be to enable the media to produce fair and accurate reports of the proceedings.
As such a representative of the media or a legal commentator who wishes to use live text based communications from court may do so without making an application to the court.‖ emphasis supplied) 18 Daniel Stepniak ‗Technology and Public Access to Audio Visual Coverage and Recordings of Court Proceedings: Implications for Common Law Jurisdictions‘ 12 William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal 79119 ‗Practice Guidance: The Use of Live Text Based Forms of Communicationfrom Court for the Purposes of Fair and Accurate Reporting‘ available at <https: www.judiciary.uk wp content uploads JCO Documents Guidance ltbc guidance dec 2011.pdf > 28 Our Court has performed its modest part to acknowledge the rapid pace of the development of technology and our need to keep up.
In Swapnil Tripathi supra) it noted: PART C ―C.
Technology and Open Court 84.
In the present age of technology it is no longer sufficient to rely solely on the media to deliver information about the hearings of cases and their outcomes.
Technology has become an inevitable facet of all aspects of life.
Internet penetration and increase in the use of smart phones has revolutionized how we communicate.
As on 31 3 2018 India had a total of 1 20622 million telecom subscribers and 49396 million internet users.Technology can enhance public access ensure transparency and pave the way for active citizen involvement in the functioning of State institutions.
Courts must also take the aid of technology to enhance the principle of open courts by moving beyond physical accessibility to virtual January March Acceptance of a new reality is the surest way of adapting to it.
Our public constitutional institutions must find better responses than to complain.
C.3 Public Discourse Media Reporting and Judicial Accountability As we understand the rights of the media to report and disseminate issues and events including court proceedings that are a part of the public domain it is important to contextualize that this is not merely an aspect of protecting the rights of individuals and entities on reporting but also a part of the process of augmenting the integrity of the judiciary and the cause of justice as a whole.
PART C 30 With the exception of in camera proceedings a courtroom is a public space.
In Attorney General vs Leveller Magazine20 Lord Diplock held that ―The principle of open justice requires that the court should do nothing to discourage fair and accurate reports of proceedings.‖ An open court and transparent dispensation of justice in all its modalities is an end in itself.
As we have discussed above technology is an accelerant in this endeavor but not the harbinger of this thought.
Media reporting has operated alongside formalized court processes for close to a century.
Court proceedings in colonial India especially sedition trials were also sites of political contestation where colonial brutality and indignity were laid bare.
The widespread reportage on Lokmanya Balgangadhar Tilak‘s first trial for sedition was seminal in highlighting the variance in procedural laws and rights denied to Indian undertrials as he struggled to access legal aid and was convicted in spite of a non unanimous verdict of the jury.
The Lokmanya‘s poignant words while recorded by the order as a formalized process of sentencing were circulated far and wide by anti colonial publications which fueled India‘s struggle for freedom.
These words incidentally also adorn the plaque outside that very courtroom in the Bombay High Court to this day21: ―In spite of the verdict of the Jury I maintain that I am innocent.
There are higher Powers that rule the destiny of men and nations and it may be the will of Providence that the cause which I represent may prosper more by my suffering than by my remaining free.‖ 20A.C.
440 21 Emperor vs Balgangadhar Tilak 10 BOMLR 848PART C Post independence matters of seminal constitutional importance have witnessed widespread reportage in newspapers and magazines which did not merely report on the pronouncement of verdicts but also the quirks of the counsel and judges.
These tales have now passed down as the legacy of our profession and also provide useful context for our study of the law.
Albeit in the context of the value of open courts Justice Bachawat speaking for this Court in Mirajkarhad placed emphasis on the publicity of court proceedings in the following terms: ―A court of justice is a public forum.
It is through publicity that