IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Reserved on: 26.02.2021 Date of decision: 22.04.2021 CM(M) 558 2020 & CM APPL.
28639 2020 BATA INDIA LIMITED Petitioner Through: Mr.Sanjeev Sindhwani SrAdv.
with Mr.TKGanjoo Adv.
SMT. SARLA SHARMATHROUGH LRS AND ORS Respondents Through: Mr.Sandeep Sethi Sr Adv.
with Mr.Asif Adv.
for R 3 R 4 & R 5.
Mr.Praveen Suri Adv.
for R 1 R 2 R 6 R 7 & R 8.
HON BLE MR. JUSTICE NAVIN CHAWLA This petition has been filed by the petitioner challenging the judgment dated 15.10.2020 passed by the learned Rent Control Tribunal West District Tis Hazari Courts New Delhi in the Appeal being RCT No. 36 of 2016 titled Bata India Ltd v. Smt. Sarla Sharma & Ors. holding that an appeal under Section 38 of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 challenging an order of dismissal of an application under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 in an eviction petition to which Section 25B of the Act is applicable is not CM558 2020 Page 1 The brief background of the facts before adverting to the question of law raised with respect to the maintainability of the appeal is as under: An Eviction Petition being E. No. 1908 titled Smt. Sarla Sharma v. M s Bata India was filed by the respondent under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act.
On 23122009 an order of eviction was passed ex parte in the abovementioned Eviction Petition against the petitioner and in favour of the respondent.
The petitioner filed an application under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code praying for setting aside of the eviction order passed ex After deliberating over the abovementioned application of the petitioner the learned Additional Rent Controller vide order dated 03.06.2011 passed the following direction: “From the perusal of the documents filed on record it is not clear that who was in the employment of the respondent applicant at the relevant period of service nor the said fact has been disclosed in the entire application that who was the store Manager or the competent person to receive the summons during that relevant period except the certificate issued by one Mr. AK.
Dutta without having any seal wherein it has been mentioned that Mr. B Kapoor and Mr. Brij Bhushan both salesmen were employed at the branch of the applicant in the suit premises employment or any other document showing their transfer posting with the respondent at the suit service filing of details of date of However CM558 2020 Page 2 therefore considering the allegations raised on behalf of the respondent applicant is being given liberty to lead evidence on the point of service but subject to deposit of the occupation charges at a rate of Rs. 25 000 per month in view of the judgment of Hon ble Supreme Court in SLPno.
63107 titled as Mohammand Ahmed & Anr.
Vs. Atma Ram Chauhan & Ors. reported in 179DLT 532 from the month of July 2010 i.e. after expiry of statutory period as provided U s 14of DRC Act upto the month of June 2011 within one month and subject to deposit of the further occupation charges at the said rate from the month of July 2011 on or before the 15th of each English Calender month during the pendency of the present case as the premises is situated in Chandni Chowk area and is consisting of more than about 800 sq.
ft. as stated during the course of arguments.
It is made clear that the amount so deposited will not be allowed to be withdrawn during the pendency of the present application and in case respondent fails to succeed said amount will be payable to the petitioner without prejudice to his rights and contention and if the applicant will succeed he will be entitled to withdraw the said amount.
Application is disposed off accordingly.
It is further made clear that if applicant fails to comply the condition imposed the application will be deemed to have been dismissed.” Emphasis supplied) By a subsequent order dated 04022012 the learned Additional Rent Controller was pleased to direct the release of the amount deposited by the petitioner to the respondent subject to a condition that in case the petitioner succeeds the amount shall be returned by the respondent.
Thereafter by an order dated 03012013 passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller the order dated 03.06.2011 was CM558 2020 Page 3 further modified directing the petitioner to deposit the user and occupation charges once in three months before the 15th of the next month in which the charges for the last month become due.
The application under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code after recording of evidence was set down for final arguments.
At this stage the respondent filed an application for issuance of warrants of possession alleging therein that as the petitioner had failed to comply with the condition of deposit in terms of the order dated 03.06.2011 the application filed by the petitioner automatically stood dismissed in terms of the said order itself.
The said application filed by the respondent was allowed by the learned Additional Rent Controller vide order dated 29112013.
It is important to mention here itself that the merit of this order is not in question in the present petition as only the question of law of the maintainability of an appeal against such order arises for consideration in the present petition.
The petitioner thereafter filed an application seeking recall of the order dated 29112013.
The said application was also dismissed by the learned Additional Rent Controller vide order dated 10032014 passed in Ex. No. 34 of 2010.
The merit of this order is also not in question before this Court in the present petition.
Subsequently the petitioner filed an Appeal under Section 38 of the Act being RCT No. 36 of 2016 challenging the orders dated 29112013 and 10032014 before the learned Rent Control Tribunal.
CM558 2020 Page 4 Vide order dated 16042014 the learned Rent Control Tribunal was pleased to stay the operation of the eviction order dated 23122009. maintainable.
By the Impugned Order however the learned Rent Control Tribunal has dismissed the appeal holding the same to be not At the outset it is noted that the learned Rent Control Tribunal has dismissed the appeal filed by the petitioner only on the question of its maintainability and has expressly stated that it has not considered the merits of the submissions made by the parties on the factual dispute between them.
In the present petition as well the learned counsels for the parties have addressed their arguments before this Court only on the issue of maintainability of the appeal and have not advanced any submissions on the merits of the factual disputes between the parties or on the merit of the orders passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller.
This Court shall therefore confine its discussion only on the maintainability of the appeal before the learned Rent Control Tribunal without making any comment on the merit of the factual dispute between the parties.
The question of law which arises for consideration before this Court is as follows: Whether an appeal under Section 38 of the Act maintainable against an order dismissing an application under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code in an Eviction Petition to which the procedure prescribed in Section 25B of the Act CM558 2020 Page 5 applies OR Whether the only remedy available to an aggrieved party is in the form of a petition under Sub section 8) of Section 25B of the Act before this Court To answer the above question of law the relevant provisions of the Code and the Act need consideration.
Chapter IIIA of the Act contains provisions for the summary trial of the applications seeking eviction of the tenant on specified grounds.
Section 25A of the Act gives primacy to the said procedure over anything inconsistent with the other provisions of the Act or any other law for the time being in force.
Section 25B of the Act deals with the procedure for the disposal of the eviction petition filed inter alia on the ground specified in clauseof the proviso to Section 14(1) or under Section(s) 14A 14B 14C or 14D of the Act.
Section(s) 25A and 25B of the Act are reproduced hereinunder: “25A.
Provisions of this Chapter to have overriding effect.
The provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained elsewhere in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force.
25B Special procedure for the disposal of applications for eviction on the ground of bona fide requirement.
Every application by a landlord for the recovery of possession of any premises on the ground specified in clause of the proviso to sub section of section 14 or under section 14A or under section 14B or under section 14C or under section 14D shall be dealt CM558 2020 Page 6 with in accordance with the procedure specified in this section.
2) The Controller shall issue summons in relation to every application referred to in sub section in the form specified in the Third 3)The Controller shall in addition to and simultaneously with the issue of summons for service on the tenant also direct the summons to be served by registered post acknowledgement tenant or his agent due addressed empowered to accept the service at the place where the tenant or his agent actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain and may if the circumstances of the case so require also direct the publication of the summons in a newspaper circulating in the locality in which the tenant is last known to have resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain.
the Controller or b) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the tenant or his agent is received the registered article containing the summons is received back with an endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee to the effect that the tenant or his agent had refused registered article the Controller may declare that there has been a valid service of summons.
take delivery of 4) The tenant on whom the summons is duly served in the form specified in the Third Schedule shall not contest the prayer for eviction from the premises unless he files an affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the application for eviction and obtains leave from the Controller as hereinafter provided and in default of his appearance in pursuance of the summons or his obtaining such statement made by the landlord in the application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by the leave CM558 2020 Page 7 tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to an order for eviction on the ground aforesaid.
5) The Controller shall give to the tenant leave to contest the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on the ground specified in clause of the proviso to sub section of section 14 or under section 6) Where leave is granted to the tenant to the Controller shall commence the hearing of the application as early as practicable.
the application 7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub sectionof section 37 the Controller shall while holding an inquiry in a proceeding to which this Chapter applies follow the practice and procedure of a Court of Small Causes including the recording of evidence.
8) No appeal or second appeal shall lie against an order for the recovery of possession of any premises made by accordance with the procedure specified in this the Controller Provided that the High Court may for the purpose of satisfying itself that an order made by the Controller under this section is according to law call for the records of the case and pass such order in respect thereto as it thinks fit.
9) Where no application has been made to the High Court on revision the Controller may exercise the powers of review in accordance with the provisions of Order XLVII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure 1908Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter the procedure for the disposal of an application for eviction on the ground specified in clause of the proviso to sub section of CM558 2020 Page 8 section 14 or under section 14A shall be the same as the procedure for the disposal of applications by Controllers.” Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act provides for service of summons of the Eviction Petition on the tenant.
Sub section of Section 25B of the Act sets in motion a chain of requirements on the tenant on being duly served with the summons of the petition.
The said tenant has to within the time prescribed enter appearance and file an affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the Eviction Petition and obtain leave of the Controller to defend the Eviction Petition on merit.
Default of appearance of the tenant pursuant to the due delivery of the summons or his her failure to obtain leave to defend results in the statements made by the landlord in the Eviction Petition to be deemed to be admitted by the tenant and the Eviction Petition shall be allowed.
Therefore due service of summons of the Eviction Petition gains primacy.
10.
A question arose as to whether the Controller is competent to condone the delay in appearance of the tenant and or his filing the affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the application for eviction.
The Supreme Court in Prithipal Singh v. Satpal Singh Dead) through LRs.
2 SCC 15 after examining the scheme of Section 25B of the Act held that Section 25B of the Act is a complete Code by which the entire procedure to be adopted for eviction of a tenant on the ground of bona fide requirement filed by the landlord in respect of a premises shall be followed.
Rule 23 of the Delhi Rent Control Rules 1959 which provides for the Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal to CM558 2020 Page 9 be guided by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 shall have no application.
The Court held that therefore the Rent Controller shall not have the power to entertain an application seeking condonation of delay of the tenant in entering his appearance or filing the affidavit seeking leave to contest the petition.
11.
The above decision was considered by this Court in its judgment in Sonal Mansingh v. Beena Om Prakash 2011 SCC OnLine Del 3818 and it was held that where the tenant disputes the due service of summons upon him the Rent Controller would have the jurisdiction to entertain an application seeking recall of the ex parte order of eviction on this ground.
12.
This Court again in Director Directorate of Education & Anr. v. Mohd.
Shamim & Ors. 2019 SCC OnLine Del 11490 considered the above referred judgment of the Supreme Court in Prithipal Singhand held that this Court if it finds sufficient ground for non filing of the application seeking leave to defend within the time prescribed in exercise of its power under Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act is entitled to set aside an order of eviction passed under Section 14(1)(e) or 14A or 14B or 14C or 14D of the Act and can remand the matter to the Rent Controller to consider the leave to defend application on merit.
13.
From the above judgments it would be apparent that though the learned Rent Controller has no power to condone the delay of the tenant in entering appearance or filing an application seeking leave to defend it can still go into the question as to whether the tenant was at all served with the summons of the eviction petition.
CM558 2020 Page 10 14.
As noted hereinabove in Prithipal Singh the Supreme Court on examining the provisions of the Act held that the learned Controller has no power to condone the delay of the tenant in putting his appearance and or filing an application seeking leave to defend within the time prescribed.
However this Court in Sonal Mansingh has held that the tenant can move the Controller to show that he was not duly served with the summons of the Eviction Petition and therefore any order of eviction passed against him is liable to be withdrawn.
15.
As a bifurcated application of Order IX Rule 13 of the Code to the proceedings under Section 25B could not have been intended by the Court with one part applying to the proceedings under Section 25B while the other not applying thereto it has to be held that the application as approved by Sonal Mansingh to be maintainable is one under Section 25B(9) of the Act seeking review of the order passed by the Rent Controller.
16.
An application filed by the tenant contending that he was not duly served and therefore eviction order could not have been passed against him would be one of seeking review of the order by which the learned Controller would have recorded that the summons of the Eviction Petition was duly served on the tenant.
Such application would therefore be one under Section 25B(9) of the Act.
In fact the learned senior counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the application filed by the tenant in such circumstances is not one under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code.
This submission also fortifies the conclusion that such an application is to be considered as one filed under CM558 2020 Page 11 Section 25B(9) of the Act and as seeking review of the order of eviction passed ex parte.
18.
Now coming to the question as to whether an order passed under Section 25B(9) of the Act would be appealable under Section 38 of the Act certain other provisions of the Act also need notice.
19.
Section 37 of the Act gives the procedure to be followed by the learned Controller in general and reads as under: “37.
Procedure to be followed by Controller.
1) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be made by the Controller under this Act without giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the order proposed to be made and until his objection if any and any evidence he may produce in support of the same have been considered by the Controller.
2) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act the Controller shall while holding an inquiry in any proceeding before him follow as far as may be the practice and procedure of a Court of Small Causes including the recording of 3) In all proceedings before him the Controller shall consider the question of costs and award such costs to or against any party as the Controller considers reasonable.” 20.
Section 37 of the Act therefore mandates compliance with the principles of natural justice and further states that the Controller shall as far as may be follow the practice and procedure of a Court of Small CM558 2020 Page 12 21.
Rule 23 of the Delhi Rent Control Rules 1959 provides that in deciding any question relating to the procedure not specifically provided by the Act and the said Rules the Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal shall as far as possible be guided by the provisions contained in the Code.
22.
Section 38 of the Act provides for an appeal from every order of the learned Controller made under the Act to the learned Rent Control Tribunal and reads as under: “38.
Appeal to the Tribunal.
An appeal shall lie from every order of the Controller made under this Act only on questions of law to the Rent Control Tribunal consisting of one person only to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette: Provided that no appeal shall lie from an order of the Controller made under section 21.
2) An appeal under sub sectionshall be preferred within thirty days from the date of the order made by the Controller: Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
3) The Tribunal shall have all the power vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 when hearing an 3) 4) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Tribunal may on an sub section application made to it or otherwise by order transfer any proceeding pending before any Controller or additional Controller to another CM558 2020 Page 13 Controller or additional Controller and Controller or additional Controller to whom the proceeding is so transferred may subject to any special directions in the order of transfer dispose of the proceeding.
5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to the Tribunal unless he is or has been a district judge or has for at least ten years held a judicial office in India.” In Vinod Kumar Chowdhry v. Smt Narain Devi Taneja 2 SCC 120 the Supreme Court considered the issue as to whether an appeal was maintainable against an order of the learned Rent Controller refusing to order eviction in a petition under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act filed by the landlord.
The Supreme Court while answering the question in the negative observed as under: “ 12.
It is in the above background that the question as to whether an appeal to the Tribunal or a revision to the High Court was competent against the order passed in the instant case by the Controller has to be decided and that brings us directly to the meaning of sub section of Section 25 B.
The proviso to that sub section gives power to the High Court to revise “an order made by the Controller under this section” which expression is no doubt capable of being construed as any order of whatsoever nature passed by the Controller while acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Section 25 B.
The proviso however has to be read as a legislative measure carved out of the sub section to which it is appended and the order mentioned therein has to be regarded as an order of the type which the sub section speaks of.
i.e. “an order for the recovery of possession of any premises made by the Controller in accordance with the procedure specified in this section”.
Thus the order covered CM558 2020 Page 14 by sub section (and therefore by the proviso also) would be a final order disposing of an application on a conclusion of the proceedings under sub sectionor sub sectionof Section 25 B.
This line of reasoning does not present any 13.
Learned counsel for the tenant however argued that for an order to be covered by sub sectionof Section 25 B it must be an order for the recovery of possession of any premises made by the Controller.
According to him if an order does not direct recovery of possession by the landlord from the tenant it is not an order which sub section would embrace.
This contention though not wholly implausible runs counter to the in Devi Singh v. Chaman LalRajdhani LR 566] which was in Bhagwati Pershad v. Om PerkashRajdhani LR 26] and Mahavir Singh v. Kamal NarainRajdhani LR 159] and does not find favour with us.
Sub section no doubt in terms speaks only of an order “for the recovery of possession of any premises” and does not mention one which refuses the relief of eviction to the landlord: but then it appears to us that the expression “order for the recovery of possession of any premises” has to be construed in the context in which it appears as an order deciding an application for the recovery of the possession of any premises.
Our reasons in this behalf are two fold.
Firstly if an order in favour of the landlord alone was meant to be covered by sub sectionan order refusing such relief would be liable to be called in question by way of an appeal or second appeal under Section 38 so that there would be two procedures for the end product of the Controller s proceedings being called in question one when the same is in favour of the landlord and another when it goes against him which would obviously entail discrimination and make the sub section suffer from a constitutional invalidity.
It is an accepted rule of interpretation that if a provision can be construed in a manner which upholds its legal or constitutional validity it CM558 2020 Page 15 should if possible be so construed rather than the other way round.
We do feel that the language used is not happy but then it would not be doing violence to it if it is construed as just above stated.
14.
Secondly the scheme of the Act and the object of the introduction of Section 14 A and Chapter III A into it by the Amending Act make us form the opinion that sub section of Section 25 B is exhaustive of the rights of appeal and revision in relation to the proceedings held under that chapter.
Before the enforcement of the Amending Act all disputes between a landlord and his tenant were liable to be dealt with according to a uniform procedure before the Controller as also in appeal and second appeal.
No distinction was made between one kind of dispute and another.
When it was felt that the procedure prescribed in the Act defeated by reason of the delay involved the very purpose of an application made under clause of the proviso to sub sectionof Section 14 especially in the case of landlords who themselves held accommodation allotted by the government or a local authority which they were required to vacate Section 14 A and Chapter III A were introduced by the Amending Act so as to cut down the time factor drastically so much so that a tenant was required to obtain leave from the Controller for contesting an application for his eviction before he could put up his defence and the Controller was given the power to refuse leave and straightway pass an order of eviction if he found that the grounds disclosed by the tenant in support of his right to dispute the landlord s claim were not such as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order of eviction.
Sub section 7) further simplified the procedure on contest being allowed even though sub section of Section 37 itself provided for a procedure far simpler than ordinarily obtains in proceedings before a civil court.
Then there is sub sectionwhich provides for the abolition of the right of appeal and second appeal and replaces it by a power in the High Court to revise an order passed CM558 2020 Page 16 by the Controller.
That provision as a part of the overall picture painted must necessarily be construed as laying down procedure exclusive of that provided in Sections 38 and 39 and we hold that the four cases relied upon by the High Court in rejecting the contention raised on behalf of the tenant were correctly decided.
15.
In the way of the above interpretation of sub section of Section 25 B the provisions of sub sectionthereof do not pose a hurdle.
All that sub section states is that the procedure for the disposal of an application for eviction covered by sub section shall be the same as the procedure for disposal of other applications by Controllers except as provided in Chapter III A Sub sectionas interpreted by us governs an application covered by sub section of Section 25 B and expressly takes away the right of appeal or second appeal while providing the remedy of revision instead.
As we have held the provisions of sub section to be exhaustive of the remedies available to a person aggrieved by an order passed by the Controller in applications triable under Chapter III A such applications fall outside the category of those which can be disposed of like other applications under sub section read with the provisions contained in other chapters of the Act.
16.
As a result of the above discussion we hold that the remedy of the landlady against the order of the Controller in the present case was by way of revision of that order by the High Court as laid down in the proviso to sub section of Section 25 B even though it was an order not directing but refusing recovery of possession of the premises in dispute.” 24.
The judgment in Vinod Kumar Chowdhry was thereafter followed by this Court in RS Bakshi & Anr v. HK Malhari & Anr 2001 SCC OnLine Del 1344 to hold that even against an order granting CM558 2020 Page 17 leave to defend to the tenant the remedy of the landlord was in form of a petition under Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act before this Court and not in form of an appeal under Section 38 of the Act.
The said view has been consistently followed by this Court in various subsequent judgments.
In Miss Santosh Mehta v. Om Prakash & Ors. 3 SCC 610 the Supreme Court considered whether an appeal would lie against an order passed under Section 15(7) of the Act in an Eviction Petition to which the summary procedure under Section 25A of the Act otherwise applies.
The Supreme Court while holding that such an appeal was maintainable observed as under: “ 9.
An order striking out the defence is appealable under Section 38.
So this order is appealable.
The reliance on Section 25 B(8) to negative an appeal is inept because this is not an order under that special section but one under Section 15.
Moreover Section 25 B(10) preserves the extent contra the procedure except indicated in Section 25 B Negation of a right of appeal follows from Section 25 B(8) only if the order for recovery is made “in accordance with the procedure specified in this section”of the Act is merely CM558 2020 Page 18 consequential to an order passed under Section 15(2) of the Act even the order passed under Section 15(2) of the Act would be appealable under Section 38 of the Act.
The Division Bench of this Court disapproved with the earlier decisions of the learned Single Judge of this Court in RK Parikh v. Smt. Uma Verma AIR 1979 Del 17 Ram Nath & Anr. v. OP Khadria AIR 1980 Del 237 and in Pran Nath Kapur v Ram Shiksh Mehta 18 DLT 300 which had taken a contrary view.
27.
A reading of the above quoted provisions of the Act as also the above referred judgments would clearly show that Section 25A of the Act gives primacy to the procedure contained in Section 25B of the Act for an Eviction Petition filed under Section 14(1)(e) or 14A 14B 14C or 14D of the Act and a remedy of an appeal under Section 38 of the Act would not be available to the parties to such Eviction Petition against any order passed in exercise of such procedure.
However in such a petition if an order passed by the learned Rent Controller is not traceable to the special procedure prescribed in Section 25B of the Act a remedy of an appeal under Section 38 of the Act if otherwise available in Eviction Petitions or proceedings filed under other provisions of the Act shall be available to the parties.
28.
Once it is held that the application seeking recall of the order passed by the Controller holding the tenant to be duly served with the summons of the Eviction Petition is one filed under Section 25B(9) of the Act the judgment of the Supreme Court in Vinod Kumar Chowdhry supra) which having considered the object and scheme of Chapter IIIA and given primacy to such procedure over any general procedure CM558 2020 Page 19 inconsistent with Chapter IIIA and further holding that Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act is exhaustive of the rights of appeal and revision in relation to the proceedings held under that Chapter IIIA taking away the right of an appeal while providing the remedy of revision instead would squarely be applicable.
The remedy of an appeal under Section 38 of the Act would therefore not be available to the tenant in such In the present case therefore it is held that the application of the petitioner though titled as one filed under Order IX Rule 13 of the Code was one under Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act and therefore in terms of Section(s) 25A and 25B of the Act any order passed thereon shall not be appealable under Section 38 of the Act.
The only remedy for the petitioner would be under Sub sectionof Section 25B of the Act to this Court.
30.
At this stage I should also refer to the three judgments relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner in specific.
In Central Bank of India v. Shri Gokal Chand AIR 1967 SC 799 the Supreme Court was considering whether an appeal under Section 38 of the Act was maintainable against an order refusing to appoint a Local Commissioner to visit the tenanted premises.
The Supreme Court held that though the language of Section 38 of the Act may seem to suggest that an appeal lies against all or any order of the learned Rent Controller however no appeal would lie against any interlocutory order which are merely procedural and do not affect the rights and liabilities of the parties.
Though the Supreme Court held that an order refusing to set aside CM558 2020 Page 20 an ex parte order is subject to appeal to the learned Rent Control Tribunal it is to be noted that the said judgment was passed prior to the amendment introducing Chapter IIIA of the Act on 01121975.
Therefore there was no occasion for the Supreme Court to consider the effect of Section 25B(8) of the Act on the maintainability of an appeal against an order passed in an eviction petition to which the procedure prescribed in Section 25B applies.
In Inder Mo