IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Date of decision: August 23 2021 WP(C) 224 2021 CM No. 589 2021 ABHISHEK YADAV Petitioner Through: Mr. Tushar Ranjan Mohanty Adv.
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA & ANR. Respondents Through: Mr. Manoj SC for FCI with Ms. Aparna Sinha Adv.
HON BLE MR. JUSTICE V KAMESWAR RAO V KAMESWAR RAO J.The present petition has been filed by the petitioner with the following prayers: “In view of the facts and circumstances mentioned herein above and the submissions made Petitioner prays that the Hon ble High Court may be graciously pleased to: i) issue rule nisi to the Respondents ii) quash and set aside the Major penalty charge sheet dated 04.08.2020same iii) grant all consequential benefits of the iv) allow exemplary costs of the present Writ the Petitioner against Respondents and WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 1 8 v) pass such other and further orderas may be deemed just and appropriate in the facts circumstances and premises of present case.” In substance the petitioner is challenging the charge sheet dated August 04 2020 issued to him.
The charge against the petitioner is the following: STATEMENT OF ARTICLE 0F CHARGES FRAMED AGAINST SHRI ABHISHEK YADAV GMFCI ZONAL OFFICE NOIDA Article of Charge I Shri Abhishek Yadav GM was transferred from MP Region to Zonal OfficeKolkata vide Office Order No. 12 2020 E.1 dated 522020.
Zonal Officerelieved the officer from West Zone wef 2022020 with the direction to report to Executive Director Zone ZO Kolkata vide Office Order No. 21 2020 dated 1922020.
Shri Abhishek Yadav was placed under suspension vide Order No.E.1 PF AY 2020 WZ dated 30.3.2020 as he did not report to his new place of posting within the stipulated time.
Subsequently officer has reported at his new place of posting i.e. Zonal Officeon 162020 and his suspension was revoked vide Order dated Shri Abhishek Yadav GM did not join place of posting after expiry of Joining time and WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 2 8 remained unauthorized absent from duty 2022020 to 31.5.2020.
By the above act Shri Abhishek Yadav GMexhibited lack of devotion towards her duty and exhibits gross in subordination towards lawful orders of the Corporation.
Thus Shri Abhishek Yadav GM General) has contravened the FCIRegulation 1971 article 32 A (6) (9) (19) 22) &224 2021 Pages 3 8 04 2020 and in retaliation the respondent No2 filed a Police Complaint in the evening of the same day.
By using his influence and his powerful friends the respondent No2 was successful in getting an FIR registered against the petitioner on August 15 2020 and that too for non cognizable offences.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply to the major penalty charge sheet.
However without considering the said reply the Inquiring Authority had been appointed on October 15 2020.
He stated that the respondent No2 has been inimical towards the petitioner for reasons best known to him and it was the respondent No2 who had issued the impugned Major Penalty Charge Sheet.
The situation took a turn for the worse on July 31 2020 at 7 O’ Clock in the morning when the petitioner received a call from the respondent No2 during which the respondent No2 threatened the petitioner of physical harm.
It is in this background that the complaint was lodged by the petitioner.
Mr. Mohanty submits that it is a fit case where charges framed against the petitioner need to be dropped.
He also relied upon the orders of the Division Benches of this Court wherein according to him in similar circumstances where the employees have been transferred from their place of posting to different places and had not joined the transferred places were charge sheeted which were set aside on their submitting an apology and also making voluntary deposit in the AIIMS Poor Fund Account.
Mr. Mohanty states that similar procedure can also be resorted to in the case of the petitioner as well.
WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 4 8 I am not impressed by the submissions made by Mr. Mohanty for the simple reason that the charge against the petitioner is that he did not join the place of posting at Kolkata.
The petitioner was transferred to Kolkata on February 05 2020.
He was relieved from Bhopal on February 20 2020.
It is his case that on way to Kolkata he met the respondent No2 in Delhi who had assured him of a sympathetic consideration because of which he went back to Bhopal and did not proceed to Kolkata.
This aspect has been denied by Mr. Manoj learned Standing Counsel appearing for the respondent.
Till May 27 2020 there is no order changing his posting from Kolkata.
It is only after the change of place of posting to NOIDA the petitioner joined his duties on June 01 2020 at NOIDA.
The issue is why did he not join the place of posting for almost three months.
The reasons given by the petitioner in his representation are that there was lockdown in Bhopal and 2) that his wife was travelling to Brazil for which he had to take leave.
The fact is the petitioner holding a high post of General Manager was neither on the rolls of Bhopal nor of Kolkata.
Was he absent unauthorizedly The Inquiry Officer has been appointed so also the Presenting Officer.
The petitioner has also appointed his defence assistant.
The petitioner has also participated in the proceedings before the Inquiry Officer.
The charge framed against the petitioner shall be decided by the Inquiry Officer based on the evidence to be produced by the Charged Officer as well as the Presenting Officer.
This Court is WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 5 8 of the view that in the facts of this case the Court should not interdict the proceedings initiated against the petitioner.
A plea is advanced by Mr. Mohanty that the issuance of chargesheet is actuated by mala fide on the part of the respondent No2.
In this regard he has referred to a complaint filed against respondent No2 by the petitioner.
Suffice to state no such case has been set up by the petitioner on facts in his reply to the chargesheet.
His only case is of malice in law that too by stating that the chargesheet has been issued by not following the rules and instructions.
No doubt the petitioner did say that there is also malice in fact but he did not elaborate the same in the manner he has done in the petition.
The plea of mala fide clearly appears to be an afterthought.
That apart though the respondent No2 has retired the new disciplinary authority is pursuing the chargesheet.
Regarding the reliance placed by Mr. Mohanty on the orders passed by the Division Bench of this Court the same are on different factual situations inasmuch as in the said cases the petitioners were working as Statistical Officers and who have some explanation for not joining the places of transfer for personal reasons and illness.
The reasons given by the petitioner for not joining the place of posting have already been stated above.
The justifiability of reasons have to be gone into by the Inquiry Officer Disciplinary Authority.
It is not for the Court to consider the relative merit of the stand of the parties and come to a conclusion.
WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 6 8 In this regard I may refer to the Judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and Ors. v. Upendra Singh 1994SCC 357 wherein the Supreme Court has held as under: “6.
In the case of charges framed in a disciplinary inquiry the tribunal or court can interfere only if on imputation or framed no misconduct or other irregularity alleged can be said to have been made out or the charges framed are contrary to any law.
At this stage the tribunal has no jurisdiction to go into the correctness or truth of the charges.
The tribunal cannot take over the functions of the disciplinary authority.
The truth or otherwise of the charges is a matter for the disciplinary authority to go into.
Indeed even after the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings if the matter comes to court or tribunal they have no jurisdiction to look into the truth of the charges or into the correctness of the findings recorded by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority as the case may be.
The function of the court tribunal is one of judicial review the parameters of which are repeatedly laid down by this Court.
It would be sufficient to quote the decision in HB Gandhi Excise and Taxation Officer cum Assessing Authority Karnal v. Gopi Nath & SonsSCC 312].
The Bench comprising MN Venkatachaliah J.and AM Ahmadi J affirmed the principle thus: SCC p. 317 para 8) “Judicial review it is trite is not directed against the decision but is confined to the decision making process.
Judicial cannot extend to the examination of the correctness or reasonableness of a decision as a matter of fact.
The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the authority after according fair treatment reaches on a matter which it is authorised by law to decide WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 7 8 a conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the Court.
Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
It will be erroneous to think that the Court sits in judgment not only on the correctness of the decision making process but also on the correctness of the decision itself.” emphasis supplied) The writ petition filed by the petitioner is dismissed.
It is made clear that my above conclusion must not be construed as determination on the merit of the charge framed against the CM No. 589 2021 Dismissed as infructuous.
V. KAMESWAR RAO J AUGUST 23 2021 aky jg WP(C) 224 2021 Pages 8 8