 on 27 11 FAO No.1517 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB & HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH FAO No1517 Date of decision : 13112017Anil Kumar ......AppellantversusRoop Kumar Sharma and another .....RespondentsCORAM: HON BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJBIR SEHRAWAT PRESENT : Mr. Naveen Daryal Advocate for the appellant.
Brig.
B.S.Tanque Advocate for respondent No2 Insurance Company.
RAJBIR SEHRAWAT J.makes the Insurance Company liable to satisfy the decree oraward for the accidents occurring outside India even if the sameis passed by a foreign Court but according to provision ofSection 149.
If the award of a foreign Court passed as perprovisions of Section 149 of the Act is enforceable against anInsurance Company in India then there is no question of theliability of Insurance Company being excluded in Courts inIndia on the ground that accident occurred outside India.It is not even disputed by learned counsel for therespondents that the bus in question had the necessarypermission to ply in the area of Nepal.
Therefore its insurancepolicy would be deemed to be validly permitted to travel in thearea of travel of the bus.
Hence for the liability arising from theaccident involving the vehicle entitled to ply in Nepal theinsurer of the vehicle would be very much liable to make thepayment.Still further the bare perusal of the policy showsthat the policy and the schedule produced on record by theappellant do not show any restriction of geographical area interms of exclusion of the liablity of the insurer.
The policyproduced on record by the appellant shows that this policy doesnot have any restriction against plying the vehicle outside India.In the name of limitation as to use only organised racing reliability test and speed testing have been excluded in terms of on 27 11 FAO No.1517 8 the Motor Vehicles Act.
There is no such clause mentioned asexcluding liablity of the Insurance Company for an accidenthappening outside India.
Athough the copy of the insurance policy producedon record by the Insurance Company as Ex. R 4 contains avague writing which speaks “Geographical area zone India”.However comparison of the policies Exhibits R 3 and R 4 showthat the policy numbers on these two policies are different.
Thepolicy Ex. R 4 carries different details regarding the premiumpaid and even regarding the details of the vehicle insured.
So itis obvious that the Insurance Company has tried to place onrecord the insurance policy not pertaining to the bus in questionto avoid its liability.
This attempt has been made by theInsurance Company only for one reason that this policycontains stipulation regarding the geographical area zone whichmentions India whereas the original policy cover noteproduced by the appellant does not show any such restriction.Therefore on the basis of this policy Exhibit R 4 which is noteven proved to be the policy of the bus in question theInsurance Company can not avoid its liability to make thepayment of the compensation awarded on account of accidentinvolving the vehicle in question.Faced with this situation learned counsel for therespondent Insurance Company submits that the limitation forliability of insurance qua area of operation outside India hasbeen defined by India Motor Tariff and therefore Insurance on 27 11 FAO No.1517 9 Company cannot be held liable for any accident which occurredoutside the territorial limits of Union of India.For that purpose the counsel relies upon thedocument Ex. R 7 which contains a specimen of theendorsement advised to be included in the policy.
However thisdocument itself is not a legal document to exclude the statutoryliability of Insurance Company.
This is only a suggestion of theAdvisory Committee.
This was required to be included in thepolicy by individual Insurance Company if at all consideredappropriate and desirable by it while insuring a vehicle.
Thisdocument in itself is not sufficient to exclude the liability of theInsurance Company in an accident which occurred outside theterritorial jurisdiction of India.As stated above nothing has been placed on recordby the Insurance Company to show that the insurance policyregarding this particular vehicle contained this stipulation andendorsement as advised by India Motor Tariff .
Moreover it isnot on record as to since when the respondent InsuranceCompany started to follow this India Motor Tariff Advisory ifat all it follows the same.
Moreover the competence of India Motor Tariff toissue such instruction to limit the liability of Insurance Companyin terms of geographical area has not been shown by theInsurance Company.
No such instructions which run counter toor dilute the liability of Insurance Company as defined underSections 146 to 149 of the Act can be countenanced by the 1 on 27 11 FAO No.1517 10 Court.A perusal of the record also shows that all theseobjections were not even raised by the Insurance Companywhile filing the written statement.
On the contrary in the writtenstatement the Insurance Company has taken the stand that theirliability is limited to the extent of Rs50 000 only.
Therefore the argument of learned counsel for the Insurance Company otherwise also is beyond the pleadings.
Hence the same cannot be accepted by this Court.In view of the above the findings of the Tribunal to the extent of the exclusion of the liablity of the InsuranceCompany and the consequent Award to that extent is set aside.It is ordered that the liablity to make the payment of the awardedamount shall be of the Insurance Company.
Hence the appeal is allowed.November 13 2017( RAJBIR SEHRAWAT )sahil soni JUDGE Whether speaking reasoned:Yes NoWhether reportable:Yes No