 STATE OF WEST BENGAL Vs JUGAL KISHORE MORE & ANR DATE OF JUDGMENT SHAH J.C SHAH J.C RAMASWAMI V GROVER AN 1969 AIR 1171 1969 SCR 320 1969 SCC 440 Extradition Nature of Fugitive Offenders ActInapplicability in Republic of India if bar to obtain extradition of fugitive offenders from another Commonwealth country Extradition Acteffect After this Court held in State of Madras v. C G Menon 1955] 1 S.C.R. 280 that the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 was inconsistent with Art. 14 of the Constitution and was on that account unenforceable after 26th January 1950 the Government of India Ministry of External Affairs issued a notification on May 21 1955 indicating the procedure for securing the presence of a fugitive offender in India from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries.
Under the Notification the Magistrate concerned is to issue a warrant of arrest of the fugitive offender under the Criminal Procedure Code 1898 and the warrant is to be sent to the Government of India Ministry of External Affairs through the concerned State Government.
Thereafter the Ministry is to address the appropriate authority in the Commonwealth country through the High Commissioner for India for the surrender of the fugitive offender In 1962 the Indian Extradition Act was passed but as Hong Kong was not included in the First Schedule that Act could not be resorted for the surrender of the respondent who was a fugitive offender residing in Hong Kong.
Action was therefore taken in the present case pursuant to the notification.
The Chief Presidency Magistrate Calcutta issued a warrant under the Criminal Procedure Code for the arrest of the respondent and the warrant was forwarded by the Government of West Bengal to the Ministry of External Affairs Government of India.
The Ministry forwarded the warrant to the High Commissioner for India Hong Kong who in his turn requested the Colonial Secretary Hong Kong for an order extraditing the respondent under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 Whether the Chief Presidency Magistrate had no power to issue the warrant as it would have extraterrestrial operation Whether the Fugitive Offenders Act having ceased to be part of the law of India could be resorted to for obtaining extradition of fugitive offenders Whether the instructions of the Government of India for obtaining extradition are an invasion upon the authority of courts andWhether the Extradition Act 1962 operates as a bar to the requisition made by the Ministry of External Affairs for the extradition of the respondent HELD : The Courts of the country which make a requisition for surrender proceed upon prima facie proof of the offence and leave it to the State to make a requisition upon the other State in which the offender has taken refuge.
Under s. 82 of the Criminal Procedure Code when a warrant is issued by a Magistrate in India it can be in India and has no extra territorial operation.
By making a requisition to another State in pursuance of such a warrant for assistance in securing the presence of the offender the warrant is not invested with extraterritorial operation.
If the other State requested Agrees to lend its aid to arrest the fugitive the arrest is made by the issue of an independent warrant or endorsement or authentication of the warrant of the court which issued it.
By such endorsement or authentication the State expresses its willingness to lend its assistance in implementation of treaties or international commitments to secure the arrest of the offender.
The offender arrested pursuant to the warrant or endorsement is brought before the Court of the country to which requisition is made and that court holds enquiry to determine whether the offender may be extradited.1 All ER 1960 Re.
Kweshi Armah2 All ER 1006 Zacharia v. Republic of Cyprus 2 All.
ER 438 and Halsbury’s Laws of England 3rd edn.
Vol. 5 Art. 987 p 433 referred to 3) This Court by holding in C G Menon’s case that since India became a Republic the Fugitive Offenders Act could not be enforced in his country presented the Government of India with a problem which had to be resolved by devising a machinery for securing the presence of fenders who were fugitives from justice.
The notification was issued only in the nature of advice about the procedure to be followed and was not in any manner intended as an affront to the Courts or to impose any executive will upon the courts in judicial matters.to India for trial for offences described in the warrant.
The Central Magistrate Hong Kong endorsed the warrant and directed the Hong Kong Police "pursuant to section 13 of Part 11 and section 26 of Part IV of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881" to arrest More.
The order recited "WHEREAS I have perused this warrant for the apprehension of Jugal Kishore More . . accused of an offence punishable by law in Calcutta Republic of India which warrant purports to be signed by the Chief Presidency Magistrate Calcutta and ’is sealed with the seal of the Court of the said Magistrate and is attested by S K Chatterjee .Under Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs of the Republic of India and sealed with the seal of the said Ministry AND WHEREAS I am satisfied that this warrant was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same AND WHEREAS it has been represented to me that the said Jugal Kishore More .
. . is suspected of being in the Colony AND WHEREAS Order in Council S.R.
and 0.
No 28 of 1918 by virtue of which Part 11 of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 was made to apply to a group 324 of British Possessions and Protective States including Hong Kong and British India appears to remain in full force and effect so far as the law of Hong Kong is concerned Now therefore under section 13 of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 I hereby endorse this Warrant and authorise and command you in Her Majesty’s name forthwith to execute this Warant in the Colony to apprehend the said Jugal Kishore More .
. . wherever he may be found in the Colony and to bring him before a Magistrate of the said Colony to be further dealt with according to law More was arrested on November 24 1965.
By order dated April 4 1966 the Central Magistrate Hong Kong over ruled the objection raised on behalf of More that the Court had no jurisdiction to proceed in the matter under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 since the Republic of India was no longer a "British Possession On May 16 1966 Hanuman Prasad father of More moved in the High Court of Calcutta a petition under S. 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and Art. 227 of the Constitution for an order quashing the warrant of arrest issued against More and all proceedings taken pursuant thereto and restraining the Chief Presidency Magistrate and the Union of India from taking any further steps pursuant to the said warrant of arrest and causing More to be extradited from Hong Kong to India.
The petition was heard before a Division Bench of the High Court.
A Roy J held that the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate was not illegal and the procedure followed for securing extradition of More was not irregular.
In his view the assumption made by the Central Magistrate Hong Kong that for the purpose of the Fugitive Offenders Act India was a "British possession" was irrelevant since that was only a view expressed by him according to the municipal law of Hong Kong and by acceding to the requisition for extradition and surrender made upon that country by the Government of India in exercise of sovereign rights the status of the Republic of India was not In the view of Gupta J the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate and the steps taken pursuant to the warrant were without jurisdiction that the request made to the Hong Kong Government by the Government of India was also without authority in the absence of a notified order under S. 3 of the Extradition Act 1962 and the High Court could not ignore the "laws of the land even to support a gesture of comity to another nation " that 325 what was done by the Hong Kong authorities pursuant to the request made for the surrender of More was "not an instance of international comity but was regarded as the legal obligation under the Fugitive Offenders Act under which the Central Magistrate Hong Kong regarded India as a Colony or Possession of the British Commonwealth".
The case was then posted for hearing before R Mukherji J The learned Judge held that the.
Chief Presidency Magistrate had no power to issue the warrant of arrest in the manner he had done a manner which in his view was "unknown to the Code of Criminal Procedure" since the Fugitive Offenders Act 18 8 1 had ceased on the coming into force of the Constitution to be part of the law of India and could not on that account be resorted to for obtaining extradition if offenders from another country that the instructions issued by the Government of India by letter No. 3516 J dated June 14 1955 laying down the procedure to the followed by the courts for securing extradition ’of offenders from the Commonwealth countries should have been ignored by the Chief Presidency Magistrate and that the Extradition Act 34 of 1962 did not authorise the Chief Presidency Magistrate to issue a warrant and to send it to the Secretary Home Political) Department Government of West Bengal that there "was no legal basis for the requisition made by the Central Government to Hong Kong" for extradition or surrender of More or for the issue of the warrant by the Chief’ Presidency Magistrate and that the demand made by the Government of India to the Government of Hong Kong by making a requisition to Hong Kong for the arrest of More was not a political act beyond the purview of law and judicial scrutiny" and being inconsistent with the law was liable to be rectified.
He observed that the Central Government had the power under s 3 of the Extradition Act 1962 to issue a notification for including Hong Kong in the list of countries from which offenders may be extradited but since the Government had not issued any notification under that clause in exercise of the executive power the Government could not attempt in violation of the statutory procedure seek extradition which the law of India did not permit.
The learned Judge accordingly ordered that the warrant of arrest dated July 30 1965 issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate Calcutta against More and all subsequent proceedings taken by the Chief Presidency Magistrate and the other respondents be quashed.
The State of West Bengal has appealed to this Court with special Extradition is the surrender by one State to another of a person desired to be dealt with for crimes of which he has been accused or convicted and which are justiciable in the courts of the other State.
Surrender of a person within the State to another State whether a citizen or an alien is a political act done in pursuance of a treaty or an arrangement ad hoc.
It is founded on the broad principle that it is in the interest of civilized communities that crimes should not go unpunished and on that account it is recoginised as a part of the comity of nations that one State should ordinarily afford to another State assistance towards bringing offenders to justice.
The law relating to extradition between independent States is based on treaties.
But the law has operation national as well as international It governs international relationship between the sovereign States which is secured by treaty obligations.
But whether an offender should be handed over pursuant to a requisition is determined by the domestic law of the State on which the requisition is made.
Though extradition is granted in implementation of the international commitments of the State the procedure to be followed by the Courts in deciding whether extradition should be ’granted and on what terms is determined by the municipal law As observed in Wheaten’s International Law Vol. 1 6th Edn.
p. 213 "’The constitutional doctrine in England is that the Crown may make treaties with foreign States for the extradition of criminals but those treaties can only be carried into effect by Act of Parliament for the executive has no power without statutory authority to seize an alien here and deliver him to a foreign power Sanction behind an order of extradition is therefore the international commitment of the State under which the Court functions but Courts jealously seek to protect the right of the individual by insisting upon strict compliance with the conditions precedent to surrender.
The Courts of the country which make a requisition for surrender deal with the prima facie proof of the offence and leave it to the State to make a requisition upon the other State in which the offender has taken refuge.
Requisition for surrender is not the function of the Courts but of the State.
A warrant issued by a Court for an offence committed in a country from its very nature has no extra territorial operation.
It is only a command by the Court in the name of the sovereign to its officer to arrest an offender and to bring him before the Court.
By making a requisition in pursuance of a warrant issued by a Court of a State to another State for assistance in securing the presence of the offender the warrant is not invested with extra territorial operation If the other State requested agrees to lend its aid to arrest the fugitive the arrest is made either by the issue of an independent warrant or endorsement or authentication of ’the warrant of the Court which issued it.
By authentication of a warrant the country in which an offender has taken refuge signifies its willingness to lend its assistance in implementation of the treaties or international commitments and to secure the arrest of the offender.
The offender arrested pursuant to the warrant or endorsement is brought before the Court of the country to which the requisition is made and the Court holds an inquiry to determine whether the offender may be extradited International commitment or treaty will be effective only if the Court of a country in which the offender is arrested after enquiry is of the view that the offender should be The functions which the Courts in the two countries perform are therefore different.
The Court within whose jurisdiction the offence is committed decides whether there is prima facie evidence on which a requisition may be made to another country for surrender of the offender.
When the State to which a requisition is made agrees consistently with its international commitments to lend its aid the requisition is transmitted to the Police authorities and the Courts of that country consider according to their own laws whether the offender should be suffendered the enquiry is in the absence of express provisions to the contrary relating to the prima facie evidence of the commission of the offence which is extraditable the offence not being a political offence nor that the requisition being a subterfuge to secure custody for trial for a political Prior to January 26 1950 there was in force in India the Indian Extradition Act 103 which as the preamble ex pressly enacted was intended to provide for the more convenient administration of the Extradition Acts of 1870 and 1873 and the Foreign Jurisdiction Act of 1881 both enacted by the British Parliament.
The Act enacted machinery in Ch.
II for the surrender of fugitive criminals in case of Foreign States ie States to which the Extradition Act of 1870 and 1873 applied and in Ch.
II for surrender of fugitive offenders in case of "His Majesty’s Dominions".
The Extradition Acts of 1870 and 1873 sought to give effect to arrangements made with foreign States with respect to the surrender to such States of any fugitive criminals Her Majesty may by Order in Council direct and to prescribe the procedure for extraditing fugitive offenders to such foreign states As observed in Halsbury’s Laws of England Vol. 16 3rd Edn.
para 1161 at p. 567 "When a treaty has been made with a foreign State and the Extradition Acts have been applied by Order in Council one of Her Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State may upon a requisition made to him by some person recognized by him as a diplomatic representative of 328 that foreign State by order under his hand and seal signify to a police magistrate that such a requisition has been made and require him to issue his warrant for the apprehension of the fugitive criminal if the criminal is in or is suspected of being in the United Kingdom The warrant may then be issued by a police magistrate on receipt of the order of the Secretary of State and upon such evidence as would in his opinion justify the issue of the warrant if the crime had been committed or the criminal convicted in England The procedure for extradition of fugitive offenders from British possessions" was less complicated.
When the Extradition Act was applied by Order in Council unless it was otherwise provided by such Order the Act extended to every "British possesSion" in the same manner as if throughout the Act the "British possession" were substituted for the United Kingdom but with certain modifications in Under Part I of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 a warrant issued in one part of the Crown’s Dominion for apprehension of a fugitive offender could be endorsed for execution in another Dominion.
After the fugitive was apprehended he was brought before the Magistrate who heard the case in the same manner and had the same jurisdiction and powers as if the fugitive was charged with an offence committed within the Magistrate’s jurisdiction.
If the Magistrate was satisfied after expiry of 15 days from the date on which the fugitive was committed to prison he could make an order for surrender of the fugitive on the warrant issued by the Secretary of State or an appropriate officer.
There was also provision for "inter colonial backing of warrants within groups of "British possessions" to which Part I of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 has been applied by Order in Council.
In such groups a more rapid procedure for the return of fugitive offenders between possessions of the same group was in force.
Where in a "British possession" of a group to which Part II of the Act applied a warrant was issued for the apprehension of a person accused of an offence punishable in that possession and such term is or was suspected of being in or on the way to another British possession of the same group a magistrate in the last mentioned possession if satisfied that the warrant was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same was bound to endorse such warrant and the warrant so endorsed was sufficient authority to apprehend within the jurisdiction of the endorsing magistrate the person named in the warrant and to bring him before the endorsing magistrate or some other magistrate in the same possession.
If the magistrate before whom a person apprehended was brought was satisfied that the war rant was duly authenticated and was by a person having lawful authority to issue it and the identity of the prisoner was established he could order the prisoner to be returned to the British possession in which the warrant was issued and for that purpose to deliver into the custody of the persons to whom the warrant was addressed or of any one or more of them and to be held in custody and conveyed to that possession there to be dealt with according to law as if he had been there apprehended.
This was in brief the procedure prior to January 26 1950 The President of India adapted the Extradition Act 1903 in certain particulars.
The Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 and the Extradition Act 1870 in their application to India were however not repealed by the Indian Parliament and to the extent they were consistent with the constitutional scheme they remained applicable.
In order to maintain the continued application of laws of the British Parliament notwithstanding India becoming a Republic the British Parliament enacted the IndiaAct 1949 which by S. 1 provided "(1) On and after the date of India’s becoming a republic all existing law that is to say all law which whether being a rule of law or a provision of an Act of Parliament or of any other enactment or instrument whatsoever is in force on that date or has been passed or made before that date and comes into force thereafter shall until provision to the contrary is made by the authority having power to alter that law and subject to the provisions of sub s.of this section have the same operation in relation to India and to persons and things in any way belonging to or connected with India as it would have had if India had not become a republic of this section shall have effect in relation to any such law as modified by such an order in so far as the contrary intention appears in the order.
An Order in Council under this section Whether the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 applies to India after 26th January 1950 when India became a Sovereign Democratic Republic and 1 S.C.R. 280 331 Act 1903 also a similar requirement is insisted upon before a person can be extradited The situation completely changed when India became a Sovereign Democratic Republic.
After the achievement of independence and the coming into force of the new Constitution by no stretch of imagination could India be described as a British Possession and it could not be grouped by an Order in Council amongst those Possessions.
Truly speaking it became a foreign territory so far as other British Possessions are concerned and the extradition of persons taking asylum in India having committed offences in British Possessions could only be dealt with by an arrangement between the Sovereign Democratic Republic of India and the British Government and given effect to by appropriate legislation.
The Union Parliament has not so far enacted any law on the subject and it was not suggested that any arrangement has been arrived at between these two Governments.
The Indian Extradition Act 1903 has been adapted but the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 which was an Act of the British Parliament has been left severely alone.
The provisions of that Act could only be made applicable to India by incorporating them with appropriate changes into an Act of the Indian Parliament and by enacting an Indian Fugitive Offenders Act.
In the absence of any legislation on those lines it seems difficult to hold that section 12 or section 14 of the Fugitive Offenders Act has force in India by reason of the provisions of article 372 of the Constitution.
The whole basis for the applicability of Part II of the Fugitive Offenders Act has gone : India is no longer a British Possession and no Order in Council can be made to group it with other British Possessions.....................
The political background and shape of things when Part II of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 was enacted and envisaged by that Act having completely changed it is not possible without radical legislative changes to adapt that Act to the changed conditions.
That being so in our opinion the tentative view expressed by the Presidency Magistrate was right After this judgment was delivered the Government of India Ministry of External Affairs issued a notification on May 21 1955 to all State Governments of Part A B C & D States.
It was stated in the notification that ".
. . in a certain case of extradition of an offender the Supreme Court of India recently ruled that in 332 the changed circumstances the English Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 is no longer applicable to India.
There can therefore be no question of issuing a warrant of arrest addressed to a foreign police or a foreign court in respect of persons who are residing outside India except in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 2In the circumstances to obtain a fugitive offender from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries the following procedure may be adopted as long as the new Indian Extradition law is not enacted and the Commonwealth countries continue to honour our requests for the surrender of the fugitive offenders notwithstanding decisions of the Supreme Court to get the warrant endorsed in accordance with law.
This letter will be addressed to the Secretary of State of para 2 above and other documents received therewith The Chief Presidency Magistrate Calcutta made out the warrant for the arrest of More pursuant to that notification and sent the warrant to the Secretary Home This Chapter shah apply only to any such commonwealth country to which by reason of an extradition arrangement entered into with that country it may seem expedient to the Central Government to apply the same of s. 2 the expression "commonwealth country means ’a commonwealth country specified in the First Schedule and such other commonwealth country as may be added to that Schedule by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette and includes every constituent part colony or dependency of any commonwealth country so specified or added :".
But in the Schedule to the Act "Hong Kong" is not specified as one of the commonwealth country and no notification has been issued by the Government of India under S. 2(a) adding to the First Schedule "Hong Kong’ as a commonwealth country.
It is common ground between the parties that the provisions of the Extradition Act 1962 could not be resorted to for making the requisition for surrender of the fugitive offender from Hong Kong and no attempt was made in that behalf Validity of the action taken by the Chief Presidency Magis trate must therefore be adjudged in the light of the action taken pursuant to the notification issued by the Government of India on May 21 1955.
Counsel for the respondent More urged that the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate was intended to be and could in its very nature be a legal warrant enforceable within India : it had no extra territorial operation and could not be enforced outside India and when the Central Magistrate Hong Kong purported to endorse that warrant for enforcement within Hong Kong he had no authority to do so.
But this Court has no authority to sit in judgment over the order passed by the Hong Kong Central Magistrate.
The Magistrate acted in accordance with the municipal law of Hong Kong and agreed to the surrender of the offender : his action cannot be challenged in this Court It may also be pointed out that Form II of the warrant prescribed in Sch.
V of the Code of Criminal Procedure only issues a direction under the authority of the Magistrate to a Police Officer to arrest a named person and to produce him before the Court.
It does not state that the warrant shall be executed in any designated place or area.
By s. 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure a warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.
That provision does not impose any restriction upon the power of the Police Officer The section only declares in that every warrant issued by any Magistrate in India may be executed at any place in India execution of the warrant is not restricted to the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate issuing the warrant or of the Court to which he is subordinate In Emperor v. Vinayak Damodar Savarkar and Ors. the Bombay High Court considered the question whether a person who was brought to the country and was charged before a 1) I.L.R.
35 Bom.
225 335 trate with an offence under the Indian Penal Code was entitled to challenge the manner in which he was brought into the country from a foreign country.
Savarkar was charged with conspiracy under ss.
121 121A 122 and 123 of the Indian Penal Code.
He was arrested in the United Kingdom and brought to India after arrest.
under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881.
When the ship in which he was being brought to India was near French territory Savarkar escaped from police custody and set foot on French territory at Marseilles.
He was arrested by the police officers without reference to the French police authorities and brought to India.
It was contended at the trial of Savarkar that he was not liable to be tried in India since arrest by the Indian police officers in a foreign territory was without jurisdiction.
Scott CJ who delivered the principal judgment of the Court rejected the contention.
He "Where a man is in the country and is charged before a Magistrate with an offence under the Penal Code it will not avail him to say that he was brought there illegally from a foreign country It is true that Savarkar was produced before the Court and be raised an objection about the validity of the trial on the plea that he was illegally brought to India after unlawful arrest in foreign territory.
In the present case we are concerned with a stage anterior to that.
The respondent More though arrested in a foreign country lawfully by the order of the Central Magistrate Hong Kong had not been surrendered and the invalidity of the warrant issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate is set up as a ground for refusing to obtain extradition of the offender.
But on the principle of Vinayak Damodar Savarkar’s case(1) the contention about the invalidity of the arrest cannot affect the jurisdiction of the Courts in India to try More if and when he is brought here The Indian Extradition Act 103 which was enacted to provide for the more convenient administration of the English Extradition Act 1870 & 1873 and the Fugitive Offenders Act.
1881 remained in operation.
But after January 26 1950 India is no longer a "British Possession In C G Menon’s caseit was decided by this Court that application of ss.
12 and 14 of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 for surrendering an offender to a Commonwealth country in pursuance of a requisition under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 is inconsistent with the political status of India.
It is somewhat unfortunate that the Court hearing that case was not invited to say anything about the operation of the IndiaAct 1949 But C G Menon’s case(2) was a reverse case in that the Colonial Secretary of Singapore had made a requisition for 1) I.L.R.
35 Bom.
225[1955] 1 S.C.R. 280 surrender of the offender for trial for offences of criminal breach of trust in Singapore.
Whether having regard to the political status of India since January 26 1950 the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 insofar as it purported to treat India as a "British Possession" imposed an obligation to.
deliver offenders in pursuance of the India Consequential Provision) Act 1949. is a question on which it is not necessary to express an opinion.
By the declaration of the status of India as a Republic India has not ceased to be a part of the Commonwealth and the United Kingdom and several Colonies have treated the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 as applicable to them for the purpose of honouring the requisition made by the Republic of India from time to time.
In Re.
Government of India and Mubarak Ali Ahmed(1) an attempt to resist in the High Court in England the requisition by the Republic of India to surrender an offender who had committed offences in India and had fled justice failed.
Mubarak Ali a native of Pakistan was being tried in the Courts in India on charges of forgery and fraud.
He broke his bail and fled to Pakistan and thereafter to England.
He was arrested on a pro ’ visional warrant issued by the London Metropolitan Magistrate on the application of the Government of India After hearing legal submissions the Metropolitan Magistrate made an order under s 5 of the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 for Mubarak Ali’s detention in custody pending his return to India to answer the charges made against him Mubarak Ali then filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus before the Queen’s Bench of the High Court.
It was held that the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881 was in force between India and Great Britain on January 26 1950 when India become a republic and it was continued to apply by virtue of S. 1of the India Act 1960 even after Ghana became are public Re.Kwesi Armah(3).
On July 1 1960 Ghana while remaining by virtue of the Ghana 1)1 All ER 1060 3)[1966] 2 All ER 1006.(2)S.C.R.
328 Provision) Act 1960 a member of the Comon wealth became a Republic.
Kwesi Armah who was a Minister in Ghana fled the country in 1966 and took refuge in the United Kingdom He was arrested under a provisional warrant issued under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881.
The Metropolitan Magistrate being satisfied that the Act of 1881 still applied to Ghana and that a prima facie case had been made out against the applicant in respect of two alleged contravention of the Ghana Criminal Code 1960 by corruption and extortion when he was a public officer commited Kwesi Armah to prison pending his return to Ghana to underg