2.
The instant appeal is assailing the order dated Fourth Bail Application No.13680 2020.
The appellant of the husband of the appellant the appellant is aggrieved by the order impugned whereunder the 2017 dated 17052017 registered in the Police Station Karni Vihar for the offence under Sections 302 452 and the appellant as an honor killing since they had not agreed to the marriage between the deceased and the appellant.
The further details relating to the incident in a mechanical manner through an order bereft of learned senior counsel for the appellant Shri H.D Thanvi learned Government Advocate for the State of Rajasthan Shri VK Shukla learned senior counsel for respondent No. 2 and perused the impugned order as the contention of the counsel for the respondent No. 2 herein that on an earlier instance this Court had cancelled the bail and thereafter the statement of witnesses has been recorded.
The counsel for the herein and in that context sought for bail to release respondent No. 2.
However the High Court has not assigned any reason whatsoever except referring to the said contention.
Be that as it may as noted an earlier order dated 03.11.2017 had been passed by the High Court enlarging the respondent No. 2 Mukesh Chaudhary on bail.
The mother­in­law of the appellant This Court while taking note of the fact situation and before concluding that the bail is to be cancelled has “ The reading of the FIR and the charge sheet shows that prima facie there is liberty of bail to the respondent No. 2.
In 7.
The documents already taken note by this Court indicates that there is prima facie material against the respondent No. 2.
Though the appellant herein i.e. the the evidence in its entirety and it is premature to conclude on the basis of a stray sentence.
Further merely classifying the appellant as the principal star witness and referring to her statement is of no consequence since the entire evidence will have to be assessed by the Sessions Court before arriving at a earlier instance had taken note of all aspects and had arrived at the conclusion that there is prima facie material against the respondent No. 2 the mere as a change in circumstance for the High Court to High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan Bench at Jaipur impugned herein is not sustainable.
The same is No. 2 is cancelled.
We therefore direct the respondent of Upper District and Sessions Judge Sr. No. 7 Jaipur consider the case being uninfluenced by any of the order has taken note that 17 witnesses out of 47 that at this point in time 21 witnesses have been examined and the trial is proceeding.
Taking into dispose of the case as expeditiously as possible but in Pending applications if any shall stand disposed Page