KARNATAKA STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION BASAVA BHAVAN BANGALORE Revision Petition No. RP 44 2018 Date of Filing : 24 Jan 2018 Arisen out of Order Dated 18 12 2017 in Case No. Complaint Case No. CC 120 201.
Smt.Farida Banu Aged about 35 years D o Haji Sab Near Government School Lakkavalli Tarikere Tq.
Chikkamagalore S o Late Nagendrappa Aged about 35 years Proprietor Veda Engineering Factory Resident of Nanjappa layout Behind Maithri college Shivamogga HON BLE MR. Ravishankar PRESIDING MEMBER HON BLE MRS. Smt.Sunita Channabasappa Bagewadi MEMBER Dated : 04 Oct 2021 Final Order Judgement BEFORE THE BEFORE THE KARNATAKA STATE CONSUMER DISPUTES Basava Bhavan Sri Basaveswara Circle High grounds Bangalore 560001 Smt.Farida Banu .
1 .
Aged about 35 years D o Haji Sab Near Government School Lakkavalli Tarikere Tq.
Case No. RP 44 2018 1 Versus Vedamurthy .
1 .
S o Late Nagendrappa Aged about 35 years Proprietor Veda Engineering Factory Resident of Nanjappa layout Behind Maithri college Shivamogga By M s VK & Co Mr. RAVISHANKAR JUDICIAL MEMBER The Revision Petitioner has preferred this Revision Petition against the Order passed by the District Commission on IA in CC.No.120 2017 filed by them to permit them to file version which was dismissed.
Heard the respondent in person Revision Petitioner is absent since long time On going through the Revision Petition certified copy of the Order on IA by the District Commission dt.18.12.2017 we noticed that the complaint had filed a complaint against the Revision Petitioner alleging deficiency in service for death of his child.
After service of notice the Revision Petitioner not appeared before the District Commission on 06.10.2017 hence this petitioner placed exparte.
Subsequently on 27102017 this Revision Petitioner filed an application u o 9 Rule 7 of CPC to set aside the order of exparte against them.
Accordingly after hearing the District Commission allowed the IA and permit them to contest the case and provided time to file version.
Inspite of sufficient time provided to file version this Revision Petitioner has not filed version.
On 05.12.2017 this petitioner has filed an application to permit them to file version and the said application was rejected as there is no scope for the said IA and sufficient opportunity was provided hence the IA was rejected Aggrieved by the said IA order the Revision Petitioner Opposite Party is before this Infact the District Commission usually issue notice to the Opposite Party after filing the complaint for their appearance and filing version at the first hearing itself whereas in this complaint this Revision Petitioner placed exparte.
Subsequently on 27102017 he just filed an application to set aside the exparte order but not filed any version.
The District Commission ofcourse have provided sufficient opportunity to file version but the Opposite Party had not filed version well within time and the Revision Petitioner has explained that due to ill health he was 2 not able to inform their counsel to file version hence it is for the bonafide reason.
The said ground for non filing of version is not acceptable.
The Revision Petitioner has not produced any materials before the District Commission or before this Commission to show that they suffered ill health.
We found that the District Commission rightly rejected the application filed by the Opposite Party to permit them to file version.
Hence Revision Petition fails.
The District Commission is directed to adjudicate the complaint after receiving the affidavit evidence and dispose the matter on merits expeditiously.
Accordingly the Revision Petition is dismissed Sd Sd MEMBER JUDICIAL MEMBER Sunita .C.
Bagewadi) (Ravishankar HON BLE MR. Ravishankar HON BLE MRS. Smt.Sunita Channabasappa Bagewadi 3