These Criminal Appeals have been heard over video­ The appellant Raveen Kumar challenges the judgment dated 23042010 and the order dated 18.05.2010 passed by a Division under Section 20 of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 was reversed and a sentence of Briefly put the prosecution case is that on 01111994 at suspected ammunition near the HP­J&K border at Surangani stopped ghee a bag of maize 20 bottles of honey rajmah angithi thermos stepney and some other miscellaneous articles.
A polythene bag underneath the driver’s seat was also discovered.
Suspecting it to contain narcotics the police summoned two local shopkeepers the police party itself.
The contents of the bag were then examined and charas in the form of dhoopbati and balls was found.
It was extracted the charas was sealed and seized and other procedural of one of the two independent witnesses Nam Singh was recorded.
The sample was sent for chemical analysis where it was confirmed to be charas with a resin content of 345%.
The prosecution accordingly charged the appellant for offence under Over the course of trial five witnesses were examined by the prosecution and various documents including PW1’s statement appellant’s written consent for search recovery memo arrest memo seals and site plan were adduced in evidence.
PW1 was declared seizure of the charas but nevertheless he broadly supported the prosecution case as regards procedural compliances sealing of the police witnesses corroborated the prosecution version regarding search seizure and other statutory compliances under the NDPS Act The appellant in his defence denied possession of any prohibited given his earlier refusal to contribute money towards a sports meet organised by the jurisdictional police.
No defence evidence however was led and the appellant instead focused on highlighting acquitted the appellant observing that possession of a prohibited dated 09.11.1994 ­ given by the prosecution to oppose appellant’s Contraband articles.
Earlier also on 27.10.94 reliable secret information was received that he was carrying charas 7 kgs in the been under observation for a long time.” In the opinion of the trial they did not know or previously engage with the appellant.
It also became the sole factor to conclude that the police in fact had was nothing but a deliberately crafted narrative to circumvent the the only independent witness had not supported the prosecution The respondent­State appealed before the High Court which through judgment dated 23042010 held that the reasoning of the the entire evidence on record observed that first the trial Court had wrongly discarded the statement of PW1 for he had corroborated major parts of the prosecution version and had merely pleaded possible contradiction would be remote and immaterial.
Fourth and most crucially PW5 had not been confronted High Court further opined that the alternate theory propounded by the defence was selectively not suggested to PW5.
Given these two of sentence and passed a separate order of sentencing dated was not a ‘commercial quantity’.
Further giving due weight to the and a fine of Rs 50 000 What is the confronted with during cross­examination and Whether non­ A) Scope of appeal in cases of acquittal set aside a finding of acquittal is legally unfounded.
It has been settled through a catena of decisions that there is no difference of power scope jurisdiction or limitation under the CrPC between Court is free to re­consider questions of both law and fact and re­ appreciate the entirety of evidence on record.
There is nonetheless a Thus in practice appellate Courts are reluctant to interfere with orders of acquittal especially when two reasonable conclusions are 12.
This Court has very illustratively in State of UP v. Banne2 grave miscarriage of justice or perverse findings of fact.
In turn Babu can be held to be perverse if the findings have been arrived at by 13.
Further this Court in exercise of its powers under Article 136 would be aptly beneficial to quote what this Court has observed in “14.
If after applying these principles not by their mechanical recitation in the judgment the High Court has reached the will not reappraise evidence in appeals brought before it under Article 136 of the Constitution.
In such appeals only such examination of the evidence would ordinarily be necessary as is High Court has disregarded the guidelines set by this Court for assessment are totally disregarded otherwise conscience can There is therefore no legal necessity for us to re­appreciate the entire evidence merely on the premise that the High Court has jurisdiction.
Instead the scope of the present appeals ought to be and whether the High Court’s re­appreciation of evidence and B) Reliance on prosecution’s reply to bail application trial Court reached such finding solely on the basis of certain Learned counsel for the appellant could not fairly dispute the proceedings as compared to the statements recorded by the police under Section 161 of CrPC.
Nevertheless a Court should be over­ cautious to place reliance on a piece of evidence with which the proceedings at best can be treated as an admission which as held by this Court in Sita Ram Bhau Patil v. Ramchandra Nago Patil5 must not only be proved but also the opposite party must be confronted with it at the stage of cross examination.
It would be the party who has made it the question comes within the it has to be found out whether the admission is clear has made it “it is sound that if a witness is under cross­ examination on oath he should be given an opportunity if the documents are to be used against him to tender his This is a general salutary and intelligible rule” … Therefore a opportunity to controvert this reply document was given to the prosecution nor was PW5 confronted with it.
Moreover no weight can bail on 17111994 had interpreted the same to conclude that the police “was not having a prior information that the petitioner was carrying Charas in his Maruti Van though it appears that there was a C) Need for independent witnesses namely PW2 and PW5 were contradictory.
Both these observations High Court on the contrary has given cogent and lucid reasons as to 21.
Although declared hostile by the prosecution Nam SinghDuring cross­examination he admits to having duly perused the being under any form of police pressure thus seriously undermining any oral statement to the contrary.
His deposition independently establishes that the Maruti van of the appellant had indeed been stopped the appellant’s consent was taken a search had been 6 Kalpnath Rai v. State AIR SC 201 ¶ 9 conducted certain items were seized and some substance had been weighed and sealed.
Although PW1 claimed not to have specifically witnessed seizure of the charas but he has not denied so either.
He submits that he had gone back to his shop to attend to some the trial Court.
Thus far from undermining the prosecution version statements we find that the High Court’s observations are unimpeachable.
It would indeed be patently wrong to suggest that PW5 deposed that the independent witnesses were called after the suspected contraband had already been recovered from underneath of the other substances being the tins of ghee honey maize etc. but D) Leniency in sentencing 23.
After having given a very generous consideration to the appeal we feel that it would serve the interests of justice to simply not sentence both at the time of commission of the offence and at the years.
Section 20(ii) of the NDPS Act as it stood before the amendment of 20017 specified that where contravention relates to cannabis in a form other than ganja then the same shall be ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shall also be 25.
Similarly Section 20(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act as it stands post the amendment of 2001 specifies the same minimum mandatory punishment of ten years for possession of ‘commercial quantity’ of time relied upon the quantity of pure resin content of 424 gms in Hira Singh v. Union of India8 the total quantity of the mixture which includes the neutral substance ought to be relevant for 230 gms which exceeds the definition of ‘commercial quantity’ as 26.
For the afore­stated reasons the appeals are dismissed.
The appellant’s bail bonds are cancelled and the respondent­State is