Serial No.02 Regular List HIGH COURT OF MEGHALAYA AT SHILLONG MCNo67 2021 Date of Order: 25.11.2021 Srilekha Das Purkayastha & ors Vs. Director General Assam Rifles & ors Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjib Banerjee Chief Justice Hon’ble Mr. Justice W Diengdoh Judge For the Petitioner Appellant(s) For the Respondent(s) i) Whether approved for reporting in Law journals etc.: ii) Whether approved for publication in press: Mr. MK Choudhury SrAdv with Mr. TN Srivinasan Adv Mr. R Deb Nath CGC Mr. N Syngkon Adv for R 2 3 & 4 JUDGMENT:(Oral) 1.
The present application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act 1963 has been filed by would be appellants who had been granted leave to intervene in an appeal that has since been dismissed as withdrawn.
2.
It will be evident from the order dated September 26 2018 by which leave was granted to the present applicants to intervene in the appeal that writ petitions had been filed on behalf of the applicants and the principle issue decided by the order under appeal in WA No.78 of 2016 would govern the writ petitions filed by these applicants.
3.
As far as WA No.78 of 2016 is concerned the appeal was permitted to be withdrawn by an order dated October 22 2021 since the notice challenged by the writ petitioner therein was withdrawn and as such the relevant writ petitioner’s cause of action did not survive.
4.
However at the time that WA No.716 was permitted to be withdrawn leave was granted to the applicants in MCNo18 to file a fresh writ appeal.
The present application for condonation of delay has been filed in connection with an appeal proposed from the same order that was assailed in WA No.716.
5.
It is submitted on behalf of the applicants that since the order impugned in WA No.716 would govern the decision making process at the writ court stage the independent petitions filed by the present applicants may suffer the same fate.
6.
It may be observed that the order impugned in WA No.716 was carried in an appeal.
However the appeal was not decided on merits but was permitted to be withdrawn.
In such a scenario the order impugned in WA No.78 of 2016 cannot be said to have been attained complete finality.
In such circumstances it will be open to the applicants to pursue their writ petitions in accordance with law and even if the learned Single Bench finds embarrassment in passing any order different from the order impugned in WA No.716 the applicants will have the right to prefer appeals from the individual writ petitions.
7.
Accordingly the present application is considered as superfluous and dismissed with liberty to the applicants to challenge any order that may be passed on the writ petitions filed by them covering the same or similar 8.
There will be no order as to costs.
9.
Accordingly WA No.19 of 2021 and MC No69 of 2021 are dismissed at the receiving stage.
W Diengdoh) Judge Chief Justice Meghalaya “Lam DR PS”