JUDGMENT This appeal arises out of the impugned judgment No. 235 1998 45 1998 dated 09.05.2001 and upheld the The present appeal pertains to Nimay Sah accused no.3 who is the elder brother of the deceased’s husband Gora Sah accused no.1.
The present appellant­accused has suffered conviction along with accused no.1 Gora Sah husband of the deceased and accused no.2 Nitai Sah father­ The deceased Asha Kumari had been married to accused no.1 Gora Sah and had been living in her matrimonial home.
As per the prosecution story she was harassed for demand of dowry of Rs. 10 000 ­ by the accused persons.
This demand was originally made to her father Devendra Sah the complainant at the time of her vidai ceremony.
Owing to her complaints of harassment her father Devendra Sahwent to her matrimonial home to pacify her in­laws and the harassment did not stop the complainant sent his son Accused no.1 Gora Sah husband of the deceased went to deceased’s parental home on 18021998.
On the fateful day ie 20.02.1998 he took the deceased for a morning walk.
Having come back alone after an hour he hurriedly packed his belongings to leave.
When confronted about the whereabouts of the deceased he said that the soon.
He left thereafter.
When the deceased did not return she was ultimately found dead near the canal with strangulation marks on her neck.
An FIR was registered against the accused persons under Section 304­B read with A read with Section 34 IPC and Section 304­B read with Section 313 CrPC denied all the evidence tendered by the court relying upon the prosecution version convicted the consistent and corroborative thereby confirmed the judgment persons has been confirmed accused no.3 Nimay Sah The learned counsel on behalf of the appellant­ the prosecution story comprises of vague allegations unsubstantiated by evidence.
The entire family of accused no.1 Gora Sah husband of the deceased has been roped in this case.
Thus the conviction of the appellant­accused Heard the learned counsel for the parties through the time of vidai ceremony and subsequently harassment on testimonies of Shyam Sunder SahMunna SahChampa Devi and Devendra Sah to uphold 10 000 ­.
However in his deposition the appellant­accused is and their family members.
Apart from this witness Shyam Sunder Sah Munna Sah and Champa Devi P.W.9) depose that the deceased was being troubled at her It ought to be noted that apart from these vague allegations no specific instance of hostile attitude or these witnesses.
Further Shyam Sunder Sahbrother of the deceased has admitted in his cross­examination that place and that none of the letters mention any harassment All other independent witnesses have turned hostile and have not supported the prosecution story.
In fact even Panchanan Sah who is the paternal uncle of the witnesses the ingredients of Section 498­A IPC have not been In light of the above we are of the view that the conviction of the appellant­accused cannot be sustained Accordingly the judgment and order dated 11.02.2010 Appeal No. 176 of 2001 is hereby set aside and the The appeal is accordingly allowed in the aforementioned terms.
Pending applications if any shall also