 Hig h C o urt of H.P on 24 04 HCHP IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH SHIMLACOPC No. 721.Decided on : 24 th April 2021Dr.
Rattan Singh...Petitioner.
VersusSh.
Suneel Sharma & another ....Respondents.
Coram:The Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sureshwar Thakur Judge.Whether approved for reporting 1 For the Petitioner:Mr. Parkash Sharma Advocate.For the Respondents: Mr. Surender Verma Advocate.
Sureshwar Thakur Judgewhichwas recently vacated by Prof Laxman Singh Thakur.
Inthis context it was also fond that the said residentialaccommodation i.e. Set No22 needs to be renovated inorder to make it habitable as per report of the ExecutiveEngineerDivn.
II dated 11082020After detailed discussion the Committeeunanimously decided that the matter of the petitioner Dr.Rattan Singhl will be duly considered as per rules in orderof his seniority amongst the other eligible applicants asand when the next meeting of the Committee will be heldfor which the petitioner Dr. Rattan Singh is required toapply through proper procedure on the proforma forchange of accommodation”3A conjoint perusal of the afore consideration order and resultant thereto proceedings drawn by the House…2… Hig h C o urt of H.P on 24 04 HCHP Allotment Committee the relevant portion whereof standsextracted hereinabove clearly personify that the residentialaccommodation as now available with the House AllotmentCommittee for allotment to the applicants concerned is underrenovation.
Necessarily the afore consideration order did notmake any peremptory direction(s) upon the respondents toensure allotment of the available vacant accommodation if any vis a vis the applicant and also it did not cast any obligation upon the respondents to dehors the relevant rules makeallotment of the afore accommodation to the petitioner ratherwhen the allotment of the residential accommodation to thepetitioner was subject to compliance being meted with the allthe relevant rules thereupon the writ petitioner cannot makeany contention before this Court that the extant available vacantaccommodation be allotted to him.
Consequently there is nomerit in the extant contempt petition and it is dismissedaccordingly.
However the respondents are directed to ensurethat after completion of the renovation of the extanty available…3… Hig h C o urt of H.P on 24 04 HCHP vacant residential accommodation and also as and when otherthan the afore residential accommodation(s) becomes availablefor allotment to the allottees concerned they shall bearing mindthe seniority of the applicant petitioner herein and henceconsider the petitioner s claim for allotment in accordance withthe relevant rules.
All pending applications also stand disposedof.
…4…