Briefcasedin Case Name: DELSTAR COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL LTD V S SARVOTTAM VINIJAYA LTD & ORS Case Year: 2001 They may or they may not.
That is beside the point.
Some technicalities cannot be permitted to defeat the exercise of the equitable jurisdiction conferred by Section 397 of the Companies Act" DELSTAR COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL LTD V S SARVOTTAM VINIJAYA LTD. & ORS. Case name: Delstar Commercial & Financial Ltd v s Sarvottam Vinijaya 2003 113 CompCas 642 CLB Company law board AK BANERJI By CHAIRMAN S BALASUBRAMANIAN By VICE CHAIRMAN Decided on: MARCH 30 2001 Section 397 398 398 402 in the Companies Act 1956 Article 136 141 142 in the Constitution of India 1950  BRIEF FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY: 1.
The petitioner is {SKS} which seeks to highlight the plight of division of business between him and his brothers.
All the petitioners are under the control of one Shri S.K.
Somanydecided to continue together to manage the companies including the 2 remaining major companies.
2.
The division of the business of the family and allocation of the major companies was done on the basis of a valuation done by Price Waterhouse and each brother was to take businesses worth 1 4th of the total value.
Two major companies allotted to SKS and HLS 1 | P a g e Briefcasedin Case Name: DELSTAR COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL LTD V S SARVOTTAM VINIJAYA LTD & ORS Case Year: 2001 were SPL Ltdand Soma Textile LtdLtd s case1 Comp LJ 1that even when the allegations of oppression are not established the court is not powerless to do justice between the parties was made in exercise of the powers of the Supreme Court in terms of Article 136 142 of the Constitution.
3 | P a g e Briefcasedin Case Name: DELSTAR COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL LTD V S SARVOTTAM VINIJAYA LTD & ORS Case Year: 2001 2.
The court opined that these appeals arose out of a petition under Section 397 and that the court had extensively dealt with the provisions of this section in the judgment and made the above observation we are of the view that the observation of the apex court that the court is not powerless to do substantial justice between the parties even when acts of oppression are not established is a proposition made with reference to the powers of a court in dealing with Section 397 petition.
This view gets strengthened from wherein when it was argued that Coats and Newey who were two of the three main partners were not of one mind and that Newey never complained of oppression the Supreme Court observed: "They may or they may not.
That is beside the point.
Such technicalities cannot be permitted to defeat the exercise of the equitable jurisdiction conferred by Section 397 of the Companies Act."
3.
The counsel pointed out that HLS is not denying the family settlement by which two of the brothers parted ways and HLS and SKS decided to continue together on the understanding that all the companies under their control would be jointly managed.
Even one of the brothers in the Calcutta suit has admitted joint management.
No joint management could exist without equal shareholding.
Referring to AIR3 SCC 639 sic) he pointed out that in case of joint management equality in shareholding could be presumed.
All the respondent companies were promoted by two trusted employees of SKS and HLS and these companies always had directors approved by both SKS and HLS.
Neither SKS nor HLS even though were controlling substantial shares in the companies was a director in these companies.
4.
The court observed that the main apprehension of SKS is that by virtue of the control of the respondent companies by HLS these companies might exercise voting in respect of the shares held by them in Soma and SLP to the detriment of the interests of SKS.
The court find that the Calcutta High Court has already protected the interests of SKS in SPL by directing that no decision shall be taken to deprive the SKS group from having joint management of SPL without the leave of the court.
As far as Soma is concerned the learned counsel for the respondents Shri Sen has made a statement that the control of Soma now with SKS shall not be disturbed.
Thus the court find that the interests of SKS in both Soma and SPL are now protected.
4 | P a g e Briefcasedin Case Name: DELSTAR COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL LTD V S SARVOTTAM VINIJAYA LTD & ORS Case Year: 2001 5.
Therefore the court is of the view that in view of the pending proceedings before the Calcutta High Court and view of the complicated shareholdings in the respondent companies we should decline considering the prayer of the petitioners for division of assets and accordingly the court do so.
However the court grant liberty to the petitioners to approach in case the declaration sought by them in the Calcutta High Court is granted by the court.
6.
The court said that in the present case court find that even though both SKS and HLS groups hold shares in the respondent companies substantial percentage of the shares in these companies are held by various companies known as common companies.
The shareholding pattern of these companies is also complicated.
The main apprehension of SKS is that by virtue of the control of the respondent companies by HLS these companies might exercise voting in respect of the shares held by them in Soma and SLP to the detriment of the interests of SKS.
Court find that the Calcutta High Court has already protected the interests of SKS in SPL by directing that no decision shall be taken to deprive the SKS group from having joint management of SPL without the leave of the  DECISION HELD BY COURT: 1.
The court dispose of all these nine petitions however without any order as to cost.
2.
The court observed that pending proceedings before the Calcutta High Court and view of the complicated shareholdings in the respondent companies court should decline considering the prayer of the petitioners for division of assets and accordingly court do 3.
However court grant liberty to the petitioners to approach us in case the declaration sought by them in the Calcutta High Court is granted by the court.
so.
5 | P a g e