IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.121715 Godawari Devi Wife of Shri Banshidhar Jha resident of Mohalla SaifullaganjWard No. 12 New 6Police Station Town District Darbhanga ... Petitioner The State of Bihar.
The Commissioner Darbhanga Division Darbhanga The Deputy Collector Land Reforms Sadar Darbhanga The Circle officer Sadar Darbhanga Sri Prem Narayan Mishra Son of Late Braj Kishore Mishra Resident of Mohalla Digghi West Professor Colony Police Station Town District ... Respondents Mr. Mrigank Mauli Sr. Advocate For the Petitioner Mr. Baidya Nath Thakur Advocate For the State : Ms. Nivedita Nirvikar GA 10 For the Resp.
No. 5 Mr. Rajeeva Roy Sr. Advocate CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE VIKASH JAIN Date : 24 01 2022 Heard learned Sr. counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for the respondents through video conference.
2.
The following reliefs as formulated by the petitioner have been claimed in the writ petition “(i) For quashing the order dated 29.06.2015 passed by the Member Administrative of the Bihar Land Tribunal Patna in BLT Case No. 396 2014 whereby while dismissing the same it was observed that the appellate order of the Divisional Commissioner Darbhanga allowing the prayer of respondent Patna High Court CWJC No.121715 dt.24 01 2022 no. 5 for demarcation of the disputed land appertaining to Khata No. 105 Khesra No. 9376admeasuring 1 Katha of Mouza Saifullaganj Ward No. 6 PS Town District Darbhanga did not call for interference and ii) Further prays for issuance of any other appropriate order orders direction directions and relief reliefs which they are entitled to in the facts and circumstances of the case.” 3.
When the matter is taken up learned counsel for the petitioner fairly states that in the interest of resolving the dispute once and for all rather than pressing the prayer for quashing the impugned order it would suffice in the overall interest of the parties if the measurement of the disputed land is carried out in a transparent manner.
This could be achieved if the measurement is made in presence of the petitioner the respondent no. 5 and Smt Indrakala Deviwho is also said to be residing in a part of the property 4.
Learned counsel for the respondent no. 5 has no objection to the prayer of the petitioner and fairly agrees to the 5.
Having regard to the common stand of the main contesting parties as above this Court is of the view that no fruitful purpose would be served in entering into the detailed merits of the contentions raised in the present writ petition Patna High Court CWJC No.121715 dt.24 01 2022 6.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of with a direction to the Circle Officer Sadar Darbhangain Mauza Saifullaganj Ward No. 6and Ward No. 12in presence of the interested parties as aforesaid expeditiously and after observing all legal formalities Vikash Jain J Transmission Date N.A