HIGH COURT OF TRIPURA Mat.
Appl.
No. 115 B E F O R E HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S.TALAPATRA HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S.G.CHATTOPADHYAY Sri Bijit Kumar Banik S O Late Brajalal Banik Resident of Palace Compound P.S East Agartala District West Tripura Appellant(s) Versus Smti.
Kaberi BanikW O Sri Bijit Kumar Banik D O Late Rohini Debbarma Now residing at Harish Thakur Lane near Bijoy Kumar Girls HS School B.K.
Road Krishnanagar PS West Agartala District West Tripura Respondent(s) For Appellant(s) Mr. SDeb Sr.Adv.
Mr. Ranjit Dasgupta Adv.
For Respondent(s) Date of hearing Date of pronouncement : 01.04.2021 Ms. P Dhar Adv.
Mr. Jhon Debbarma Adv.
Mr. H Debbarma Adv.
12.02.2021 Whether fit for reporting Yes No JUDGMENT Per S.G.Chattopadhyay J] The present appeal is filed by the appellant husband being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment dated 09.09.2015 delivered by the Family Court Agartala in divorce.
Case No. TS 104 of 2009 rejecting his petition for The factual background is as follows: Appellant Bijit Kr.Banik and respondent Kaberi Banik entered into matrimonial alliance as per hindu rites and rituals at Agartala on 22.07.1994.
After marriage respondent wife came to her matrimonial home.
But her conduct to the appellant and his family members was very indignant and rude.
She did not like to share a common mess with them.
To avoid trouble the appellant rented a house near her parental home and the spouses started living together in the rented house.
She became more abusive in the rented house and spoiled the domestic peace.
Appellant tried to bring about changes in her by persuasion.
But his efforts did not work.
She once physically assaulted her appellant husband by fist and blows.
However the wife conceived in the rented house and a son was born to them.
After the death of his father the appellant returned to his ancestral house at palace compound Agartala along with his wife and son where the second son was born to them on 15102003.
When she was living with her appellant husband after the death of her father in law she raised quarrel with her husband and lodged a complaint at the East Agartala woman police station on 08022004 against her appellant husband on various allegations of cruelty.
As a result of her complaint police arrested her appellant husband.
Thereafter on 18032004 she appeared at the police station and informed the officer in charge of East Agartala Woman Police Station that pursuant to an altercation with her husband on 07.02.2004 she returned to her parents and lodged a case against her husband at the spur of moment for which her husband suffered detention in police custody.
She withdrew her case and resumed conjugal life with the appellant.
On 30.10.2005 elder brother of the respondent visited the house of the appellant.
His wife then left her matrimonial home with her elder brother along with her children.
The appellant met her several times at her matrimonial home to bring her back.
But she did not return.
The appellant husband then filed a petition at East Agartala police station on 16122005 seeking police help to rescue his wife and children from her parental home.
3 years thereafter the appellant sent a letter to his wife by post registered with AD on 01.12.2008 seeking her consent for filing a petition for divorce on mutual consent.
Having received no response from his wife he filed petition in the Family Court at Agartala under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act seeking divorce.
The respondent wife filed written objection denying the allegations of her husband.
She admitted that her elder son was born in the rented house.
She also stated that after the death of her father in law she returned to her in law’s house where the second son was born to them.
According to the respondent she never wanted separation from the family members of her husband.
According to her when her in laws’ house at Palace Compound was demolished for reconstruction she shifted to a rented house along with all members of the family of her husband.
It was stated by the respondent that she never misbehaved with her husband.
Rather she was always willing to live a happy conjugal life with her husband along with their children.
The respondent therefore urged the court for dismissal of the divorce petition filed by her husband.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties the following issue was framed by the Family Court: “Whether the petitioner was subjected to cruelty by his wife and whether he was entitled to get the decree of divorce from his wife.” After the issue was framed the parties were called to adduce their evidence.
The plaintiff adduced the oral evidence of himself and his neighbour Kaushik Dey.
His defendant wife on the other hand examined 03 witnesses including herself.
She was examined as DW 1 her relative Smt. Maya Debbarma was examined as DW 2 and her sister Rakhi Debbarma was examined as DW 3.
On appreciation of evidence the Family Court by judgment and order dated 18022013 in TS 104 of 2009 declined to grant divorce in favour of the appellant husband and dismissed the suit observing as follows: “20) Considering the submission I find that this court is to consider the prayer for divorce as per Hindu marriage Act 1955 on the ground as provided in Sec.13 of the Act and there is no such ground for granting divorce on the fact that the marriage between the parties irretrievably broken down and as such I find no merit in the submission made by the Ld.
Counsel of the petitioner in this 21) Besides considering the rest submission of the Ld.
Counsel of the petitioner that there is no denial of the statement made on affidavit by the petitioner and her witnesses during their cross examination I find that this court directed both the parties to produce their witnesses before for cross examination during the trial in view of Sec.16 of the Family Courts Act 1984 and in no circumstances the examination in chief of the court the petitioner and her witnesses submitted in this court was accepted by this court subject to cross examination and as such I find no to consider 22) In the result I find that the petitioner is not entitled to any decree of divorce as prayed for against the respondent and accordingly all this issues No. ’I’ ‘II’ and ‘III’ are decided in the negative and against the petitioner.” Aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said judgment of the Family Court the appellant husband challenged the judgment in this court in Matt.App.10 of 2013.
It was observed by this court in the said appeal that no effective opportunity was granted to the other side for cross examination of the PWs during trial of the case.
Therefore vide order dated 18022015 in Matt.
App.
113 this court remanded back the case to the Family Court for fresh consideration in terms of the directions issued by this court.
Relevant extract of the judgment of this court is as under: “7.
On scrutiny of the records as well as on appreciating the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties this Court finds that no effective opportunity was granted for cross examination of PW 1 and PW 3.
It further appears from their cross examination that the Court has only noted after completion of the examination in chief that “It is not a fact that I deposed false”.
It appears that the cross examination was not carried out for exposing the truth rather having written that “It is not a fact that I witnesses was declared closed.
the examination of 8.
We are shocked to observe the way the family court has recorded the cross examination.
At this juncture Ms Dhar learned counsel has submitted that the defendant has been seriously prejudiced for denial of the opportunity to cross examine.
Therefore it is apparent that without such opportunities granted to the defendant the impugned judgment and decree has been passed.
There are several judgments as stated where this High Court has rendered in unequivocal terms that the right to cross examine is a fundamental facet of the fair trial and component of natural justice.
We are constrained to observe further that the way the cross examination has been done and recorded by the court of the Judge Family Court is wholly unacceptable in terms of the doctrine of natural justice.
Apart that the way the documentary evidence has been introduced in the records has not been introduced following the proper procedure as the respondent defendant in the suit did not have any opportunity of raising any objection against admissibility or relevance of the documentary evidence.
These are material irregularities in the proceeding those have incapacitated the court to arrive at the correct finding on the fact.
It is trite that fair procedure is a fundamental facet of the rule of law.
Even though the Judge Family court has the statutory right to devise its own procedure but he cannot devise procedure which is not in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
9.
Hence this Court has no hesitation to hold that the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside and accordingly the judgment and decree dated 18022013 are set aside for the limited purpose of remanding the matter back for re commencing the inquiry after affording opportunity of cross examination to the respondent defendant in the suit and to allow the respondent the defendant No. 1 in the suit to raise any objection in regard to documentary evidence.
Hence this matter is remitted for fresh consideration in the manner as directed above.
10.
In the result this appeal stands partly allowed to the extent as indicated above.
Draw the decree accordingly.
Send down the LCRs forthwith with a copy of this order.
11.
Before parting with the records the Judge Family Court Agartala West Tripura is directed to complete the entire proceedings within six months from the date of receipt of the case records along with a copy of this order.
” Pursuant to the direction of this court in the aforementioned appeal the Family Court framed the following “i) Whether the husband petitioner was subjected to cruelty by the wife respondent and if so to what extent.
ii) Has the petitioner been deserted by the prayed for.” iii) Is the petitioner entitled to decree as Each of the parties was given opportunity to cross examine the witnesses of the other side.
Accordingly PW 1 that is the appellant husband and his neighbour Kaushik Deywere cross examined at length on behalf of the defendant.
Similarly DW 1 i.e. the defendant wife her relative Smt. Maya Debbarma DW 2 and her sister Smt. Rakhi Debbarma DW 3 were also cross examined at length on behalf of the appellant On appreciation of evidence the Family Court vide fresh judgment dated 09.09.2015 in TS DR.N.G.DASTANE Versus MRS. SDASTANE reported in 2 SCC 326 ii) V.BHAGAT Versus D.BHAGATreported in1 SCC 337 iii) SAVITRI PANDEY Versus PREM CHANDRA PANDEY reported in2 SCC 73 iv) NAVEEN KOHLI Versus NEELU KOHLI reported in4 SCC 558 v) SAMAR GHOSH Versus.
JAYA GHOSH reported in4 SCC 511 vi) GURBUX SINGH Versus HARMINDER KAUR reported in14 SCC 301 vii) U.SREE Versus U.SRINIVAS reported in2 SCC 114 Ms. PDhar learned Advocate appearing for the respondent wife on the other hand argued that the respondent wife by adducing consistent and coherent evidence proved that she was treated with cruelty by her appellant husband.
According to Ms. Dhar learned Advocate the husband compelled his respondent wife to leave her matrimonial home who is now trying to take the advantage of his own wrong.
It is submitted by Ms. Dhar learned Advocate that even though her complaint was genuine day after filing the complaint against her husband at the police station the wife had withdrawn her complaint at the instance of her husband and in laws to save their relationship.
If she really intended to terminate the relationship she would not have withdrawn the complaint against her husband.
It is submitted by learned counsel that the respondent wife has 02 children and she is still willing to live with her husband.
Relying on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Savitri Pandey learned counsel submits that neither cruelty nor desertion has been proved against the respondent wife.
Moreover the theory of irretrievable break down of marriage does not apply to this case because given facts and circumstances of the case do not establish that their marriage has become dead.
Learned counsel therefore urges the court for dismissal of the appeal.
We may recall that the appellant in support of his case has examined himself as PW 1 and his neighbour Koushik Dey as PW 2.
Bijit Kumar Banik the appellant PW 1 stated at the trial that inspite of having his ancestral house at palace compound he had to stay in a rented house for about 8 years from 1994 to 2002 at the insistence of his wife where their first son was born.
After the birth of their son they returned to the ancestral house of the appellant and stayed there for about 1 year where their second son was born.
Again his wife demanded for moving to a rented house.
The appellant could not accede to her proposal because he did not want to leave his old mother alone in the ancestral house.
Finally in the month of October 2005 his wife left his company bag and baggage along with their sons.
He sought police help to bring her back but his efforts did not work.
Since then his wife is living along with the sons away from him.
According to the appellant as an agent of ‘Rose Valley’ his wife earns ₹10 000 per month.
The appellant PW 1 was cross examined at length on behalf of his respondent wife.
In his cross examination he stated that after separation he did not write any letter to his wife to get her back home.
Several suggestions were put to him on behalf of his wife during the cross examination.
It was suggested to him that his wife was treated with cruelty at her matrimonial home.
The appellant denied the suggestion.
Among the other suggestions it was also suggested to him that he made false statement before the court that his wife deserted him.
It was also denied by the PW.
As stated above the appellant also examined his neighbour Koushik Dey as PW 2 who stated that the appellant and his wife lived a peaceful conjugal life in the rented house for many years.
Thereafter the appellant came back to his ancestral house along with his wife and son.
Then the wife of the appellant left her matrimonial home at a night at about 12 O’clock.
The PW was not aware about the actual reason of their matrimonial dispute.
In his cross examination he denied that he gave false statement before the court.
The respondent on the other hand examined herself as DW 1.
She stated that after marriage she stayed with her husband in a rented house for about 8 years.
After the death of her father in law she was taken by her appellant husband to his ancestral house at palace compound where their second son was born.
The respondent wife stated that problems started after the birth of their second son.
Her husband started quarrelling with her on trivial issues.
Every time after her return from her parental home her husband used to encounter her with queries like why she delayed in returning home etc. She felt humiliated for such conduct of her husband.
In her statement she referred to an incidence of such humiliation which is as under: “.....After birth of my 2nd son in one occasion there was a program at Astabal market in front of our house.
My maternal sister in law also came to our house to attend that program where some artists had come from outside Tripura.
My husband was absent at that time in the house.
One of my sister who is my distant relative used to stay in my marital home as a tenant.
On that day I took permission from the program and mother in law and attended accordingly I along with my maternal sister in law and the sister went to attend the program.
At about 930 pm I along with my maternal sister in law came back to our house where I found my husband sleeping in the house.
My maternal sister in law left the house.
After that my husband had started enquiry why I went to attend the program without his permission and in this respect started altercation and finally assaulted me physically causing trauma on my face.
I had to bear the pain and on the next day I left my marital home and lodged an FIR to Women’s PS.
I also went to GB Hospital for my treatment.
Later on I filed a petition to Women’s PS not to proceed with that case...” In her cross examination she reiterated her statements made out in her examination in chief and denied the suggestion of her husband that she gave false statement before the court.
She asserted in cross examination that she never deserted her husband because she was always willing to live conjugal life with her husband.
Smt. Maya Debbarmaa distant relative of the respondent wife stated that she was a tenant in the ancestral house of the appellant from the year 2001 to 2004.
She supported the statement made by the DW 1 and stated as “In one occasion I along with the wife of the petitioner and one of her sister in law went to attend a program in the Astabal market.
At about 10 11 pm.
before my arrival the op came to her marital home to feed her baby.
After arrival to my house I used to her hot altercation quarrel between the petitioner and his wife.
On the next day morning I was called by the petitioner and his mother to his house and accordingly I went to their house and found both of them in altercation.
The husband petitioner suddenly slap to his wife on her face to which I raised strong objection.
Thereafter I came back to my house but the altercation was going on.” In her cross examination she reasserted incidence of physical torture of the appellant on his wife and denied his suggestion that she gave false statement before the DW 3 Smt. Rakhi Debbarma who is the sister of respondent wife also supported the incidence of physical assault on her sister by her appellant husband.
She stated that at about 1245 O’clock in one night her sister wanted to speak to her over telephone.
Soon after she picked up the receiver she heard her sister crying from the other end.
Her appellant brother in law then came between them.
The PW asked her appellant brother in law to give the phone to her sister.
Reluctant appellant then gave the phone to her sister who told the PW over telephone that she was physically assaulted by her appellant husband and she requested the PW to take her back from her matrimonial home.
Immediately the PW along with her husband and one of her neighbours rushed to the house of her sister and noticed bleeding injury on the face of her sister.
She brought her sister to her home.
But the appellant did not allow his son to go with them.
On the following day the PW had taken her sister to hospital.
After treatment she was sent to her matrimonial home.
But ultimately thereafter she had to leave her in law’s house because of appellant’s cruel treatment.
In her cross examination it was suggested to her on behalf of the appellant that entire statement of her was a falsehood.
She denied the suggestion.
Though the appellant did not specifically assign any ground of divorce in his petition dated 13052009 from his averments in the petition it can be gathered that his petition is founded on the grounds of cruelty and desertion.
The relevant averments made by the appellant in paragraph 11 and 12 are as “11.
…The defendant had without any rhyme or reason withdrawn her from cohabitation and had not shown any intention for resumption any conjugal right nor did she show any respect for the performance of martial obligation.
The marriage had for all purposes failed and has become a deadwood.
The defendant received the said letter on 26122008.
Despite that the defendant has neither come back nor replied to that.
That the defendant wife left her husband and matrimonial home out of her own wish and without consent of the plaintiff and has not so far made any attempt to come back to the plaintiff’s house.
The marriage is not only to have any symbolical value but also meaning of marital good relationship between the parties of the marriage.
the statement made 12.
From paragraphs it would be clear that the plaintiff has been subjected to intentional cruelty by the defendant soon after the marriage and such cruelties are sufficient ground to get a decree of dissolution of marriage between the plaintiff and the defendant.” Apart from these two grounds learned counsel appearing for the appellant also emphasised on the ground of irretrievable break down of marriage.
It has been submitted by him that during the last 15 years there was no meeting between the spouses which lead to the presumption that their marriage has broken down irretrievably and denial of divorce will cause misery to both of them.
As discussed Mr.Sankar Deb learned counsel of the appellant husband has relied on few decisions of the Apex Court to support his contentions.
Reliance has been placed by him on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Dr.NGDastanein which the factual context is entirely different.
In that case the Apex Court first examined whether the conduct of the respondent wife amounted to cruelty.
The court held that constant threat of the wife of the appellant that she would put an end to her own life or that she would set the house on fire her threat that she would make her husband lose his job and have the matters published in newspapers and her persistent abuse and insults hurled at her husband and his parents imperilled the appellant’s sense of personal safety mental happiness job satisfaction and reputation which amounted to cruelty within the meaning of the law.
The next question which was examined by the court was whether the husband had at any time condoned the cruelty of his wife.
With regard to the question of condonation the Apex Court held that condonation means forgivingness of the matrimonial offence and the restoration of offending spouse to the same position as he or she occupied before the offence was committed.
In the said case the court held that though the respondent wife was guilty of cruelty but her appellant husband condoned it and her subsequent conduct was not such as to amount to a revival of the original state of cruelty or cause of action.
Accordingly appeal of the husband was dismissed.
The facts of the two cases being entirely distinguishable the appellant cannot derive any benefit from the said decision.
In the case of V.Bhagat(supra) which has also been relied upon by the learned counsel of the appellant the appellant husband sued his wife for divorce on the ground that his wife was guilty of adultery.
The divorce petition was transferred from the district court to the high court to expedite its disposal.
Even thereafter petition was pending over a period of 8 years at the trial stage.
The appellant husband came to the apex court seeking direction for speedy hearing of the divorce petition on day to day basis.
Accordingly direction was issued by the apex court for day to day hearing and disposal of the matter within a reasonable time.
The matter could not be disposed of even after 28 months.
The appellant husband again approached the apex court.
The court found that a good part of the lives of both the parties has been consumed in this litigation and yet the end is not in sight.
In these circumstances the apex court had withdrawn the case to its file and decided the matter.
Though the grounds of adultery against the wife was not proved the apex court granted divorce in the case observing as “20 She is fully aware that the marriage is long dead and over.
It is her case that the petitioner is genetically insane.
Despite all that she says that she wants to live with the petitioner.
The obvious conclusion is that she has resolved to live in agony only to make life a miserable hell for the petitioner as well.
This type of callous attitude in the context of the facts of this case leaves no manner of doubt in our mind that the respondent is bent upon treating the petitioner with mental cruelty.
It is abundantly clear that the marriage between the parties has broken down irretrievably and there is no chance of their coming together or living together again.
Having regard to the peculiar features of this case we are of the opinion that the marriage between the parties should be dissolved under Section 13(1)(i a) of Hindu Marriage Act and we do accordingly.
Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and its progress over the last eight years detailed hereinbefore we are of the opinion that it is a fit case for cutting across the procedural objections to give a quietus to the matter.
21.
Before parting with this case we think it necessary to append a clarification.
Merely because there are allegations and counter allegations a decree of divorce cannot follow.
Nor is mere delay in disposal of the divorce proceedings by itself a ground.
There must be really some extraordinary features to warrant grant of divorce on the basis of pleadingswithout a full trial.
Irretrievable breakdown of the marriage is not a ground by itself.
But while scrutinising the evidence on record to determine whether the ground(s) alleged is are made out and in determining the relief to be granted the said circumstance can certainly be borne in mind.
The unusual step as the one taken by us herein can be resorted to only to clear up an insoluble mess when the court finds it in the interest of both the parties.
22.
The petition for divorce HM Case No. 1 of 1986 pending in the Delhi High Court is withdrawn to the file of this Court and is allowed.
The marriage between the parties is dissolved.
In the circumstances the allegations levelled by the petitioner against the wife are held not proved .
The honour and character of the respondent wife stands vindicated.” The facts of two cases are completely distinguishable.
The apex court had withdrawn the case to the file of the apex court under unusual circumstances and decided the matter.
The case in hand is not covered by the said decision of the apex court.
In the case of Savitri Pandey case of the appellant wife seeking divorce against her husband on the ground of cruelty and desertion was allowed by the family court.
In the said suit the wife also claimed return of her ornaments given at the time of marriage.
While granting divorce the family court also directed her husband to return a sum of Rs.12 000 as the price of the scooter which was given to him at the time of the marriage and payment of a monthly sum of Rs500 as permanent alimony.
No direction was issued for return of jewellery to the wife.
Husband appalled in the high court against the decree of divorce.
Wife also filed appeal against the said judgment on the ground that no order was issued for return of her jewellery.
The appeals were disposed of by the high court by holding that the appellant wife herself was a defaulting party and neither the allegations of cruelty nor the ground of desertion were proved.
Decree of divorce granted by the family court was set aside.
In this backdrop of circumstances the matter came to the Supreme Court.
In the said case allegations of the wife were that their marriage was solemnized on 06.05.1987 and 21061987 and their marriage was never consummated.
During marriage parents of the wife gave cash and valuables.
Despite that the husband was demanding more cash and started torturing her on false pretext.
Aggrieved with his attitude she filed the divorce petition.
The husband denied all allegations and pleaded that his wife was taking advantage of her own wrongs.
The apex court found that neither desertion nor cruelty was proved against the husband.
It was held by the apex court that the wife could not lead any evidence to show that she was forced to leave the company of her husband or that she was thrown away from the matrimonial home or that she was forced to live separately and that the husband had intended animus deserendi.
It was observed by the apex court that approach of court should be to preserve the matrimonial home and as such there should be reluctance to dissolve the marriage on the asking of one of the parties.
In the said case court found that the appellant wife herself was trying to take advantage of her own wrong and in the circumstances of the case their marriage cannot be held to have become dead for invoking the jurisdiction of the court under article 142 of the Constitution for dissolving the marriage.
Accordingly the Apex Court dismissed the appeal of the wife against the judgment of the High Court.
With regard to the irretrievable breakdown theory of marriage as pleaded by the learned counsel of the appellant the Apex Court in the said judgment vide paragraph 17 has held as follows: “17The Marriage between the parties cannot be dissolved only on the averments made by one of the parties that as the marriage between them has broken down no useful purpose would be served to keep it alive.
The legislature in its wisdom despite observation of this Court has not thought it proper to provide for dissolution of the marriage on such averments.
There may be cases where on facts it is found that as the marriage has become dead on account of contributory acts of commission and omission of the parties no useful purpose would be served by keeping such marriage alive.
The sanctity of marriage cannot be left at the whims of one of the annoying spouses.
This Court in V. Bhagat v. Mrs. DBhagatheld that irretrievable breakdown of the marriage is not a ground by itself to dissolve it.” In the case of Naveen Kohli(supra) husband Naveen Kohli sought for divorce against his wife Neelu Kohli which was dismissed by the family court.
Appeal of the wife was allowed by the High Court and divorce granted by the family court was dismissed.
Appellant husband then came to the Supreme Court.
In the said case the husband alleged in his divorce petition that his wife was a bad tempered woman and she was of rude behaviour and after marriage she started quarrelling and misbehaving with her husband and parents.
As a result the husband and his parents left their ancestral house and started living in a rented house.
In the said case it was also alleged by the husband that he found his wife indulging in an indecent manner in a party and she was also found in a compromising position with another man.
The wife also showed extreme cruelty against her husband by lodging series of criminal cases under various sections of IPC against her husband.
It was proved by the husband that she lodged at least 10 criminal cases against him.
Moreover she also opposed the bail application moved by her husband and in one case in which final report was filed for lack of evidence she raised a protest petition.
The Apex Court observed that conduct of the wife clearly demonstrates her deep and intense feeling of revenge against her husband and the Apex Court held as under: evaluation of the entire evidence it is clear that the respondent has resolved to live in agony only to make life a miserable hell for the appellant as well.
This type of adamant and callous attitude in the context of the facts of this case leaves no manner of doubt in our mind that the respondent is bent upon treating the appellant with mental cruelty.
It abundantly clear that the marriage between the parties had broken down irretrievably and there is no chance of their coming together or living together again.” In this factual context the Apex Court granted divorce in favour of the husband Naveen Kohli by observing as the appellant against the respondent against “86In view of the fact that the parties have been living separately for more than 10 years and a very large number of aforementioned criminal and civil proceedings have been initiated by appellant and some proceedings have been initiated by respondent the matrimonial bond between the parties is beyond repair.
A marriage between the parties is only in name.
The marriage has been wrecked beyond the hope of salvage public interest and interest of all concerned lies in the recognition of the fact and to declare defunct de jure what is already defunct de facto.
To keep the sham is obviously conducive to immorality and potentially more prejudicial to the public interest than a dissolution of the marriage bond.” In the case of Samar Ghosh(supra) the appellant husband Samar Ghosh and his wife Jaya Ghosh were both IAS officers.
The factual context reveals that they were in marital tie for as long as 22 years.
After solemnization of their marriage on 13121984 they started living separately from 27.08.1990.
The w