 REPORTABLE IN THE CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION WRIT PETITIONNO.
1236 OF 2019 LOK PRAHARI THROUGH ITS GENERAL SECRETARY SN SHUKLA .. PETITIONER(S UNION OF INDIA & ORS. .. RESPONDENT(S JUDGMENT The intent of our order today is to activate a dormant provision of the Constitution of India Article 224A for the appointment of ad hoc Judges to deal with the unprecedented situation arising from the backlog of cases pending in the High Courts which has now crossed the figure of 57 lakh coupled with the consistent ratio of vacancies of almost 40 per cent.
Any Constitution has to be dynamic and thus even if the intent behind including the provisionwas slightly different nothing prevents it from being utilised to subserve an endeavour to solve an existing problem For as it is always said ‘change is the only constant’ India was fortunate to have some of the best minds work on the framing of our Constitution as members of our Constituent Assembly The Indian Constitution is an elaborate one taking cues from the experience of various democracies.
One of the essential aspects of our Constitution has been the separation of powers between the Judiciary Executive and Legislature Chapter V of Part VI of the Constitution of India commencing from Article 214 upto Article 231 relates to the High Courts in the states.
Article 217 provides for the appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of the High Court wherein the current age of retirement is 62 years.
We may say that broadly it is amongst the youngest ages of retirement of judges of the apex Court of a state in comparison with other democracies of the world Article 224 deals with the appointment of additional and acting judges.
The objective as set out in the Article is to take care of any temporary increase in business of the High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein.
The appointment of an additional judge duly qualified to be the judge of a High Court has to be for a period not exceeding two years or as the President may specify.
The ground reality however remains that while determining the strength of different High Courts the practice that has been adopted is that about 25% of the strength consists of additional Judges.
In the present case we are concerned with Article 224A which reads as under 224A Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State may with the previous consent of the President request any person who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State and every such person so requested shall while so sitting and acting be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction powers and privileges of but shall not otherwise be deemed to be a Judge of that High Court Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do."
The aforesaid Article begins with a non obstante clause and was placed so that a request can be made to any person who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a judge of the High Court for the state.
The second aspect is that while sitting and acting such a judge would be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction powers and privileges of the High Court judge but for all other purposes shall not be deemed to be a High Court judge.
The proviso stipulates that consent has to be obtained from the judge concerned.
It is the say of the petitioner before us in this public interest litigation that a large number of vacancies of High Court judges coupled with mounting arrears is a scenario which requires urgent attention and one of the modes to deal with both these aspects is resorting to Article 224A of the Constitution of India.
The Historical Perspective Article 224A was numbered as Article 200 in the Draft Constitution and discussed by the Constituent Assembly on 7th June 1949.
The debate focused on the purpose and duration of the appointment of retired High Court judges.
Three other specific issues hoc judge 1) whether a retired judge must consent to his appointment 2) whether a retired judge draws salary after his appointment as an ad 3) whether the appointment of ad hoc judges was to be made with the concurrence of the President Some part of the debates indicate that the retired judge was to be invited back only for their expertise and experience to decide cases that were particularly difficult or important and that it may not be advisable to call retired judges and asked them to clear off the arrears pending before the High Court.
On the other hand Dr. BR Ambedkar had clarified that the intent behind the appointment of ad hoc judges was as an alternative to the appointment of temporary or additional judges which suggestion had not been accepted by the Constituent Assembly Thus ad hoc judges were not intended to be appointed for an indefinite length of time.
In his words It seems to me that if you are not going to have any temporary or additional judges you must make some kind of provision for the disposal of certain business for which it may not be feasible to appoint a temporary judge in time to discharge the duties of a High Court Judge with respect to such matters.
"1 10.
The aforesaid provision it was emphasized by Dr. Ambedkar was borrowedfrom Section 8 of the Supreme Court of JudicatureAct 1925 in the UK and similar provisions in America.
It was explained that the proviso was inserted to avoid a situation where the refusal of a retired judge to accept the invitation could be treated as remiss of his conduct.
11.
Another important aspect as emerges from the debates was that it was the view of Dr. Ambedkar himself that the matter of salary and 1 Speech by Dr. BR Ambedkar on 7th June 1949 Constituent Assembly Debates Vol. VIII ¶181.
benefits would be governed by the rules governing pension.
Thus all benefits would be admissible minus the pension though the precise definition of "privileges" of an ad hoc judge was left to the Parliament to decide.
The aspect of concurrence of the President was also debated and introduced to bring greater transparency in the process.
The aforesaid provision for appointment of ad hoc judges was removed by the ConstitutionAct 1956.
The objective of that Act clarifies that this was done as the provision for recalling retired judges for a short period had been found to be neither adequate nor satisfactory.
It was sought to be replaced by the current Article 224 making provisions for appointment of additional judges to clear off arrears and for the appointment of acting judges in temporary vacancies There appears to have been a legislative re think as the provision for the appointment of ad hoc judges was reintroduced vide Article 224A by the ConstitutionAct 1963.
The Lok Sabha debates did not specifically refer to the philosophy behind the re introduction but this can be extrapolated from the purpose behind introducing ad hoc appointments in the Supreme Court of India.
The debates do reflect the two points of view i.e. a worry about a possible demon of patronage" and on the other hand views being expressed that it was possibly better to call back a retired judge instead of appointing a member of the Bar for a few months.
The amendments seeking to restrict the term of ad hoc judges to three months was however negated while inserting this provision in the Constitution Judicial Views : 14.
Now we turn to the aspects arising from the aforesaid provision being debated in certain judicial precedents.
In Krishan Gopal vs. Shri Prakash Chandra & Ors2 a Constitution Bench of this Court ruled on the issue of whether a person sitting and acting as a Judge of the High Court under Article 224A of the Constitution has the jurisdiction to try an election petition under Section 80 A of the Representation of the People Act 1951.
Debate arose in the context of a judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court who was sitting and acting as a judge of that Court under Article 224A of the Constitution and his appointment was to last for a period of one year or till the disposal of elections petitions entrusted to him whichever was earlier.
In that context it was observed that if a person appointed under Article 224A of the Constitution was not considered to be a judge of the High Court for the purpose of jurisdiction powers and privileges the question of appointing such a person would never arise.
The provision could not thus be rendered a 21 SCC 128 dead letter.
It was clarified that the effect of the provision would create a deeming fiction and the Court observed “15.The person requested while so sitting and acting shall have all the jurisdiction powers and privileges of a judge of the High Court.
Such a person shall not otherwise be deemed to be a judge of that Court.
The words "while so sitting and acting show that the person requested not merely has the Jurisdiction powers and privileges of a Judge of the High Court he also sits and acts as a Judge of that Court.
Question then arises as to what is the significance of the concluding words "but shall not otherwise be deemed to be a Judge of that Court".
These words in our opinion indicate that in matters not relating to jurisdiction powers and privileges the person so requested shall not be deemed to be a Judge of that Court.
The dictionary meaning of the word "otherwise" is "in other ways" "in other circumstances" in other respects".
The word "otherwise" would therefore point to the conclusion that for the purpose of jurisdiction powers and privileges the person requested shall be a Judge of the concerned High Court and for purposes other than those of jurisdiction powers and privileges the person requested shall not be deemed to be a Judge of that Court.
It would for example be not permissible to transfer him under Article 222 of the Constitution The use of the word "deemed" shows that the person who sits and acts as a Judge of the High Court under Article 224 A is a Judge of the said High Court but by a legal fiction he is not to be considered to be a Judge of the High Court for purposes other than those relating to jurisdiction powers and privileges7 SCC 726 entitled to further pensionary benefits after he demits the Constitutional office that he holds in terms of Article 217.
It may also be appropriate to turn to some of the opinions expressed on the requirement of consent of a retired Judge.
In Union of India vs. Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth 4 it was observed that the reason for insisting on consent was that a retired Judge cannot be compelled to work as an ad hoc judge against his consent.
This is because he ceases to be a judge of the High Court on demitting office at the prescribed age and is not bound by the conditions of service It is appropriate to refer to more opinions albeit of the High Court to know how this particular aspect had been dealt with in the opinion of the High Court.
In Anna Mathew vs. N Kannadasan though the issue was not directly in question the aspect of appointment of an ad hoc judge under Article 224A of the Constitution had been adverted to5 The context of the view on the expression "ad hoc" is present only in Article 224A and Article 127.
In that context a reference had been made to the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Ashok Tanwar and Anr. vs. State of HP and Others.6 Here there are observations to the effect that a consultation with the Collegium would 44 SCC 193 5 2009LW 87(¶ 47 62 SCC 104 not be necessary inasmuch as the Chief Justice is required to recommend the name of a sitting or a retired judge.
However that was a case dealing with appointments to the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission and in that context consultation with the Collegium was thought not necessary.
However if we turn to the judgment in Ashok Tanwar s casewe find there was actually no real discussion on Article 224A What was in question was whether Section 16 of the Consumer Protection Act 1986 a consultation with acting Chief Justice was sufficient compliance of the case.
19.
The last judicial view we seek to refer to is of the Full Bench of the High Court of the Judicature at Allahabad in Indian Society of Lawyers vs. President of India which elaborately dealt with the interpretation of Article 224A of the Constitution.7 It was observed that an ad hoc judge does not fall within Article 216 and that he is not a judge of the High Court so sitting and acting.
The President does not appoint him and only gives his consent to the Chief Justice to request a former judge to sit and act as a judge of the High Court.
Thus the process of appointment under Clauseof Article 217 does not apply to him.
This is also the reason why while dealing with the aspect of 75 All LJ 455over the last two years as we have already mentioned.
A number of vacancies arising every year are barely filled in by fresh appointments.
Thus it remains an unfulfilled challenge to bring the appointment process to such numbers as would be able to cover the vacancies existing and arising.
Without endeavouring to blame anyone a ground reality remains that there are manifold reasons for the same.
21.
The present system of appointments as envisaged by the Constitution and as elucidated in the Collegium system makes it clear that the first step is a recommendation from that High Court by a collegium of the three senior most judges presided over by the Chief Justice of the High Court.
This process in turn requires wide consultation by the Chief Justice of the High Court to identify the requisite talent so as to make the recommendations.
Contrary to some portrayed beliefs as if this is an extremely subjective system every Chief Justice is actually required to solicit names from different sources whether it be sitting judges retired judges or prominent members of the Bar.
It is from this pool of talent that he selects after a discussion before the collegium the most suitable candidates.
It is thus of utmost importance that the flow of recommendations continues for the appointment process to work successfully.
The vacancies existing and arising are always known as a judge demits office in the High Court on his 62nd birthday.
The only exception can be an unforeseen eventuality or an elevation to the Supreme Court of India.
Thus every endeavour has to be made to see that the recommendations are made well in advance while maintaining a balance between recommendations from the Bar and the subordinate judiciary about six months in advance as per norms which were thought to be the appropriate time period within which the whole process of appointment ought to be concluded.
This aspect has been emphasized by us in another connected matter i.e. TP(C) No. 2419 2019 22.
We may also note that on the basis of talent available considering that the age profile for elevation from the Bar is between 45 to 55 years there may be situations where at one go all recommendations against vacancies may not be possible to be made.
However nothing prohibits or rather the exigencies of the appointment process requires recommendations to be periodically made without unnecessarily waiting for the outcome of the first set of recommendations.
If this continuing pipeline operates and even if some recommendations fall by the wayside over a reasonable period of time the vacancies can be filled up The current situation of vacancies especially in some of the larger courts with very few recommendations in the pipeline seems to be the genesis of this problem The data placed before us as drawn from the National Judicial Data Grid shows that five High Courts alone are responsible for 54% of the pendency of over 57 51 312 cases the High Courts of Allahabad Punjab & Haryana Madras Bombay and Rajasthan.
The Madras High Court has among the highest arrears in the country of 58 lakh cases despite having fewer vacancies than most other High Courts but less than half the arrears as compared to Madrashow to make this process more efficacious and 2) till the vacancies are filled up what is it that can support a quicker adjudicatory process The latter undoubtedly requires more number of judges and thus the present debate has arisen for the purposes of utilization of the existing Article 224A of the Constitution to appoint ad hoc judges in the context of a large number of existing vacancies and pending arrears.
Memorandum of Procedure The Union of India vide additional affidavit dated 13042021 had placed before us a Memorandum of Procedure which was prepared in the year 1998 in pursuance to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Supreme Court Advocate on Record Association v. Union of India8read with the advisory opinion rendered in Special Reference No.1 19989 for “attendance of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.” It is the say of the Union of India that the appointment of retired Judges under Article 224A should be a 84 SCC 441 97 SCC 739 collaborative process between the Executive and the Judiciary and the procedure prescribed in para 24 may be followed till it is amended.
The relevant paragraph of the MoP reads as under “24.
Under Article 224A of the Constitution the Chief Justice of a High Court may at any time with the previous consent of the President request any person who has held the office of a Judge of that court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court of that State.
Whenever the necessity for such an appointment arises the Chief Justice of India will after obtaining the consent of the person concerned communicate to the Chief Minister of the State the name of the retired Judge and the period for which he will be required to sit and act as Judge of the High Court.
The Chief Minister will after consultation with the Governor forward his recommendation to the Union Minister of Law Justice and Company Affairs.
The Union Minister of Law Justice and Company Affairs would then consult the Chief Justice of India in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
On receipt of CJI’s advice the same would be put up to the Prime Minister who will then advise the President as to the person to be appointed to it and act as a Judge of the High Court.
As soon as the President gives his consent to the appointment the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice will inform the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Minister(s) and will issue the necessary notification in the Gazette 31.
We may notice that the subsequent endeavour to introduce the National Judicial Appointments Commission through a constitutional amendment could not withstand the constitutional challenge in Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association & Anr. v Union of India5 SCC 1 consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
In this behalf the final view of the Judiciary was sent after discussion and there is no change in the aforesaid.
The MoP has been circulated to the Chief Justices of the Law Commission Reports The path we seek to traverse is supported by the Law Commission Reports.
In fact the 124th report of the Law Commission delivered in 1988 dealt with the aspect that a fresh look was required for High Court arrears.
In that context it has been recognized that retired judges have several decades of adjudicatory experience and their talents could be utilized to dispose of mounting arrears.
On account of their experience they would be quick in disposing cases and being unburdened with administrative or admission work they could spend their entire time hearing old matters.
Thus the appointment of retired judges as ad hoc judges was seen as a part of a "multipronged attack on arrears and was strongly recommended This is not a first time that this aspect was noted.
The 79 th Report of the Law Commission of 1979 had suggested recourse to this Article to sub serve the said objective.
We may however notice that in 245th Report of 2014 some concerns were expressed about this process on account of the appointment being for a short period and the accountability in the functioning and performance of ad hoc judges.
34.
We may notice that in the 188th Report of the Law Commission of 2003 that in the interest of clearing arrears in the High Court in various types of cases including criminal matters it was felt that it was the need of the hour to make appointments under Article 224A of the Constitution.
The concern was to bring the arrears within manageable Some other views In the recently published treatise a view had been expressed that one great advantage of appointing ad hoc judges under Article 224 A is that it provides for a ready made pool of known judicial talent which can be relied upon to be competent clean and efficient.
This can be an effective weapon to deal with the disposal of forgotten and pending cases more so in the context of inordinate delay in fresh judicial In the Chief Justices’ Conference held on 22nd and 23rd April 2016 a resolution was adopted dealing with filling up of vacancies in 11 A M Singhvi “Beating the Backlog Reforms in Administration of Justice in India ” in S Khurshid et.
al.
Judicial Review Process Powers and Problems Essays in Honour of Upendra Baxi) page 53 High Courts and to address the problem of arrears in criminal and civil cases de hors Article 224A where it was perceived to be a course to follow.
The Resolution states as under: Resolved further that keeping in view the large pendency of civil and criminal cases especially criminal appeals where convicts are in jail and having due regard the recommendation made by the 17th Law Commission of India in 2003 the Chief Justices will actively have regard to the provisions of Article 224A of the Constitution as a source for enhancing the strength of Judges to deal with the backlog of cases for a period of two years or the age of sixty five years whichever is later until a five plus zero pendency is achieved Article 224A earlier recourse 37.
We have already noticed that Article 224A has largely been a dormant provision with only three recorded instances of its invocation Justice Suraj Bhan of the Madhya Pradesh High Court was appointed as an ad hoc Judge on 23111972 after he had demitted office on 2.2.1971 His appointment was for a period of one year or till the disposal of election petitions entrusted to him whichever was earlier.
Thus it was with a specific purpose Justice P Venugopal of the Madras High Court was a Judge for a short period of less than three years and close to his retirement he was appointed to a Commission of Inquiry to inquire into certain incidents that took place in Coimbatore town on 23.7.1981 and again appointed to a one man commission to inquire into incidents of communal riots by order dated 22.3.1982.
He was appointed to the post of ad hoc Judge in the year 1982 and yet again his term was renewed for a period of one year from 1981983 39.
Most recently in the year 2007 Justice OP Srivastava was appointed as an ad hoc Judge in the Allahabad High Court.
He was one of the Members of the Special Bench constituted for hearing of the Ayodhya matter with the avowed object of facilitating continued and continuous hearing of the matter The Challenge Ahead 40.
We have little doubt that challenge of mounting arrears and existing vacancies requires recourse to Article 224A of the Constitution to appoint ad hoc judges which is a ready pool of talent as a methodology especially for clearing the old cases.
The existing strength of permanent and additional judges can be utilized for current and not so old cases.
The ad hoc judges are absolved even from the administrative responsibilities.
They can concentrate on old cases which are stuck in the system and may require greater experience.
For example it is often perceived that a Regular Second Appeal is an area of concern and the more experienced judges are able to attend to this area with more promptness.
We see no reason why there should be an unending debate of taking recourse to Article 224A when such a provision exists in the Constitution.
It should not be made a dead letter more so when the need is so pressing 42.
We are unable to accept the plea of the learned Attorney General that though the Government of India may not have any in principle opposition to the aforesaid first the existing vacancies should be filled in.
In our view this would be a self defeating argument because the very reason why at present Article 224A has been resorted to is non filling up of vacancies and the mounting arrears.
We may however hasten to add that the objective is not to appoint ad hoc judges instead of judges to be appointed to the regular strength of the High Court apprehension expressed by Mr. Vikas Singh Senior Counsel President of the Supreme Court Bar Association).
The very provision makes it clear that it does not in any way constrain or limit the regular appointment process and consent of the retired judge is sought to sit and act as a judge of the High Court.
One may say that this largely a transitory methodology till all the appointment processes are in place though that may not be the only reason to take recourse to the aforesaid 43.
We also have no doubt that we would not like to encourage an environment where Article 224A is sought as panacea for inaction in making recommendations to the regular appointments.
In order to prevent such a situation we are of the view that certain checks and balances must be provided so that Article 224A can be resorted to only on the process having being initiated for filling up of the regular vacancies and awaiting their appointments.
We are thus of the view that there should not be more than 20% of the vacancies for which no recommendation has been made for this Article to be resorted to.
We put this figure not out of the blue but looking to the entire scenario where sometimes it may be difficult to find the requisite talent at a particular stage which may have to await some time period.
However certainly it cannot be countenanced that no or very few recommendations are made for a large number of vacancies by resorting to Article 224A 44.
We may have to turn to the aspect of the process to be followed for making present appointments.
The Constitution of India did not provide for a collegium system.
This is an aspect which emerged from the cases of SP Gupta v Union of India 12 Supreme Court Advocates on Record v. Union of India 13 and in Re: Special Reference 1 of 199814 and its modified forms has remained in existence since then.
The endeavour of the Government to bring in the National Judicial Appointments Commission did not pass the muster of the constitutional mandate and was struck down in Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association and Anr. v. Union of India.15 Thus the collegium of the Supreme Court has an important role to play in the appointment of judges of the High Court.
In the aforesaid conspectus the exercise by the Chief Justice of the High Court the authority vested under Article 224A of the Constitution would require a prior consent from the judge concerned and that recommendation in turn has to be routed through the collegium of the Supreme Court.
Of course the previous consent of the President of Indiais necessary but looking to the very nature of this appointment which is of a retired judge who for his judicial appointment has gone through the complete process time period of maximum three months is more than sufficient to carry the process through all stages.
This in turn would be facilitated if the Chief 122 SCR 365 134 SCC 441 14 AIR 1999 SC 1 15 2015 11 SCALE 1 Justice of the High Court takes the initial steps at least three months in advance so that there is no unnecessary delay in this regard 45.
We may add here that we are quite conscious of the difference in the manner of appointment of permanent and additional Judges and ad hoc judges in the High Court.
Thus two scenarios of appointment of Judges arise under Article 217 of the Constitution of India and the appointment has to be by the President by warrant under his hand and seal 1 SCC 226 parameters and is intended to facilitate a cogent flow to the guidelines sought from us.
We may notice that it is a common case that the present proceedings are not adversarial but a method to make the provisions of Article 224A into a practical and working arrangement.
We now proceed to issue the guidelines i.
Trigger Point for activation The discretion of the Chief Justice of the High Court under Article 224A is not constrained but as stated some general guidelines are required to be laid so that power conferred under the said provision is exercised in a transparent manner.
The Trigger Point cannot be singular and there can be more than one eventuality where the it arises a.
If the vacancies are more than 20% of the sanctioned strength b.
The cases in a particular category are pending for over five c. More than 10% of the backlog of pending cases are over five d. The percentage of the rate of disposal is lower than the institution of the cases either in a particular subject matter or generally in the Court e. Even if there are not many old cases pending but depending on the jurisdiction a situation of mounting arrears is likely to arise if the rate of disposal is consistently lower than the rate of filing over a period of a year or more ii.
Embargo Situtation 54.
We have already observed that the recourse to Article 224A is not an alternative to regular appointments.
In order to emphasise this aspect we clarify that if recommendations have not been made for more than 20% of the regular vacancies then the trigger for recourse to Article 224A would not arise In this behalf we may take note of the data placed before us which would suggest that there are only ten High Courts having fewer than 20% vacancies as on 1.4.2021 seven High Courts having fewer than 10% vacancies in permanent appointments but then there may be additional Judges and there are cases which are in the pipeline.
Thus the parameter we have adopted is that at least the recommendations should have been made leaving not more than 20% vacancies in order to take recourse to Article 224A iii.
Pre recommendation process a.
Past performance of recommendees in both quality and quantum of disposal of cases should be factored in for selection as the objective is to clear the backlog b.
The Chief Justice should prepare a panel of Judges and former Judges.
Naturally this will be in respect of Judges on the anvil of retirement and normally Judges who have recently retired preferably within a period of one year.
However there can be situations where the Judge may have retired earlier but his expertise is required in a particular subject matter.
There may also be a scenario where the Judge(s) may prefer to take some time off before embarking upon a second innings albeit a short one.
In the preparation of panel in order to take consent and take into account different factors a personal interaction should be held with the Judge concerned by the Chief Justice of the High Court iv.
Methodology of Appointment 56.
We have already noticed that para 24 of the MoP lays down a procedure for appointment under Article 224A of the Constitution.
We have also noticed that it is not law laid down in this behalf under Article 141 of the Constitution but as a first step it may be more appropriate to follow this procedure laid down in para 24 of the MoP to see the progress made and impediments if any.
We may however notice that since the Judges are already appointed to the post through a warrant of appointment the occasion to refer the matter to the IB or other agencies would not arise in such a case which would itself shorten the time v. Time to complete the process The requirement that recommendations should be made six months in advance by the Chief Justice of the High Court emanates from the concept that the said period should be required to complete the process in case of a regular appointment of a Judge under Article 217 or 224 of the Constitution of India.
In view of number of aspects not required to be adverted to for appointment under Article 224A we are of the view that a period of about three months should be sufficient to process a recommendation and thus ideally a Chief Justice should start the process three months in advance for such appointment vi.
Tenure of Appointment The tenure for which an ad hoc Judge is appointed may vary on the basis of the need but suffice to say that in ord