Court No. 38 Case : WRIT C No. 538410 Petitioner : Pratap Singh Respondent : State of UP and Others Counsel for Petitioner : Rajesh Kumar Mishra Counsel for Respondent : CSC Hon ble Jayant Banerji J Heard Shri Rajesh Kumar Mishra learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Awadhesh Chandra Srivastava learned Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents.
By means of this petition the petitioner seeks to challenge the order dated 31122009 passed by the Additional District Magistrate Finance & Revenue) Moradabad in Case No.407 09 under Section 33 40 47 of the Indian Stamp Act 18991 whereby by means of an ex parte order deficiency of stamp has been imposed upon the petitioner while relying upon the report dated 16102009 of the Assistant Inspector General of Registration.
Further under challenge is the order dated 26.05.2010 passed by the Additional Commissioner Administration) Moradabad Mandal Moradabad whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner under Section 56 of the Act being Appeal No.74 2009 10 has been partly allowed by reducing the amount of penalty imposed upon the petitioner The facts as mentioned in the petition are that the petitioner purchased an area of 0002 hectares from Khasra No.869 Ka an area of 0130 hectares from Khasra No948 and an area of 0255 hectares from Khasra No.950 totalling 0387 hectares in Village Bhogpur Mithauni Tehsil & District Moradabad by means of a sale deed executed on 27092007 which was registered thereafter.
It is stated that the aforesaid land was purchased for agricultural purposes and the stamp duty was paid in accordance with the minimum rates specified by the Collector.
The name of the petitioner was also mutated in the revenue records.
It is alleged that the respondent no2 passed the impugned order dated 31122009 without issuance of summons or notice to the petitioner in which it was held that the plots in question are for residential usage and therefore deficiency of stamp duty of Rs.1 38 400 and penalty of Rs.1 38 400 alongwith interest at the rate of 15% per mensem were imposed.
It is stated that on coming to know of the ex parte order passed by the respondent no2 an appeal was filed by the petitioner before the Additional Commissionerin the appellate order has committed an error of law in affirming the order of the respondent no2 and that neither the penalty nor the deficiency in stamp duty could have been 2 2005 AWC 1087 imposed upon the petitioner under the facts and circumstances of the Learned Standing Counsel has opposed the writ petition stating that the report of the Assistant Inspector General of Registration dated 16102009 has referred to three exemplar sale deeds pertaining to parts of land of those very Khasra numbers that were sold to other persons in which the purpose for purchase was stated to be residential.
The contention is that accordingly no fault exists in the order of the respondent no2 on this ground and also on the ground that the service of notice on the petitioner was deemed sufficient It is noticed as is admitted that the impugned order dated 31122009 was ex parte.
It is not the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that any restoration application was filed on behalf of the petitioner in respect of the aforesaid order dated 31122009.
The petitioner straightaway proceeded to file the appeal under Section 56 of the Act.
The grounds of appeal that has been enclosed as Annexure 6 to the writ petition do not contain any ground with regard to the non receipt of notice.
Among the grounds raised is of lack of opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
In view of the aforesaid the affirmation on behalf of the petitioner that no notice was received by him is belied The order of the respondent no2 Additional District Magistrate has been passed relying upon the report of the Assistant Inspector General of Registration dated 16102009 in which it was mentioned that portions of lands of those very Khasra numbers were subject of instrument Nos4894 05 601 06 and 2463 07 on which stamp duty on the basis of the residential rates was paid.
The respondent no2 has observed that since neither the petitioner nor his counsel had appeared nor any objection was filed it would be deemed that he accepts the report and notice.
Accordingly the deficiency in stamp duty and penalty were imposed.
Annexure 5 is the report made by the Assistant Inspector General of Registration dated 16102009.
The relevant part of the report dated 16102009 is extracted below: अधोहस्ताक्षरिरित द्वारिा अद्र्द्धनगरिीय एवं उपान्त क्षरेत्र के कृ िषि आधािरित मूल्यांकन वाले िवक्रय िवलेखों के मूल्यांकन जांच के क्रम मे उक्त िवक्रय िवलेख मेरिे संज्ञान मे आया। अिभिलेखों के अवलोकन से खसरिा न० 869 948 व 950 ित स्थित ग्राम भिोगपुरि िमठौनी से सम्पि कत्ति क्रय की गयी तथिा आवासीय दरि के मूल्यांकन परि स्टाम्प शुल्क अदा िकया गया है। उक्त प्रकारि के कितपय िवलेखों का िववरिण िनम्न सािरिणी मे िदया जा रिहा हैः ि कजस परि वगर्द्ध मी० शुल्क अदा 869 869 948 948 उपरिोक्त सािरिणी के अवलोकन से स्पष्ट है िक खसरिा न० 869 948 950 ित स्थित ग्राम भिोगपुरि िमठौनी से सम्बन्धित न्धत िवक्रय िवलेख संख्या 4894 05 601 06 तथिा 2463 07 का िनबन्धन्धन िकया गया तथिा िनधार्द्धिरित आवासीय दरि के मूल्यांकन परि स्टाम्प शुल्क अदा िकया गया है। एक ही ग्राम एक ही एक ही खसरिे की भिूिम के दो दरिो के आधारि परि सम्पि कत्ति के बन्धाजारि मूल्य का िनधार्द्धरिण िकया जाना तकर्द्ध संगत एवं िवि कध सम्मत् नही है िक सािरिणी मे उिल्लिखि कखत िवलेख िववािदत िवलेख संख्या 5733 07 के द्वारिा अन्तिरित सम्पि कत्ति के मूल्यांकन हेतु उपयुक्त एवं तकर्द्ध संगत पूवर्द्ध दृष्टांत दृष्टांत स्टि कजत करिते है। .....” As is evident from the report as extracted above that three specific exemplar deeds have been relied upon by the Assistant Inspector General of Registration to reflect the residential usage over the land in question.
In the decision of Ram Khelawana coordinate Bench of this Court had made an observation that no reliance can be placed on an ex parte report for deciding the case.
It was observed that the ex parte inspection report may be relevant for initiating the proceedings under Section 47 A of the Act and after initiation of the case inspection is to be made by the Collector or the authority hearing the case after due notice to the parties to the instrument as provided under Rule 7(3)(c) of the UP StampRules 1997.
Though this Court is in respectful agreement with the aforesaid observations made by this Court in the case of Ram Khelawanhowever in the present case at hand the ex parte report specifically refers to three exemplar instruments that were considered by the Assistant Inspector General of Registration while making his report.
It was therefore open for the District Magistrate in the facts and circumstances of the present case where despite notice neither any objection was filed on behalf of the petitioner nor had any advocate appeared on his behalf to rely upon the ex parte report which was based upon the exemplar deeds.
It is always open to the Collector or the authority undertaking an examination of an instrument under Section 47 A(3) of the Act to refer to exemplar deeds for the purpose of ascertaining the market value even though they may form part of an ex parte report that has led to the initiation of the proceedings under Section 47 A(3) of the Act.
Therefore no fault can be attributable to the respondent no2 in relying upon the three exemplar deeds that find mention in the ex parte report dated 16102009.
In view of the above the order of the Additional Commissioner upholding the order of the respondent no2 cannot faulted as far as this aspect is concerned.
However the matter of concern in the present petition is that despite relying upon the aforesaid exemplar deeds the respondent no2 has proceeded to assess the value of the land in question on the basis of the minimum rates prescribed by the Collector.
This could not have been done in view of the express provisions of Section 47 A(3) of the Act that is also relied in the judgment of this Court in Ram Khelawan supra) and several other decisions.
In the decision of a three Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Smt. Pushpa Sareen vs. State of UP3 it has been held as follows: 3 2015ADJ 136 26.
The true test for determination by the Collector is the market value of the property on the date of the instrument because under the provisions of the Act every instrument is required to be stamped before or at the time of execution.
In making that determination the Collector has to be mindful of the fact that the market value of the property may vary from location to location and is dependent upon a large number of circumstances having a bearing on the comparative advantages or disadvantages of the land as well as the use to which the land can be put on the date of the execution of the instrument 27.
Undoubtedly the Collector is not permitted to launch upon a speculative inquiry about the prospective use to which a land may be put to use at an uncertain future date The market value of the property has to be determined with reference to the use to which the land is capable reasonably of being put to immediately or in the proximate future.
The possibility of the land becoming available in the immediate or near future for better use and enjoyment reflects upon the potentiality of the land.
This potential has to be assessed with reference to the date of the execution of the instrument.
In other words the power of the Collector cannot be unduly circumscribed by ruling out the potential to which the land can be advantageously deployed at the time of the execution of the instrument or a period reasonably proximate thereto.
Again the use to which land in the area had been put is a material consideration.
If the land surrounding the property in question has been put to commercial use it would be improper to hold that this is a circumstance which should not weigh with the Collector as a factor which influences the market value of the land 28.
The fact that the land was put to a particular use say for instance a commercial purpose at a later point in time may not be a relevant criterion for deciding the value for the purpose of stamp duty as held by the Supreme Court in State of UP and others v. Ambrish Tandon and another 2012) 5 SCC 566.
This is because the nature of the user is relateable to the date of purchase which is relevant for the purpose of computing the stamp duty.
Where however the potential of the land can be assessed on the date of the execution of the instrument itself that is clearly a circumstance which is relevant and germane to the determination of the true market value.
At the same time the exercise before the Collector has to be based on adequate material and cannot be a matter of hypothesis or surmise.
The Collector must have material on the record to the effect that there has been a change of use or other contemporaneous sale deeds in respect of the adjacent areas that would have a bearing on the market value of the property which is under consideration.
The Collector therefore would be within jurisdiction in referring to exemplars or comparable sale instances which have a bearing on the true market value of the property which is required to be assessed.
If the sale instances are comparable they would also reflect the potentiality of the land which would be taken into consideration in a price agreed upon between a vendor and a purchaser Accordingly the impugned order of the respondent no2 dated 31122009 insofar as it assesses the valuation of the land in question on the basis of the minimum rates is set aside.
The order of the Additional Commissionerdated 26052010 is also set aside insofar as it affirms the order of the respondent no2 assessing the market value on the basis of the minimum rates.
The matter is remitted to the respondent no2 or the competent authority who may be seized of the matter to assess the market value taking into account the monetary consideration reflected in the exemplar deeds aforesaid or any other exemplar deeds and not on the basis of the minimum rates.
This exercise shall be done by the authority concerned within a period of three months from today.
Since the petitioner is represented no separate notice is required to be sent to him.
It is however provided that the petitioner shall appear before the respondent no2 on 22.12.2021 alongwith a certified copy of the order passed today whereafter dates may be fixed.
In case of failure of the petitioner in appearing on that day it will be open to the authority concerned to proceed in accordance In view of the aforesaid observations and to the extent mentioned above this writ petition is allowed Order Date : 07.12.2021 Jayant Banerji J