The State Of Hp.
V Kundan Lal High Court Of Himachal Pradesh Criminal Appeal No. 515 Of 1999 06 09 2010 The State Of Hp HON BLE JUSTICE RB MISRA HON BLE JUSTICE VK SHARMA JJ.
LQ HimHC 2010 1733 RB Misra 1.
The presence of accused respondent could not be ensured despite issuance of non bailable warrants.
However Shri MA Khan Advocate has been requested to assist this Court as Amicus Curiae and he has agreed to the same.
Accordingly Shri MA Khan Advocate has assisted this Court in response to the submissions made on behalf by Shri Rajinder Dogra Additional Advocate General for the appellant State 2.
The present criminal appeal has come up for consideration after leave to appeal under Section 378(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been granted in reference to the impugned judgment and order dated 04.08.1999 passed by the learned Special Judge Solan District Solan in Sessions Case No. 6 S 7 of 1999 acquitting the alleged accused under Section 20 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 3.
Prosecution case is that police officials while on patrol duty apprehended the accused respondent in association with two independent witnesses and on his personal search 200 grams of charas was recovered from his jacket Rukka was sent by SI SHO and two samples each 25 grams of charas were separated and sealed.
Thereafter the samples were sent for chemical examination and the accused respondent was charged for the offences under Section 20 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 4.
In order to prove its case prosecution examined as many as six witnesses whereas accused through his statement under Section 313 Cr.PC denied the prosecution case 5.
Sant Ram and Satish Kumar were associated by the police officials in the raiding party as independent witnesses and from the search of the jacket of the accused respondent charas rapped in a white coloured polythene bag was recovered.
The search was made in reference to a secret information received by the police party.
However the search was made only by apprising the accused respondent that whether he wants to be (Printed For: Reetasa Samal 02 01 2022 On: 02:14:PM The State Of Hp.
V Kundan Lal searched by the police officer or by others on agreeing the accused respondent was searched 6.
From the scrutiny of the prosecution witnesses and the material on record it appears that before making the search accused respondent was not apprised that he has a right to be searched by a Gazetted Officer or Magistrate or by the same police officer and only apprising him that he is to be searched is not the compliance of mandatory requirement of Section 50 of the NDPS Act 7.
Two independent witnesses are also silent on the aspect that the searching police party had apprised the accused respondent of his right of being searched as such non compliance of mandatory requirement of Section 50 of the NDPS Act makes the prosecution case doubtful 8.
In view of the inconsistencies contradictions and improbabilities in the prosecution case learned Special Judge has rightly arrived at the finding that the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.
In our considered view lack of mandatory requirement under Section 50 of the NDPS Act and non support of the independent witnesses makes the prosecution case doubtful.
The prosecution has failed to bring home the guilt against the accused respondents.
In these circumstances criminal appeal being devoid of merit is dismissed 9.
The Court appreciate the efforts made by Mr. MA Khan Advocate in assisting the Court on behalf of accused respondent as Amicus Curiae Disclaimer: Legitquest has made all efforts to avoid any omission and or mistake in publishing this document and adding editorial and other enhancements.
Legitquest would not be liable in any manner whatsoever by reason of any omission or mistake in the published document or any action or advice rendered or accepted on the basis of the document or any editorial or other enhancements like idraf infographics Note Notebook Acts Rules Regulations Bills Notifications Circulars News Interviews Columns Treaties LawCommission Reports Constituent Debates and or any material or feature added by us.
All disputes will be exclusively dealt with the Courts Tribunals at Delhi only.
It is advised to check the authenticity of all published document from the original source (Printed For: Reetasa Samal 02 01 2022 On: 02:14:PM