 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PIL: 1.
The scheme attempted to be introduced by the MaharashtraState Road Transport CorporationRespondent No.2 as “Kutumb Suraksha Yojna” wherebyterminated or suspended conductors are sought to be re appointedunder the said scheme is under challenge in the present Suo MotoPublic Interest Litigation.Background of PIL 2.One Mr. Sharad Babrao Pote and others had filed writ petitionNo.100316 before this Court and sought relaxation of the agerestriction made under the notification of the MSRTC from 45 tohigher age in order to get benefit of the said scheme “KutumbSuraksha Yojna”.
The said writ petition was placed before the DivisionBench of this Court on 30.06.2017 when this Court noticed that thescheme floated by the MSRTC is against the public interest since theemployees who were charged or terminated or suspended on accountof mis appropriation of funds sought to be re appointed under theguise of the scheme.
This Court converted the above said writpetition into Suo Moto Public Interest Litigation to consider the on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PIL4 SCC 126.
(iii)Jaskaran Singh Brar Vs. State of Punjab reported in 2005SLJ 354(iv) Sushil Kumar Singhal Vs.
Regional Manager Punjab National Bank reported in8 SCC 573.
13Per contra Mr. Sapkal learned Senior Counsel supported theCircular impugned Scheme.
Mr. Sapkal submitted that the PublicInterest Litigation in service matters cannot be entertained.
Theimpugned Circular is in between the MSRTC and its employees.
There on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILHari Bansh Lal Vs. Sahodar Prasad Mahto and others reported in AIR 2010 SC 351515.We have considered the arguments advanced by Mr.Gangakhedkar the learned amicus curiae and Mr. Sapkal learnedSenior Counsel.
16The Public interest litigation is a weapon which has to be usedwith great care and caution.
It is to be used as an effective weapon inthe armory of law for delivering social justice to the citizens.
It shouldbe aimed at redressal of genuine public wrong or public injury andnot publicity oriented or based on personal vendetta.
It is the duty ofthe Court to see that a persons approaches the court by way of publicinterest litigation is acting bona fide and not for personal gain orprivate motive or political motivation or other oblique considerations.17.In case of Dr. Duryodhan Sahu Vs. Jitendra Kumar Mishrareported in AIR 1999SC 114 it is ruled by the Hon’ble Supreme Courtthat the Public Interest Litigation should not be entertained involvingservice matters.
The same view find place in case of Dattaraj NathujiThaware Vs. Sate of Maharashtra and othersit is held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that in PublicInterest Litigation involving service matters the Public Interest1 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILit is held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that in servicematters the role of the Court is to ensure rule of law and to see thatexecutive acts fairly.20.In case of State of Orrisa Vs. Bimbalkumar Mohanty itis held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as under:“Normally when an appointing authority or the disciplinaryauthority seeks to suspend an employee pending inquiry orcontemplated inquiry or pending investigation into gravecharges of misconduct or defalcation of funds or seriousacts of omission and commission the order of suspensionwould be passed after taking into consideration the gravityof the misconduct sought to be inquired into or investigatedand the nature of the evidence placed before the appointingauthority and on application of the mind by disciplinaryauthority.
Appointing authority or disciplinary authorityshould consider the above aspects and decide whether it isexpedient to keep an employee under suspension pendingaforesaid action.
It would not be as an administrativeroutine or an automatic order to suspend an employee.
Itshould be on consideration of the gravity of the allegedmisconduct or the nature of the allegations imputed to thedelinquent employee.
The Court or the Tribunal mustconsider each case on its own facts and no general lawcould be laid down in that behalf.
Suspension is not apunishment but is only one of forbidding or disabling anemployee to discharge the duties of office or post held byhim.
In other words it is to refrain him to avail further1 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILtheallegations of fraud in public employment centrestaged on the"procedure and mechanism" adopted by the State of Punjab in thewholesome selection of Deputy Superintendent of Policefrom"Outstanding Sports Persons" can be a subject matter of publicinterest litigation the legality and propriety of these selections wasraised in writ petition along with the public interest litigation.
ThePunjab nd Haryana High Court was pleased to entertain that thosepetitions and issued certain directions to the State of Punjab.1 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILit is held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that inService Law conviction of a person in crime involving moralturpitude impeaches his credibility as he has been found to haveindulged in a shameful wicked and base activity such an employeecannot be directed to be reinstated in service.
23In case of National Association of Blind Vs. Bombay MunicipalCorporation reported in 2020 SCC Online Bom 2032 the DivisionBench of this Court at Principal Seat at Bombay has laid down thefollowing tests after having gone through the various authorities.
Thetests to entertain the Public Interest Litigation are as under:“(a) that the PIL petition is not a camouflage to fosterpersonal disputes that behind the beautiful veil of public interest anugly private malice vested interest and or publicityseeking is not lurking that the PIL petition is not intended to besmirch thecharacter of others that the information given in the PIL petition issufficient to show the gravity and seriousness involved and 1 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILthat the PIL petition is not mischievous seeking toassail an executive action for oblique motives.
24The Division Bench of this Court while hearing the writ petitionNo.100316prima facie noticed that the schemelaunched by the MSRTC to re appoint the suspended or terminatedconductors under the scheme “Kutumb Suraksha Yojana” is againstthe public interest and directed to initiate Suo Moto Public InterestLitigation to consider notification in question.
In that background it isdifficult to accept the argument advanced by the learned SeniorCounsel that the instant Public Interest Litigation relating to servicematter is not maintainable.
25It is tried to be canvassed before us that for the welfare of thefamily members of suspended or dismissed conductors of the MSRTC the impugned scheme is launched.
It is by way of rehabilitation ofsuspended dismissed conductors and their families.
It is for theirwelfare and to protect their fundamental rights.
We are not impressedby such argument.
The MSRTC is run and controlled by the State ofMaharashtra.
The Corporation is rendering its services to the public atlarge.
The policy decisions taken by the State Government from timeto time are also applicable to the MSRTC.1 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILThe Suo Moto Public Interest Litigation is hereby allowed.
(ii)The impugned scheme known as Kutumb Suraksha Yojana bearing No25 2016 dated 682016 is hereby quashed andset aside.
(iii)The Registrarto forward copy of this judgment and order to the Managing Director M.S.R.T.C.
Mumbai for information and further necessary action.2 on 30 04 2021 on 01 05 01 17 PILand the Secretary High Court Legal Services Sub Committee at Aurangabad shall pay the abovequantified fees to learned Counsel Mr S.S. Gangakhedkar.38.Suo Moto Public Interest Litigation stands disposed of in aboveterms.
( S.V.
GANGAPURWALA ) JUDGE JUDGE SP Rane39Mr.
Gangakhedkar the learned advocate graciously submitsthat the fees be remitted to the Government Medical College andHospital Aurangabad.40.We appreciate the gesture of Mr. Gangakhedkar the learnedadvocate.
The said fees be remitted to the Government MedicalCollege and Hospital Aurangabad.
SHRIKANT D. KULKARNI ) JUDGE JUDGE SP Rane2