The appellants were awarded a contract by the State of Muvattupuzha­Thodupuzha and MuvattupuzhaAngamaly.
The agreement in this regard was executed on 7th November 2002 This appeal originates from disputes on certain issues arising appellants under certain heads.
In the present proceeding recommendations at the first instance.
If the recommendations was required to give notice to commence arbitration within a specified time and thereafter the dispute was to be settled appeal arises are concerned disputes on three counts arose member Arbitral Tribunal The amount due to the Contractor under any Contract shall subject to Clauses be paid by the within 42 days after the Contractor’s monthly statement has been submitted to the Engineer for to or deducted from the next payment to the credit In the event of the failure of the Employer to shall pay to the Contractor interest compounded same should have been paid in the currencies in which the payment are due.
The provisions of the 4.
The relevant provision of the appendix to the bid the content of which came for interpretation before the Tribunal and “ANNEXURE P 3 The above of interest for foreign currencies shall be supplied by the recording the rate of interest for payment to be made in local currency blank.
The agreement contemplated payment to the been that the rate of interest on delayed payment and the next was another written communication dated 3rd August 2004 is a waiver of the rights of the claimant does not stand.
The receiving payment in respect of IPC.
I The waiver does not apply to the instant case.
This is corroborated by the fact that was due under the terms of the contract the DRB made after due deliberations and discussions with the parties has relevance The Tribunal directed interest on delayed payment in paragraphs 16 to 18 of the award.
Extract from the award containing these paragraphs would appear later in this was no waiver and in any event the communication of 14 th July 2004 followed by that of 3rd August 2004 related to IPC­I only This stand had been broadly accepted by the Tribunal.
The the appellants claimants had continued to raise demand for interest subsequent to the issue of those two communications interest on delay in payment with regard to the local currency Appellate Bench was that in the event it was intention of the claimants to retain their entitlement to interest on delayed persuaded to accept the appellants’ bid on the basis that the situation as this factor could have made their bid more 10.
This appeal in substance is an extension of a proceeding under Section 34 of the 1996 Act.
To go into the question of Ltd. vs.
Saw Pipes Ltd 5 SCC 705].
Contention of the respondents has been that the Arbitral Tribunal’s order stood vitiated under the “patent illegality” principle spelt out in that What would constitute patent illegality has been elaborated by this Court in a later judgment Associate Builders vs. Delhi invalidated as per this authority if the same was in “42.3Equally the third subhead of patent “28.
Rules applicable to substance of decide in accordance with the terms of the contract and shall take into account the usages of the trade applicable to the This last contravention must be understood with a caveat.
An Arbitral terms of the contract but if an arbitrator construes a term of the contract in a award can be set aside on this ground Construction of the terms of a contract is primarily for an arbitrator to decide unless that no fair­minded or reasonable person in the bid document the “appendix to bid” to be specific had far as payment in local currency component contained in the agreement is concerned.
In our opinion however the interference with the award by the Arbitration Court on this ground was unwarranted.
The underlying reasoning of the 9 SCC 266] were relied upon before us by the appellants to distinguished on behalf of the respondents on the ground that the former decision related to interest pendente lite and both statute an arbitrator had power or jurisdiction to grant pre­ lite and future interest.
Such jurisdiction stood curbed only if express terms of the contract precluded payment of interest Referring to another authority the Union of India vs.
Bright Power Projects(P) Ltd. 9 SCC 695] this Court 31(7) of the 1996 Act.
In the case of Bright Power Projects agreed by the parties the Arbitral Tribunal can award interest at which forms the subject­matter of this appeal being the 12.
On the other hand the specific term of the agreement our opinion cannot be construed as cancellation of the clause do not think the Appellate Court or the Arbitration Court was interest under that head was necessary to have been incorporated in the agreement.
Though the case of GC Roy supra) was delivered in a dispute to which the 1940 Act was applicable the Constitution Bench of this Court has laid down “43.
The question still remains whether arbitrator has the power to award interest must reiterate that we are dealing with the situation where the agreement does not prohibit such grant.
In other words we are dealing with a case where the agreement is of aforementioned decisions the following any name.
It may be called interest compensation or damages.
This basic consideration is as valid for the period the upon the reference.
This is the principle of 13.
The underlying principle guiding award of interest is that interest payment is essentially compensatory in nature.
But as we have already observed in the case before us interest on delayed payment formed part of the contract itself.
The agreement did not contain any express exclusion clause on reasoning of the Tribunal on the basis of which it rejected the respondents’ plea of waiver.
This was a finding of fact on reasons behind the decisions of the Appellate Court and Arbitration Court was that the appellants while bidding had and the said two fora sought to invoke the principle of law 14.
The Appeal Court accepted reasoning of the Arbitration Court that the blank portion in the appendix to the bid would imply “zero” or “nil”.
This reasoning in our opinion is flawed constitute rewriting the contract which is impermissible.
The payment.
The Tribunal determined the rate thereof in sub­ paragraphs 16 to 18 of the award.
This part of the award It is therefore held that the Claimants under any IPCs issued by the Engineer or Claimants monthly statements submitted to the Engineer for certification and when were not paid or had been withheld by the after the claimants’ respective monthly statements had been submitted to the Engineer for certification to the date of The Arbitral Tribunal therefore directs that the Respondents shall pay to the 2 15 72 150 ­ for the period of the due dates of payment till the actual dates of full The Respondents shall further pay to the claimants such interest on the unpaid sums in respect of other IPCs No. 5 to 14 issued by the Engineer or the Claimants for certification for the period from the due dates of payment till the actual dates of full to para 17 and 18 hereinabove from such dates of payment of the principal amount to 15.
The Appellate Court’s rationale that such blank interest assumption that the other bidders might have had pressed for other bidders had left the space blank or filled the same with specified rate.
The Arbitration Court’s view sustained by the High 16.
We do not find any flaw in the reasoning of the Arbitral in respect of delayed payment in local currency component specified therein.
This being the position in our opinion the under Section 34 of the Act which view was upheld by the Appellate forum breaches the permissible boundaries for encroaching upon an award as laid down in Saw Pipes case In our opinion the view taken by the Tribunal on view.
We however are of the opinion that the rate at which 16 and 18 of the award which we have reproduced above are of interest but provides for payment of interest on delayed payment the Tribunal’s exercise of fixing the rate should have been on the basis of applying the principle laid down in paragraph 431. in the case of GC Roy (supra).
The said of the 1996 Act.
The only difference between the situation provision for such payment.
Only the rate at which interest would be payable remained unspecified.
In our view simple 16. to 18 of the award.
We accordingly set aside the judgment interest on delayed payment in relation to local currency component of the contract.
As a consequence judgment of the Sixth Additional District Judge Ernakulam shall also stand of interest on the sum shall be computed in the manner prescribed in paragraphs 16 17 and 18 and shall be at 8