IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS No. 88621 Arising Out of PS.
Case No. 210 Year 2020 Thana SIMRI District Buxar Birendra Paswan @ Birendra Kumar Paswan Male aged about 20 years Son of Dharmdev Paswan @ Barhmdev Paswan Resident of Village Balihar Paswan Tola PS Simari District Buxar The State of Bihar ... Petitioner s For the Petitioner s For the State Mr. Sanjay Kumar Advocate Mr. Anant Kumar No. 1 APP CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH ...
Opposite Party s ORAL JUDGMENT Date : 29 07 2021 The matter has been heard via video conferencing.
2.
The case has been taken up out of turn on the basis of motion slip filed by learned counsel for the petitioner on 22072021 which was allowed 3.
Heard Mr. Sanjay Kumar learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Anant Kumar No. 1 learned Additional Public Prosecutorfor the State 4.
The petitioner apprehends arrest in connection with Simri PS Case No. 2120 dated 26072020 instituted under Section 30(a) of the Bihar Prohibition and Excise Act 2016 hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No88621 dt.29 07 2021 5.
The allegation against the petitioner is that when the police went on prior information near the brick kiln of Mina Dubey one motorcycle was seen coming towards them but on seeing the police the rider turned the motorcycle and tried to run away but despite chase he managed to escape leaving behind the motorcycle and on search 60 litres of countrymade liquor was recovered from the said motorcycle and the petitioner was named as the person who had run away by the local Chowkidar 6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner has been named only on suspicion by the local Chowkidar and has no other criminal antecedent 7.
Learned APP submitted that the police had gone on prior information and it was the petitioner who was seen coming on the motorcycle and on chase had left the motorcycle from which there is recovery of huge amount of countrymade liquor Further it was submitted that the local Chowkidar is the competent person to identify the persons of that locality and him having identified the petitioner as the sole person who was riding the motorcycle and had fled away there is no reason to disbelieve him at least at the present stage.
Thus it was submitted that once there is direct connection of the petitioner to the recovered liquor the present petition under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No88621 dt.29 07 2021 Procedure 1973 would not be maintainable due to bar of Section 76(2) of the Act 8.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of learned counsel for the parties the Court finds substance in the contention of learned APP.
Once the local Chowkidar has identified the petitioner as the sole person who was riding the motorcycle and had fled away and from which there is recovery of 60 litres of countrymade liquor an offence prima facie is made out under the Act and therefore the present application would not be maintainable due to bar of Section 76(2 of the Act.
9.
For reasons aforesaid the petition stands dismissed as (Ahsanuddin Amanullah J