1.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 14.11.2019 passed by the High revision petition by quashing and setting aside the order dated 27.07.2019 passed by the learned Trial Court and Order XII Rule 6 of CPC the original defendants have 2.
The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as 2.1 That the respondent original plaintiff had instituted Civil Suit No.805 of 2018 against the original defendants appellants herein in the court of Senior Civil Judge and the defendants had taken the peaceful possession specific performance of contract declaration eviction and permanent injunction against the the Hon ble Court of Sh. Sanatan Prasad Ld ADJ East KKD Courts Delhi” no.2 is claiming to be in possession as an owner and there is a decree passed in her favour and the decree for specific performance is passed and or the sale deed is the owner of the suit property.
Till the suit for specific performance is decided the plaintiff respondent herein continues to be the owner and defendant No1 appellant the actual owner of the suit property.
As observed in favour of the defendants more particularly defendant and defendant No1 continues to be the tenant.
Therefore and that defendant No1 is a tenant.
Therefore the High Court as such has rightly passed the decree on admission under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC which in the facts and circumstances of the case cannot be said to be erroneous However at the same time when the substantive suit filed by High Court by the impugned judgment and order shall always be subject to the outcome of the said suit filed by defendant No.2 against the plaintiff and if ultimately she passed and the learned Trial Court passes the decree for possession then necessary consequences shall follow and the plaintiff subject to filing the appeal shall have to abide by the decree that may be passed in the suit for specific performance.
It also goes without saying that any by defendant No.2 for specific performance of the contract 10.
In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the passed by the High Court is confirmed subject to the observations made in earlier paragraph No. 9.
In the facts