IN THE CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 912 OF 2021 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITIONNo.
16721 Rahmat Khan @ Rammu Bismillah ...Appellant(s Deputy Commissioner of Police …Respondent(s JUDGMENT Indira Banerjee J This appeal is against a final judgment and order dated 29th January 2021 passed by the Nagpur Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay dismissing the Criminal Writ Petition No. 4918 filed by the Appellant challenging an order of Externment dated 07.05.2018 passed by the Deputy Commissioner of Police Zone 1 Amravati City under Section 56(1)(a)(b) of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951 whereby the Appellant has been directed not to enter or return to Amravati City or Amravati Rural District for a period of one year from the date on which he leaves or is taken out of Amravati City and or Amravati Rural District Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the impugned Externment Order are extracted hereinbelow for convenience “Whereas as per the Order under section 10(2) of the Bombay Police Act Mumbai 251) the Govt. of Maharashtra by Order No.Maharashtra Ordinance No.9 94 dt.24th June 1994 has directed that Deputy Commission of PoliceAmravati will implement the power work and duties conferred upon him under section 56 of the said Act Whereas against Rahematakhan @ Rammu Bismillakhan age 48 years R o Chaman Chhaoni University Road Amravati the proof of following nature has been submitted before me 1.
Since 2017 due to his act and movement fear has been created in the locality under Police Station Nagpurigate and Kotwali and to the property of people residing in the nearby surroundings and un safety has been created in their mind.
In future also there is every possibility of creation of un safety a) The said person by accompanying with his companions is engaged in serious offence like threatening to kill by abusing and demanding ransom to the people residing in area specified above Offence registered against aforesaid person 384 452 294 506(B) 34 IPC 12 10 2017 Under Police 384 448 294 504 506(B) 34 23 10 2017 Under Police 13 10 2017 Under Police Iste.
No. & Section 53 17 under section 110(e)Cr.P.C Date of In this way he is liable to be punished as per Chapter 17 of the IPC b)The aforesaid person accompanying with his companions is engaged in serious offence like threatening to kill by abusing and demanding ransom to the people residing in area specified above 2.
He has committed activities of the nature as mentioned in paragraph No1 sub para No.A and B so also has committed several activities of the nature mentioned in the show cause notice….” On or about 11th October 2013 the Government of Maharashtra introduced a scheme called “Dr.
Zakir Hussain Madrasa Adhunikikaran Yojana” hereinafter referred to as ‘the Scheme’ for the upliftment of the Muslim community by providing quality education to Muslim children As per the Scheme the Madrasas registered with the office of Charity Commissioner or Waqf Board which had completed three years were to be given priority for allotment of funds for basic amenities remuneration of teachers scholarship of students etc Pursuant to a Government Resolution dated 20th March 2015 the State of Maharashtra announced the disbursement of grants totaling a sum of Rs.1 35 70 000 to 33 Madrasas of Amravati District for the Financial Year 2014 2015 The Appellant claims to be a religious minded journalist and social worker who has been fighting against corruption and misuse of public funds.
The Appellant used to publish the newspaper “kalam Ki Takat” till 2009 According to the Appellant his daughter was studying in a Madrasa in Amravati District in Maharashtra.
At that time the Appellant came to know of irregularities in the running of Madrasas including misappropriation of public money distributed to Madrasas in Amravati District by the State of Maharashtra The Appellant has alleged that complaints were received by the Government of Maharashtra of illegalities in distribution of grants under the Scheme during the Financial Years 2014 2015 and 2015 2016.
The appellant had also made such complaints.
In view of the complaints as aforesaid all Collectors were directed to initiate inquiry into the disbursement of grants to Madrasas during the Financial Years 2014 2015 and 2015 2016 On or about 9th August 2017 the Appellant made an application under the Right to Information Act 2005 seeking information from the District Planning Committee Amravati of the outcome of the inquiry and details of distribution of grants in Amravati District in the Financial Years 2014 2015 and 2015 2016 By a communication dated 18th September 2017 the Appellant was informed that a Government Order dated 24th May 2017 had been passed for enquiry but no Enquiry Report had been received by the office of the District Planning Committee.
The Appellant was furnished with a list of grantees to whom grants had been disbursed during the years 2014 2015 and 2015 2016 with particulars of the amounts granted to the respective granters.
The Appellant claims that he came to know that certain government officers including one CR Rathod the then Deputy Director of Education Amravati had disbursed grants under the Scheme in contravention of the Government Resolution dated 11th October 2013 On or about 14th September 2017 the Appellant filed a complaint with the Collector Amravati seeking appropriate action against the concerned officers including the said CR Rathod allegedly responsible for illegal distribution of grants.
The Appellant also requested the Collector to stop the distribution of Government grants under the scheme in contravention of Rules to certain educational institutions and Madrasas including the institutions run by Joha Education and Charitable Welfare Trust and Madrasi Baba Education On 13th October 2017 the Appellant requested the Collector as also the police to investigate misappropriation of Government grants by Madrasas in collusion with Government officials.
In retaliation affected persons filed complaints against the Appellant particulars whereof have been mentioned in paragraph 1 of the impugned Externment Order extracted above.
The Appellant applied for and was granted bail by the Sessions Court on condition that the Appellant would attend to the Police Station concerned till the chargesheet was filed The Appellant appears to have filed applications under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the High Court for quashing the criminal cases referred to above which are pending adjudication On or about 30012018 the Appellant filed a Public Interest Litigation in the Nagpur Bench praying for the following orders “(i) issue a writ order or direction in the nature of Mandamus commanding the State Minority Development Department to take action and stop distribution of grants to the respondent no. 11 to 29 and all concerned Madarssa’s into the matter of the selection of the Madarsa’s under the said scheme which are not registered with charity commissioner or Wakf Board and regarding the same inquiry has been already done in the year 2017 as of the Annexure F and report of it already been prepared and submitted by the residential collector Amravati to the respondent no.2 further be pleased to direct the respondent no.1 to 2 to submit the details of the action taken against all the concerned Madarsas before this Hon’ble Court in stipulated time ii) issue a writ order or directions to take action against the respondent no 2 10 who are responsible for the selection of the Madarsas under the iii) issue a writ order or direction in the nature of Mandamus directing an independent impartial enquiry to be conducted regarding all the Madarsas running in the state of Maharashtra and are receiving grants under the scheme by any retired High Court Judge for submitting its report before this Court in a stipulated time iv) issue a writ order or direction in the nature of Mandamus commanding the Respondent no. 2 to 6 to furnish the record of the funds distributed under the schemes to the different Madarsas v) issue a writ order or direction in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents 1 to initiate the departmental and disciplinary proceeding against the Respondents no 2 10 who are responsible for selection of the vi) issue a writ order or direction which this Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of the case vii) award the cost of the petition to the petitioner.” Some time thereafter a Show Cause Notice dated 3rd April 2018 was issued to the Appellant from the office of the Assistant Police Commissioner Gadge Nagar Division Amravati informing him of the initiation of Externment proceeding against him under Section 56(1)(a b) of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951.
According to the Appellant he received the show cause notice on 12th April 2018.
By a letter dated 16th April 2018 the Appellant replied to the Show Cause Notice dated 3rd April 2018 inter alia contending “1.
In the show cause notice the reference of three criminal offences pending against me are reflecting which includes Crime No. 344 17 352 17 registered with Police Station Nagpuri gate and Crime No. 501 17 registered with Police Station Kotwali.
It appears that in the show cause notice the date of the said offences is deliberately not shown.
2.
First offence i.e. Crime No. 344 17 registered against me is on the complaint filed by one Shamim Azahar Khan Jafar Ali Khan dt. 12 10 2017 in which it is alleged by him that I the undersigned had threatened him on 20 9 2017 at about 930 A.M. to 10 A.M. and demanded Rs50 000 .
On the basis of said complaint FIR was lodged against me for the offences punishable u s 294 34 384 452 506(B) of IPC.
I have filed application u s 482 CrPC before the Hon’ble High Court Bench at Nagpur challenging the said FIR vide Criminal Application no. 921 2017.
In which Hon’ble High Court was pleased to issue notices and same is pending as on today.
I submit that the FIR in question is maliciously lodged as I have pursued the matter of misappropriation by the various schools including the office bearers of the Education Department while implementing the Scheme of Government vide GR dt. 11 10 2013 3.
Second Offence i.e. Crime No. 352 17 registered against me is on the complaint filed by one Irfan Ahmed Mohd.
Sheikh dt. 23 10 2017 in which it is alleged by him that I the undersigned along with three other had threatened him and demanded Rs.5 00 000 .
On the basis of said complaint FIR was lodged against me for the offences punishable u s 448 384 294 504 506(B) and 34 of IPC.
I have filed application u s 482 CrPC before the Hon’ble High Court Bench at Nagpur challenging the said FIR vide Criminal Applicationno.
922 2017.
In which the Hon’ble High Court was pleased to issue notices and same is pending as on today.
I submit that the FIR in question is maliciously lodged as I have pursued the matter of misappropriation by the various schools including the office bearers of the Education Department while implementing the Scheme of Government vide GR dt. 11 10 2013 4.
Third Offence i.e. Crime No. 501 17 registered against me is on the complaint filed by one Chandansingh Ramsingh Rathod dt. 13 10 2017 in which it is alleged by him that I the undersigned had demanded Rs.25 000 from him for not lodging complaint against him with collector On the basis of said complaint FIR was lodged against me for the offences punishable u s 384 of IPC.
I have filed application u s 482 CrPC before the Hon’ble High Court Bench at Nagpur challenging the said FIR vide Criminal Application no. 924 2017.
In which the Hon’ble High Court was pleased to issue notices and same is pending as on today.
I submit that the FIR in question is maliciously lodged as I have pursued the matter of misappropriation by the various schools including the office bearers of the Education Department while implementing the Scheme of Government vide GR dt. 11 10 2013 5.
That the impugned action is nothing but a pressurized tactics on me for not pursuing the matter of misappropriation before the concerned authorities as the impugned action is initiated against me only after I have approached the Hon’ble High Court by filing application for quashing of the three FIRs referred in the notice in question.
As such the action is with ulterior motive and malafide 6.
That all the three FIRs are output of personal allegations levelled against me and no allegations which satisfies a requirement of Section 56(1)(a)(b of the Bombay Police Act.
Thus the three FIRs cannot be a ground of externing me from entire Amravati District.” On 25th April 2018 the Appellant received another notice dated 20th April 2018 from the Office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police Zone 1 Amravati City under Section 59 of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951.
Thereafter externment proceedings were initiated against the Appellant which culminated in the impugned Externment order The impugned Externment Order refers to three Crime Cases being Crime Case Nos. 344 17 352 17 and 501 17 which were initiated pursuant to three First Information Reports(i) the first FIR dated 12.10.2017 lodged at the Nagpuri Gate Police Station by Shamim Azahar Khan Jafal Ali Khan Headmaster of Priyadarshani Urdu Primary and Pre Secondary School run by Madrasi Baba Education Welfare Society at Azad Colony Amravati the second FIR dated 23102017 also lodged at the Nagpur Gate Police Station by Irfan Ahmed Mohammad Sheikh Headmaster of Al Haram International English School run by Joha Educational and Charitable Trust at Jamiya Nagar Lal Khadi Ring Road Amravati andthe third FIR dated 13th October 2017 lodged at the Kotwali Police Station in Amravati City by C. R Rathod the then Deputy Director of Education Amravati The Appellant had been filing applications under the Right to Information Act 2005 seeking information from concerned authorities in relation to illegalities in disbursement of funds to various Madrasas including Al Haram International English School run by Joha Education and Charitable Welfare Trust and Priyadarshini Urdu Primary and Pre Secondary School run by Madrasi Baba Education Welfare Society Pursuant to such applications the Office of the Education Officer had sought information from the concerned Headmasters vide communications dated 23.8.2017 and 25.9.2017 respectively It is the case of the Appellant that Crime Nos. 352 2017 and 344 2017 were initiated as a counterblast in retaliation to the steps taken by the Appellant to put an end to illegal misappropriation of public funds and to initiate action against those involved in illegal practices.
The Criminal Case No.501 2017 filed by the said CR Rathod Deputy Director of Education Amravati is also retaliatory according to It is not in dispute that the three FIRs were filed soon after the Appellant started making complaints and raising queries under the Right to Information Act 2005.
Reference may be made to a response dated 792018 of the Office of the District Collector in response to a query of the Appellant vide an application dated 1682018.
The response is extracted below for convenience “As per the terms and conditions of Government Resolution of 11th October 2013 on the order of District Collector on the complaint dated 1492017 of Rahemat Khan Bismilla Khan in the year 2016 17 inquiry of total 36 Madarsas was done on 15112017 and 26112017 who have taken Government Grant.
After this inquiry with the signature of Resident Dy District Collector and District Collector in office note in the proposal of 36 Madarsa there is certificate of registration with the office of Charity Commissioner.
But there is no registration Certificate in the name of Madarsa in the office of Waqf Board or Charity Commissioner.
In the year 2016 17 the Directors of total 36 Madarsa have been found guilty hence further proposal has been sent to the Govt for necessary action.
After getting directives from the Govt further action would be taken.” After investigation of Crime No. 344 2017charge sheet was submitted in the Court of the Judicial Magistrate First Class Court No. 11 Amravati.
Charges were framed and the case was registered as Reg.
Crl.
Case No. 421 The appellant has been acquitted by a judgment and order dated 26th February 2020 of the Judicial Magistrate The impugned Externment Order records that witnesses are not ready to adduce evidence publicly against the Appellant for fear of physical harm as also loss of their property.
By a notice sent on 20 th April 2018 the Appellant was called for a hearing to submit his reply The Appellant submitted his reply which as per the impugned Externment Order “does not feel to be cogent” Allegedly on the basis of statement made by undisclosed persons whose identity it is claimed cannot be disclosed to protect them from the danger of retribution the Deputy Commissioner issued an order recording the finding extracted hereinbelow : “… I am sure that the said person named Rahematkhan alias Rammu Bismillakhan age 48 years R o Chaman Chhaoni University Road Amravati Alongwith his colleagues is engaed in illegal acts serious offence like threatening to kill by abusing and demanding tribute in the Police Commissionerate to the people residing in the localities under Nagpurigate and Kotwali.
As he is having backing of Grundyism he alongwith his companions he threatens the residents of aforesaid locality and part The said offences are punishable under Chapter XVII of the IPC.
Whereas as per my opinion as it is felt that the safety of property of witnesses will be endangered the witnesses are not ready adduce evidence publicly by coming forward against the said person.
The Police Inspector by making utmost efforts took two witnesses in confidence and after assuring them that if they record their statement evidence then their names and identification will be kept secret.
They will not call before any Court or open Forum to adduce evidence.
On such assurance their evidence has been recorded in closed doors.
Perused the said closed door statements and got sure about its factual condition.
On perusing all the documents there is no effect of cases filed in Court against the said person…” The scope and ambit of Sections 56 to 59 of the Maharashtra Police Act 1954 was considered in Pandharinath Shridhar Rangnekar v. Dy.
Commr.
Of Police the State of Maharashtra reported in1 SCC 372 cited by Mr. Patil appearing for the State where this Court held “8.
Section 56 of the Act provides to the extent material that whenever it shall appear in Greater Bombay to the Commissioner:that the movements of acts of any person are causing or are calculated to cause alarm danger or harm to person or property orthat there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is engaged or is about to be engaged in the commission of an offence involving force or violence or an offence punishable under Chapter XII XVI or XVII of the Penal Code 1860 and when in the opinion of such officer witnesses are not willing to come forward to give evidence in public against such person by reason of apprehension on their part as regards the safety of their person or property the said officer may by order in writing direct such person to remove himself outside the area within the local limits of his jurisdiction or such area and any district or districts or any part thereof contiguous thereto within such time as the said officer may prescribe and not to enter or return to the said area from which he was directed the remove himself.
Under Section 58 an order of externment passed under Section 56 can in no case exceed a period of two years from the date on which it was made.
The relevant part of Section 59(1) provides that before an order under Section 56 is passed against any person the officer shall inform that person in writing “of the general nature of the material allegations against him” and give him a reasonable opportunity of tendering an explanation regarding those allegations.
The proposed externee is entitled to lead evidence unless the authority takes the view that the application for examination of witnesses is made for the purpose of vexation or delay Section 59 also confers on the person concerned a right to file a written statement and to appear through an advocate or attorney 9.
These provisions show that the reasons which necessitate or justify the passing of an externment order arise out of extraordinary circumstances.
An order of externment can be passed under clauseorof Section 56 and only if the authority concerned is satisfied that witnesses are unwilling to come forward to give evidence in public against the proposed externee by reason of apprehension on their part as regards the safety of their person or property.
A full and complete disclosure of particulars such as is requisite in an open prosecution will frustrate the very purpose of an externment proceeding.
If the show cause notice were to furnish to the proposed externee concrete data like specific dates of incidents or the names of persons involved in those incidents it would be easy enough to fix the identity of those who out of fear of injury to their person or property are unwilling to depose in public There is a brand of lawless element in society which is impossible to bring to book by established methods of judicial trial because in such trials there can be no conviction without legal evidence.
And legal evidence is impossible to obtain because out of fear of reprisals witnesses are unwilling to depose in public.
That explains why Section 59 of the Act imposes but a limited obligation on the authorities to inform the proposed externee “of the general nature of the material allegations against him”.
That obligation fixes the limits of the co relative right of the proposed externee.
He is entitled before an order of externment is passed under Section 56 to know the material allegations against him and the general nature of those allegations.
He is not entitled to be informed of specific particulars relating to the material 10.
It is true that the provisions of Section 56 make a serious inroad on personal liberty but such restraints have to be suffered in the larger interests of society.
This Court in Gurbachan Singh v. State of Bombay[1952 SCR 737 : AIR 1952 SC 221 : 1952 SCJ 279] had upheld the validity of Section 27(1) of the City of Bombay Police Act 1902 which corresponds to Section 56 of the Act.
Following that decision the challenge to the constitutionality of Section 56 was repelled in Bhagubhai v. Dulldbhabhai Bhandari v. District Magistrate Thana We will only add that care must be taken to ensure that the terms of Sections 56 and 59 are strictly complied with and that the slender safeguards which those provisions offer are made available to the 15.
As regards the last point it is primarily for the externing authority to decide how best the externment order can be made effective so as to subserve its real purpose.
How long within the statutory limit of two years fixed by Section 58 the order shall operate and to what territories within the statutory limitations of Section 56 it should extend are matters which must depend for their decision on the nature of the data which the authority is able to collect in the externment proceedings.
There are cases and cases and therefore no general formulation can be made that the order of externment must always be restricted to the area to which the illegal activities of the externee extend.
A larger area may conceivably have to be comprised within the externment order so as to isolate the externee from his moorings 16.
An excessive order can undoubtedly be struck down because no greater restraint on personal liberty can be permitted than is reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
The decision of the Bombay High Court in Balu Shivling Dombe v. Divisional Magistrate Pandharpur is an instance in point where an externment order was set aside on the ground that it was far wider than was justified by the exigencies of the case.
The activities of the externee therein were confined to the city of Pandharpur and yet the externment order covered an area as extensive as districts of Sholapur Satara and Poona.
These areas are far widely removed from the locality in which the externee had committed but two supposedly illegal acts.
The exercise of the power was therefore arbitrary and excessive the order having been passed without reference to the purpose of the externment.” In Gazi Saduddin v. State of Maharashtra reported inthe externment notice referred to three criminal proceedings registered against the appellant.
It was alleged in the notice that movements and activities of the appellant had caused alarm in the locality and created an atmosphere of terror.
It contained details of three incidents having occurred within the period of a fortnight or a month prior to the date of notice wherein the appellant had threatened the people for seeking their cooperation in teaching a lesson to a particular religious community.
It was mentioned that the appellant had established contacts with an organisation engaged in activities against communal harmony and national security and had participated in a programme of burning the effigies of leaders of that religious community thereby causing communal tension in the area The judgment of this Court in State of Maharashtra and Ors v. Salem Hasan Khan reported in2 SCC 316 pertained to a person found to be frequently engaged in illegal business of narcotics who was involved in several cases of riot and also criminal intimidation of the residents of the locality because of suspicion that they were supplying information to the police about his illegal activities Witnesses were therefore not willing to come forward and depose against him.
Rejecting the argument that the allegations in the show cause notice were too vague in the absence of details to afford the externee reasonable opportunity to defend himself this Court held that a full a complete disclosure of particulars as was requisite in an open prosecution would frustrate the very purpose of an externment proceeding.
This Court observed : “4….There is band of lawless elements in society which it is impossible to bring to book by established methods of judicial trial because in such trials there can be no conviction without legal evidence.
And legal evidence is impossible to obtain because out of fear of reprisal witnesses are unwilling to depose in public.
While dealing with the contention that the State Government was under a duty to give reasons in support of its order dismissing the appeal the point was rejected in the following terms:of Education CR Rathod District Planning Officer Ravindra Kale Extension Officer Sandip Bodhke.
The Inquiry Report along with explanation of the officers has been sent to the Chamber Officer of the Minority Development Department Mantralaya Mumbai for further action CR Rathod lodged FIR No.501 2017 dated 13th October 2017 against the Appellant under Section 384 of the Indian Penal Code exactly within one month from the date of the Appellant’s complaint against him in respect of illegalities in relation to disbursal of funds to As observed above the Appellant was acquitted in Crime No3417.
FIR No.352 2017 dated 23102017 which led to initiation of Crime No.352 2017 was apparently filled soon after the complainant of the said FIR Crime case being the Head Master Al Haram International School received a communication from the Office of the Education Officer Zila Parishad Amravati directing him to furnish information sought by the Appellant by filing an application under the Right to Information Act 2005 From the tenor of the complaint lodged by Irfan Ahmed Mohd Sheikh Headmaster of the Al Haram International English School with the Nagpuri Gate Police Station it is patently clear that there were disputes with regard to the manner of operation of the school Accordingly in the FIR it is stated: “This School is formed after obtaining requisite permission as per rule Their U Dise Number is is 27071502112.
On 8th August 2017 the non applicant Rehemat Khan filed an application for getting certain information under Right to Information Act.
On 4 10 2017 the non applicant No 1 came in the office of the applicant and demanded the information that was given to him.
The applicant verbally told him and given in writing that this is a private school hence information cannot be given under Right to The applicant tried to convince the non applicant No 1 that in this school no any malfunction takes place hence there is no question arises to pay him anything.
On that he got delirious with anger and said the applicant that TUM BHADKHAU HO MAI TUMHARA HISAB KARTA HOON.
Saying this he aimed the pistol towards me and tried to come near to me.
Hearing this noise the Staff Members School Bus Driver Shakil Ahmed Teacher of the school Hafiz Riyaz Huseni Watchman of the School Abdul Sayeed all entered in the office and seeing the situation they stopped the non applicant and attempted to control him.” The deplorable allegation of demand for ransom by threat prima facie appears to have been concocted to give the complaint a colour of intense gravity.
Mr. Patil argued that the Appellant had been extorting money under threat of exposing the illegal activities of certain officials and certain Madrasas or educational institutions Even assuming that there was substance in the allegation which appears to be doubtful an order of externment was unwarranted There was no reason for the complainants who lodged the FIRs to get terrorized by the alleged threats allegedly meted out by the Appellant for if those complainants had not indulged in unlawful acts they had nothing to fear.
Even otherwise threat to lodge a complaint cannot possibly be a ground for passing an order of externment under Section 56 of the Maharashtra Police Act 1951 more so when the responses of government authorities to queries raised by the Appellant under the Right to Information Act clearly indicate that the complaints are not frivolous ones without substance.
A person cannot be denied his fundamental right to reside anywhere in the country or to move freely throughout the country on flimsy grounds Having regard to the special facts and circumstances of this case where on the basis of complaints lodged by the Appellants inquiry had been started by the concerned authorities against government officials and educational institutions including the complainants who lodged the FIRs against the Appellant the impugned externment order which followed cannot be sustained.
The Appeal is accordingly allowed and the impugned externment order is set aside [INDIRA BANERJEE NEW DELHI AUGUST 25 2021 [V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN