IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS No. 66721 Arising Out of PS.
Case No. 432 Year 2020 Thana RAJAOLI District Nawada Anil Kumar Male aged about 58 years Son of Late Baleshwar Singh Resident of Village Mahawatpur PS Sirdala District Nawadah at Present Incharge Head Master Upgrade Middle School Balia PS Rajauli District The State of Bihar ... Petitioner s ...
Opposite Party s For the Petitioner s For the State Mr. Arun Kumar Advocate Mr. Anand Mohan Prasad Mehta APP CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH ORAL JUDGMENT Date : 21 08 2021 The matter has been heard via video conferencing 2.
The case has been taken up out of turn on the basis of motion slip filed by learned counsel for the petitioner on 09082021 which was allowed.
3.
Heard Mr. Arun Kumar learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Anand Mohan Prasad Mehta learned Additional Public Prosecutorhad been made In charge for distribution of rice under the Mid Day Scheme with effect from 10082020.
It was submitted that the incident shown in the viral clip is of 18082020 i.e. after the constitution of the said Committee.
Learned counsel submitted that even in the viral the voice is that of co accused Ajit Kumar who was member of the said Committee and not the petitioner.
It was submitted that in the Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.66721 dt.21 08 2021 matter complicity of the cook has been ruled out as the explanation that she had asked her son to take the rice which was kept in the sun to ensure that it did not go bad to the storage room has been accepted and that is why neither she nor her son have been made accused in the present case.
Thus it was submitted that once the main allegation of two bags containing rice shown in the viral video being against the son of the cook no criminal liability can be fastened against the petitioner at least in the present matter.
Learned counsel submitted that even with regard to detection of excess rice as the school was a COVID quarantine centre for migrants who were coming from outside the State since foodgrains were being sent for their food which was also in the premises of the school and even the services of the cooks of the school were being utilized whatever was unutilized was also kept in the same store due to which more foodgrains have been found upon verification.
It was submitted that the petitioner has never been involved in any other criminal case and he is at the last stage of employment and for this allegation he has been placed under suspension and departmental proceeding has also been initiated against him treating it as misconduct 7.
Learned APP submitted that the petitioner being the In charge Headmaster was responsible for such irregularities Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.66721 dt.21 08 2021 8.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of learned counsel for the parties in view of the petitioner having constituted a Committee of four teachers as per the guidelines of the District Magistrate Nawadah with regard to distribution of rice under the Mid Day Meal Scheme during the pandemic period and the explanation of the cook with regard to irregularity of two bags of rice being shown with her son having been accepted by the authorities and the petitioner having no past criminal antecedent the Court is inclined to allow the prayer for pre arrest bail 9.
Accordingly in the event of arrest or surrender before the Court below within six weeks from today the petitioner be released on bail upon furnishing bail bonds of Rs. 25 000 twenty five thousand) with two sureties of the like amount each to the satisfaction of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate Nawadah in Rajauli PS Case No. 432 of 2020 subject to the conditions laid down in Section 438(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and further that one of the bailors shall be a close relative of the petitioner andthat the petitioner shall co operate with the Court and police prosecution.
Failure to co operate shall lead to cancellation of his bail bonds Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.66721 dt.21 08 2021 10.
It shall also be open for the prosecution to bring any violation of the foregoing conditions by the petitioner to the notice of the Court concerned which shall take immediate action on the same after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner 11.
The petition stands disposed of in the (Ahsanuddin Amanullah J