These Criminal Appeals have been preferred against a of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 imprisonment and fine of Rs 1 00 000 each was awarded 09.01.2002 at about 100 PM a police team led by ASI Singh were checking traffic at Shamshar when a vehicle and Rajesh Dhiman who later deposited it at the police station.
After completion of personal search of the appellants they were one independent witness Karam Chand was also held to cast serious the Rajasthan High Court in Gyan Chand v. State of the one which was favourable to the accused ought to be 1 1993 Cri LJ 3716 preferred.
Consequently it held that no charas was recovered However the High Court in appeal set­aside the acquittal and convicted the appellants for possession of charas under Section 20 of the NDPS Act.
The High Court observed that always desirable but their non­examination would not per se be fatal to the prosecution case especially when due efforts are made by the police to secure their presence.
Adverting to the an adverse inference against non­examination of independent of the official witnesses.
The High Court dissected a catena of to be subjected to a vigorous standard of scrutiny and corroboration which after careful and cautious appraisal had been met in the instant case.
The quantity of charas recovered years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs.1 00 000was projected as being fatal to the prosecution case.
A subtle distinction was sought to be made between cases where the appellants only on the premise that the effect of non­ the appellants under Section 313 CrPC as well as the non­ Learned State counsel on the other side drew our attention authoritatively settled the law on permissibility of the complainant also being the investigating officer in cases under to portray the evidence of the official witnesses as being unimpeachable and inspiring confidence and therefore 2 2020 SCC OnLine SC 700 of the complainant in the present case PW8 also being the line of cases ending with Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab3 has laid down the legal proposition that investigation by the complainant himself would be contrary to the scheme of the 10.
Suffice to say that the law on this point is no longer res integra and the controversy if any has been set at rest by the Constitutional Bench of this Court in Mukesh Singh 17 SCC 627 “102.
From the above discussion and for the reasons stated I That the observations of this Court in the cases of Bhagwan Singh v. State of Rajasthan 1 SCC 15 Megha Singh v. State of Haryana 11 SCC 709 and State by Inspector of Police NIB Tamil Nadu v. Rajangam Court on the ground that as the informant and the accused is entitled to acquittal are to be treated to be confined to their own facts.
It cannot be said that in the aforesaid decisions this Court laid down any general proposition of law that in each and every case where the informant is the investigator there is a bias caused to the II In a case where the informant himself is the investigator by that itself cannot be said that the like factor.
The question of bias or prejudice would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Therefore merely because the informant is the Court in the case of Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab 17 11.
We therefore see no reason to draw any adverse inference statutory mandates and non­examination of independent the High Court to be factually incorrect or legally irrelevant basis for concluding bias.
The appellants have at no stage claimed that there existed any enmity or other motive for the Further such a huge quantity of charas could not have been and that reason alone is sufficient not to hold them guilty prosecution has established the guilt “beyond reasonable doubt”.
A tainted investigation by a complaint who is a “witness” himself to a substantial ingredient of an offence case can be established on the parameter of “beyond 19.
A person accused of criminal offence punishable with a peril to his life or liberty enjoys certain rights under the jurisprudence.
Any action which impinges or affects those in the case of Rafiq Ahmad v. State of UP 8 SCC 300 and the standards of proof.
It is observed in the said decision that whenever a plea of prejudice is raised by the accused it must be examined with reference to the above rights and safeguards as it is the violation of these rights alone that may result in the weakening of the case of the prosecution and benefit to the accused in accordance with 13.
At the outset we may clarify that the observations relied upon by the appellants are not findings conclusion or resolution and improbable but it escapes our comprehension how non­ same incident does not carry any weight.
We may firstly clarify that the expression “reasonable doubt” is a well­defined accused.
These words are inbuilt measures to ensure that reasonable doubts are removed from the mind of an ordinary 15.
This Court in K Gopal Reddy v. State of Andhra concede the existence of a reasonable doubt.
But fanciful and remote possibilities must be left out of account.
To entitle an accused person to the benefit of a doubt arising from the to make out a case where two reasonable conclusions can be 16.
Secondly it is useful to point out that in their respective 4 1 SCC 355 that when they were coming after visiting a temple “a person vehicle and in the meanwhile third person fled away from the being carried by an unknown stranger who had mysteriously stopped by the police is ex­facie fanciful and is without even a bolsters the prosecution case.
The appellants effectively have ended up admitting that they were present on the spot some sufficient cause to stop the vehicle and that such search was based not on any prior information but was spontaneous and 17.
Reliance can also not be placed on Karam Chand’s4 SCC 350