IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS No.258021 Arising Out of PS.
Case No. 66 Year 2019 Thana CHOUTARWA District West Champaran 1.
Dilip Mushar aged about 30 years Male son of Sudama Mushar 2.
Gaudi Devi aged about 35 years Female wife of late Bhutkun Mushra Both resident of Village Bahuarwa Farm PS Chautarwa Dist.
West ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar  Opposite Party s For the Petitioner s For the State Mr. Bimlesh Kumar Pandey Advocate Ms. Indu Kumari Srivastava APP CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH ORAL JUDGMENT Date : 06 09 2021 The matter has been heard via video conferencing.
2.
The case has been taken up out of turn on the basis of motion slip filed by learned counsel for the petitioner which 3.
Heard Mr. Bimlesh Kumar Pandey learned counsel for the petitioner and Ms. Indu Kumari Srivastava learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State 4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that he may be permitted to withdraw the petition on behalf of the petitioner no. 1 namely Dilip Mushar as he has been arrested.
5.
In view thereof the petition on behalf of the Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.258021 dt.06 09 2021 petitioner no. 1 Dilip Mushar stands disposed of as withdrawn and is restricted to the petitioner no. 2 namely Gaudi Devi 6.
The petitioner no. 2 apprehends arrest in connection with Chautarwa PS Case No. 66 of 2019 dated 11.03.2019 instituted under Sections 302 201 34 of the Indian Penal Code 7.
As per the FIR the body of the brother of the informant was recovered which showed that he had been killed by sharp cutting and penetrating weapon and nine persons have been named including the petitioner no. 2 against whom suspicion has been raised that in the past she used to abuse and had also assaulted the deceased.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner no. 2 submitted that the allegation is totally false and concocted.
It was submitted that there is only one wound which led to the death of the deceased and the petitioner no. 2 being a lady and one among nine co accused it is unbelievable that she would be the perpetrator of the crime.
Further learned counsel submitted that another woman co accused namely Rampati Devi has been granted anticipatory bail by a coordinate Bench by order dated 23.10.2019 passed in Cr.
Misc. No. 64350 of 2019.
Learned counsel submitted that the investigation shows that the deceased had relationship with the petitioner no. 2 and even for the sake Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.258021 dt.06 09 2021 of argument if the same is accepted then all the more reason that the petitioner no. 2 could not have been the person behind the killing of the deceased as she would have no reason for committing such crime.
Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner no. 2 has become widow at a very young age and has no criminal antecedent.
accomplice in the crime.
9.
Learned APP submitted that the petitioner is an 10.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of learned counsel for the parties in view of the petitioner no. 2 being a lady and there being only suspicion raised and one wound found on the body of the deceased and further that similarly situated lady co accused Rampati Devi having been granted anticipatory bail and the petitioner no. 2 is not having any other criminal antecedent the Court is inclined to allow the prayer for pre arrest bail 11.
Accordingly in the event of arrest or surrender before the Court below within six weeks from today the petitioner no. 2 namely Gaudi Devi be released on bail upon furnishing bail bonds of Rs. 25 000 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and furtherthat one of the bailors shall be a close relative of the petitioner no. 2 that the petitioner no. 2 shall cooperate with the Court and the police prosecution.
Failure to cooperate shall lead to cancellation of her bail bonds.
12.
It shall also be open for the prosecution to bring any violation of the foregoing conditions by the petitioner no. 2 to the notice of the Court concerned which shall take immediate action on the same after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner no. 2 13.
The petition stands disposed of in the Ahsanuddin Amanullah J J Alam