This appeal arises out of the judgment passed on Appeal No. 31286 of 2017 dismissing the application seeking condonation of delay and the appeal as barred by The facts leading to file this appeal are that a suit for specific performance of the contract was filed by the respondent against the appellant based on an agreement to sell dated 1821998 with respect to an agricultural land bearing Gat No. 21 1 admeasuring 154 hectares situated at Suit No. 2 of 2001 by Civil Judge Amalner The appellant was duly served and appeared in the said pecuniary jurisdiction of the District Court the said appeal Thereafter a fresh notice was issued to the appellant which change of his address.
The Ad­hoc District Judge­I Amalner 2012 vide judgment dated 8092015 and granted decree of appellant filed second appeal before the High Court of judicature of Bombay Bench at Aurangabad on 1892017 inter alia contending that the judgment passed by the Ist Appellate Court came to his knowledge only on 1492017 application seeking condonation was rejected observing that not acceptable.
It was also observed that the appellant had himself been negligent and had not contacted his counsel engaged in the lower appellate court.
The High Court however observed that the respondent who had been litigating since last 17 years ought not be deprived of the valuable right as accrued to him.
With these observations the sum of Rs. 51 000 ­ was remaining.
In addition Rs. 10 000 ­ suit partly for refund of earnest amount.
The decree of specific performance is a discretionary relief as specified giving an opportunity of hearing to contest the claim the passed an ex­parte judgment and decree of specific performance.
Counsel argued that the dismissal of the second appeal on the ground of limitation is wholly on a judgment of this Court in the case of Perumon Bhagvathyu Devaswom Perinadu Village vs. Bhargavi that when appeal is pending in the appellate court where periodical dates are not being given the parties cannot be Considering the facts of the case in which the notice of the appeal sent by publication is not allegedly served and the documents of change of address have been filed by the appellant as well as the respondent which are on record in 10.
Reliance is further placed on the decision of this Court in Court subject to direction of deposit of the amount of the agreement and further deposit of the amount of the stamp and registration fee directed to condone the delay and also set­aside the sale deed executed by the Court.
Therefore an 11.
Per contra learned counsel representing the respondent last 20 years.
In the said suit in trial court the appellant and the appellant was represented through an advocate Later due to enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction the said appeal stood transferred to the court of Ad­hoc District Judge­I Amalner where from notice of the appeal was served before the Ist Appellate Court however the suit seeking specific performance was decreed.
The appellant remained ex­parte and on filing the execution the sale deed has also been explained showing bona fides.
In such a case 12.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the facts of the case suit seeking specific performance was based on an agreement to sell dated 1821998.
As per the said agreement to sell appellant had of Rs. 51000 ­ per bigha.
As per the entries on the agreement to sell certain amount was paid.
Later on certain Court considering the same refused to grant a decree of specific performance but directed for refund of Rs. 61 000 ­ with interest.
The said decree was reversed by the lower Appellate Court directing specific performance.
In both the 13.
The appellant filed an appeal before the High Court the matter cannot be negligent and it would be unfair to deprive the respondent litigating for the last 17 years of the In this case the appellant has also produced the documents including voters list aadhar card showing his change of address from Amalner to Nashik.
On the other hand the respondent has produced the voters’ list of existing.
However in such a situation without any enquiry 15.
As per the judgment of Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom supra) the Court while dealing with the issue of condonation has clearly observed that advocates usually inform the litigants who are to be in contact.
Sometimes they assure aspect and taking a lenient view we are of the considered opinion that the High Court erred in dismissing the second appeal solely on the ground of limitation.
Therefore the request the High Court to take up the second appeal for month and if the second appeal is admitted to decide and hereinabove would not be treated as an expression on the 18.
Appeal is thus disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
No