 on 26 09 CRWP 9185 2021 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA ATCHANDIGARHCRWP 9185 2021 Date of Decision: 24092021Safina Begum and another ....Petitioner(s)VersusThe State of UT Chandigarh and others .....Respondent(s)CORAM:HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE JASGURPREET SINGH PURIPresent:Mr. Kuldeep Singh Advocate for the petitioners.
Through Video ConferencingJASGURPREET SINGH PURI J.The present petition has been filed under Article 226 of theConstitution of India with a prayer for issuance of writ in the nature ofMandamus seeking protection of life and liberty of the petitioners.The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that boththe petitioners are major and the petitioner No.1is 30 years of ageand was earlier married to somebody else but the marriage has since beendissolved by divorce as stated in para No3 of the petition.
He submittedthat the petitioner No.1 and petitioner No.2 are in a live in relationship.He submitted that there is an imminent threat at the hands of the privaterespondents because they are objecting to the relationship.
He submitted thatsince both the petitioners are adults they have right to choose the place oftheir living and person with whom they want to live.
He further submitted on 26 09 CRWP 9185 2021 2 that the scope of the present petition is only pertaining to the protection oflife to the petitioners.
Notice of motion to respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
Mr. Shashank Bhandari learned Additional Public Prosecutor UT Chandigarh has caused appearance on behalf of the aforesaidrespondents and has submitted that in fact the police has got enquired fromthe place of residence which has been stated in the memo of parties and itwas found that the petitioners are not residing at the place which has beenmentioned in the memo of parties and therefore it will not be possible forfurther processing with the enquiry.
Mr. Kuldeep Singh learned counsel for the petitioner hassubmitted that in view of the threat from the private respondents it is justpossible that the petitioners are wandering around.
He however submittedthat both the petitioners will appear before the concerned SHO at Sector 36 Police Station immediately and get their statements recorded and has prayedthat protection be granted to them.I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.The scope of the present petition is pertaining only to the extentof grant of protection to the life of the petitioners.
It however does notreflect anything with regard to the relationship of the petitioner inter se.In view of the statement made by the learned counsel for thepetitioners the petitioners may appear before the concerned SHO of Section36 Police Station and in the event of their doing so the concerned SHOshall assess the threat perception of the petitioners and in case so required then shall take appropriate steps for the protection of the life of thepetitioners.
on 26 09 CRWP 9185 2021 3 It is made further clear that the scope of the petition is only tothe extent of protection of the life of the petitioners and it will not be deemedto be any kind of impediment for taking any other action against thepetitioner if otherwise it is so required under the law.The present petition stands disposed of.24.09.2021 (JASGURPREET SINGH PURI)rakesh JUDGEWhether speaking:Yes NoWhether reportable:Yes No