MCRC No28321 HIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH BILASPUR Proceedings through video conferencing Order Reserved on 08.07.2021 Order Delivered on 14 .07.2021 MCRC No. 28321 1.
Vijay Bijoy Majumdar S o Balram Majumdar Aged About 26 Years R o Ward No. 12 Railway Gaurds Colony Aronjangla Dhubri Down Amko Road Dhubri District DhubriHariharpur District Dhanbadfor the offence punishable under Sections 420 467 468 34 of the Indian Penal Code 3.
As per the prosecution case the applicants claiming themselves to be belonging to SSR Industries and Telecom Industry induced the complainant Shailesh Singh Kachhwaha by calling him and sending messages in his mobile number assuring him of establishing mobile tower of Airtel Company on his land.
They obtained different amounts in installments from November 2020 onwards from the complainant the total amount being Rs. 39 It is argued on behalf of the applicants that the amount received from the complainant was deposited with the Airtel Company and the applicants are not the beneficiary and they being in jail since 20 02 2021 they are entitled to be released on bail 5.
Per contra learned State counsel would oppose the prayer for grant of bail.
He would submit that the applicants posed themselves as agents of Airtel Company however the amount has not been made over to the Airtel Company therefore considering the nature of fraud committed by the applicants they are not entitled to be released on bail 6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties it appears the applicants have obtained payment of Rs. 39 lacs from the MCRC No28321 complainant by falsely assuring him of erecting a mobile tower on his land.
The applicants are not the agents of the Airtel Company No such document has been produced by the applicants showing their contract arrangement with Airtel Company authorizing them to obtain payment for establishing a mobile tower.
Online fraud involving cyber crime is on enormous rise in the country 7.
Considering the facts situation of the case and considering the gravity of offence I am not inclined to release the applicants on 8.
Accordingly the present bail application is rejected (Prashant Kumar Mishra Acting Chief Justice