W.P.No.57021IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRASDATED :09032021CORAM : THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.VAIDYANATHANW.P.No.57021Malarkodi @ Malar ... PetitionerVs1The Chief Internal Audit Officer Board Office Audit Branch TANGEDCO N.P.K.R.R.
Maaligai First Floor 144 800 Anna Salai Chennai 600 002.2.The Executive Engineer Execution and Maintenance Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Thiruvidaimarudhur Main Road Kumbakonam 612 001.3.The Superintendent Engineer TANGEDCO Tanjore Taluk Vallam Road TNEB Tanjore.4.The Branch Manager Indian Overseas Bank Gandhi Salai Kumbakonam Branch.
... RespondentsPage No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo57021Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying to issue a writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for the records pertaining to pension by an order dated 25112020 vide Ka.No010206 411 Ni.Bi.2(2) Ko.Oivu 2020 passed by the 3rd Respondent and to quash the same and further direct the Respondents to disburse the family pension and other related pensionary benefits including the life time pending arrears to the Petitioner.For Petitioner: Ms.DKalaivaniFor Respondents :Mr.Fakkir MohideenO R D E RPetitioner has come up with this Writ Petition seeking to quash the order dated 25112020 passed by the 3rd Respondent vide Ka.No010206 411 Ni.Bi.2(2) Ko.Oivu 2020 and for a direction to the Respondents to disburse family pension and other related pensionary benefits including the life time pending arrears to her.2.According to the Petitioner her husband Late S.Kaliyaperumal worked as Foreman I Grade in the Kumbakonam Branch of the Respondent TANGEDCO and after putting 33 years of service he retired on 31032004.
After his retirement he was receiving pension in his Bank Account from TANGEDCO Pensioners Family Security Fund and lifetime arrears of pension from TANGEDCO vide PPONo52572 and his monthly Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo57021pension was credited to his S.B.
Account in Indian Overseas Bank Gandhi Salai Branch Kumbakonam.3.It is further stated by the Petitioner that in the Pension Account her husband has mentioned one Mrs.Susila who is his first wife as his nominee.
The said Susila is none other than the Petitioner’s own sister.
As Susila predeceased the Petitioner s husband on 21.02.2009 due to illness the Petitioner s husband made an Application in 2015 for change in the details of nominee in his Account and requested for updating the name of the Petitioner in the nominee details in respect of his pension Account.
While so the Petitioner s husband died on 11.01.2015 leaving behind him the Petitioner three sons and three daughters as his legal heirs.
As all her sons and daughters got married and settled with their family the Petitioner is greatly dependent on her husband’s pensionary benefits4It is the case of the Petitioner that after the death of her husband Provident Fund and other amount from his Pension Account was not withdrawn from his Bank Account.
Due to non withdrawal of pension from his Account the Bank has kept the Account as Inactive and the same is in non operational stage.
As the Petitioner s Application to the Respondents Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo57021seeking withdrawal of pension amount from his Account stood rejected having no other alternative she has approached this Court by way of the present Writ Petition.5.Heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the material documents available on record.6.Admittedly the Petitioner is the sister of her husband s first wife.
Though it has been stated by the Petitioner that her sister Susila was suffering from cancer and hence she was asked to marry her husband both the said Susila and the Petitioner herein lived together under one roof after the marriage of the Petitioner with the deceased.
It is not in dispute that the first wife of the Petitioner s husband pre deceased the Petitioner s husband due to illness.
Hence according to the Petitioner she is entitled to pension and other retirement benefits of her husband in terms of Rule 49 of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules 1978of the said Rules states that there should be a valid marriage.Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo570217For better appreciation Rule 49(7) of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules 1978 is extracted hereunder: “(7)(i) Where family pension is payable to more widows than one the family pension shall be paid to widows in equal shares.On the death of widow her share of the family pension shall become payable to her eligible childWhere the deceased Government or pensioner is survived by a widow but has left behind eligible child or children from another wife who is not alive the eligible child or children shall be entitled to the share of family pension which the mother would have received if she had been alive at the time of the death of the Government servant or pensioner.[Explanation.
For the purpose of this rule the second wife shall be eligible for the benefits of family pension only if the second marriagesolemnised as per the customary law prevailed among the community before the date of commencement of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955orPage No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo57021(ii) solemnised under the Mohammadan Law in which bigamy is permissible.
]Where family pension is payable to more than one person each share containing a fraction of a rupee it shall be rounded off to the next higher rupeewhere the share of family pension as so rounded off under this sub rule when added causes an excess over the maximum limit such case shall be referred to the Government.
](8)Except as provided in sub rule(7) the family pension shall not be payable to more than one member of the family at the same time.[Explanation.
For the purpose of this rule the twin children born at a single birth shall be treated as of the same age and made eligible for family pension in equal shares".
](ii) If a deceased Government servant or pensioner leaves behind a widow or widower the family pension shall become payable to the widow or widower failing which to the eligible child.
[(iii)If sons and unmarried daughters are alive the eligible male or female children will be entitled for family pension in the order of their birth irrespective of the sex of the child and the immediate younger of him or her will be eligible for family pension only after the elder above him or her become ineligible for family pension.
(b) In the case of twin children family pension is payable to such twin children in equal shares in the event of anyone of such children ceasing to be eligible for family pension his or her share of family pension will Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021become payable to the other such child and when both such children become ineligible for family pension the family pension will become payable to the next eligible child or twin children as the case may be.
]8.The Hindu Marriage Act 1955 does not permit second marriage.
Second marriage becomes valid if solemnized after the demise of the first wife.
But it cannot be lost out of sight that after the enactment of the Domestic Violence Act 2005 even without marriage when the factum of live in relationship between a man and woman is established it is held to be legally valid and over a period of time the woman attains the status of a wife.
But after the demise of the husband if two wives are alive the second one will not attain the legal status of wife unless Personal Law permits.9.The issue whether presumption of marriage arises when parties are in a live in relationship for a long period of time which would give rise to a claim u S. 125 Cr.PC came up for consideration in Chanmuniya vs. Virendra Kumar Singh Kushwaha before the Supreme Court.
It was held that where a man and a woman have cohabited for a long period of time in the absence of legal necessities of a valid marriage such a woman would be entitled to maintenance.
A man should not be allowed to benefit Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021from legal loopholes by enjoying the advantages of a defacto marriage without undertaking the duties and obligations of such marriage.
A broad and expansive interpretation must be given to the term “wife” to include even those cases where a man and woman have been living together as husband and wife for a reasonably long period of time.
Strict proof of marriage should not be a pre condition for grant of maintenance u S. 125 Cr.PC10.The Parliament to protect the interest of women who ends up as a second wife or a concubine as a result of long live in relationship with a male companion has enacted the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005.
Section 2(f) of the said Act reads as follows:“Domestic Relationship means a relationship between two persons who live or have at any point of time lived together in a shared household when they are related by consanguinity marriage or through a relationship in the nature of marriage adoption or are family members living together as a joint family”11The Domestic Violence Act 2005 nowhere states that a married man cannot have a live in relationship with an unmarried woman so also a married woman cannot have relationship with any person more Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021particularly when Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code has been struck down by the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court has held that in a live in relationship between a male and female who do not have a spouse a situation like the present one on hand may arise only after the demise of the legally wedded person.12.
The expression “relationship in the nature of marriage” as being akin to a common law or a defacto marriage came up for consideration in the case of D.Velusamy vs. D.Patchaiammal.
It was opined that a common law marriage is one which requires that although a couple may not be formally married:the couple hold themselves out to society as being akin to spouses the parties must be of legal age to marry the parties must be otherwise qualified to enter into a legal marriage including being unmarried andthe parties must have voluntarily cohabited and held themselves out to the world as being akin to spouses for a significant period of time.
However not all live in relationships would amount to a relationship in the nature of marriage to avail the benefit of Domestic Violence Act.
Merely spending week ends together or a one night stand would not make it a “domestic relationship”.Page No. https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.5702113.When there is a specific enactment of the Domestic Violence Act 2005 Rule 49 of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules 1978 will take a backseat as Domestic Violence Act 2005 will come to the driver’s seat and the woman will have to be given protection and the Rule cannot supersede the Statute mentioned supra.
In the light of the Domestic Violence Act 2005 if the live in relationship is established then the woman attains the status of a wife.
The march of law happens only while considering the co habitation that continues after the death of the first wife.
14.In a similar circumstance a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of C.Sarojini Devi vs.
The Director of Local Fund Audits Chennai has held that the second wife is entitled to payment of family pension after the death of the first wife.
For better appreciation relevant portion of the said judgment is extracted below: “12.
Even in the above judgment the petitioner therein had married the Government Employee during the subsistence of the first marriage.
The only difference is that in that case the first marriage got dissolved in the year 2003 and the first wife died in the year 2005.
This Court took into consideration the judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court in Dhannulal s case.
The Hon ble Supreme Court in the said case has held that Law presumes in favour of marriageand against concubinage Page No.1 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021when a man and woman have co habitated continuously for a long time.
By relying upon this judgment this Court held that after the dissolution of marriage with the first wife and after her death the petitioner therein was living with the deceased Government servant till his death.
This was taken into consideration by this Court and this Court held that the petitioner therein must be considered to be the wife of the deceased Government servant atleast after the dissolution of the first marriage and the subsequent death of the first wife.13.
This Court is in complete agreement with the proposition of law that has been enunciated in the above judgment.
It is very easy to brand the petitioner as a concubine and deprive her of her livelihood.
However the fact remains that the petitioner lived with the deceased Dr.AChinnasamy from the year 1975 up to his death in the year 2009.
This means that she lived with him for nearly 34 years.
The petitioner also gave birth to three children.
If the petitioner had made this claim when the first wife is alive then obviously the petitioner will not be entitled for Family Pension since her relationship is not recognized by law.14.
The march of law happens only while considering the co habitation that continues after the death of the first wife.
That is the most crucial factor that was taken into consideration by this Court while granting the Family Pension to the petitioner in the case cited supra.
Even in the present case the first wife died on 02041997.
Thereafter the petitioner lived with the deceased Dr.AChinnasamy till his death on 20012009.
During this period it can always be construed that the petitioner and the deceased Dr.AChinnasamy were living as husband and wife and their long co habitation itself raises that presumption of marriage.
Added to that the deceased Dr.AChinnasamy had also nominated the petitioner on 11051999 to receive the Family Pension after his death.Page No.1 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis WPNo5702115.
In the considered view of this Court this Court has to necessarily lean towards the presumption of marriage rather than branding the petitioner as a concubine.
This will be the most appropriate way to deal with the facts of the present case if justice has to be done to the petitioner.16.
In view of the above discussion this Court has no hesitation to quash the impugned order passed by the first respondent on 01022016 and accordingly the same is quashed.
The first respondent is directed to pass necessary orders and sanction Family Pension to the petitioner with effect from the date of death of Dr.AChinnasamy i.e. from 20012009 and disburse the arrears of pension to the petitioner within a period of twelveweeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner shall be continued to be paid with the Family Pension till her life time.”15.When the Rule specifically gives relief to more than one widow taking into account Personal Law the question of validity of the second marriage does not arise at all during the subsistence of the first marriage.
I am of the view that the second wife attains the deeming status of a wife from the date of demise of the first wife in case the husband is alive on the date of demise of the first wife.
Also when unknown relationship comes to be known after the demise of the husband such woman may not be entitled to any relief unless Personal Law permits more than one marriage or a declaration is obtained from the competent Judicial Forum with regard to her Page No.1 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021legal status after making the first wife as a party if she is alive16It is more pertinent to refer to a Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of R.Rajathi vs.
The Superintending Engineer TANGEDCO Nagapattinam Districtwherein in a similar circumstance regarding grant of pension to the second wife of the deceased employee it has been held as under:“43.
We are therefore constrained to conclude that the judgments which conclude that a second wife would be entitled to family pension irrespective of her marriage being void under the provisions of their relevant Personal Law’s applicable to the parties do not reflect the correct position of law and therefore will stand overruled.
The applicability of Sub Rule 7(a)(i) is confined only to cases where the second marriage is valid under the Personal Law applicable to the parties only in such cases widows of such marriages would be entitled to family pension.”17.Though I am bound by the Division Bench decision of this Court as the Domestic Violence Act has not been taken into account moreso when there are different judgments pertaining to the issue on hand including that of mine rendered in the case of SKamatchi vs.
The Accountant General O o.Principal Accountant General Chennai as Page No.1 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021early as on 06082014 which has been dealt with by the Division Bench in paragraphs 13 17 and 35 of the judgment rendered in Rajathi s caseI am of the view that the matter has to be referred to a Larger Bench to arrive at a finality to the issue as to whetherRule 49 of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules 1978 can take away the rights guaranteed for women under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 anda concubine after the enactment of the Domestic Violence Act 2005 attains the status of a companion wife after the demise of the first wife during the lifetime of her husband and that due to continued live in relationship whether she attains the status of a wife in order to get pensionary and other terminal benefits due to the deceased person.
18.Taking note of the fact that women are to be respected and protected moreso in the light of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 the issue certainly needs to be decided by the Larger Bench.
Registry is directed to place the matter before the Hon’ble Chief Justice to constitute a Larger Bench for deciding the issue in question.
09.03.2021Index :Yes NoPage No.1 https: www.mhc.tn.gov.in judis W.P.No.57021Speaking Order :Yes No(aeb)S.VAIDYANATHAN J.(aeb) W.P.No.5702109.03.2021Page No.1