IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO. 611 0F 2020 PRADEEP KUMAR SONTHALIA … APPELLANT(S DHIRAJ PRASAD SAHU @ DHIRAJ SAHU & ANR. …RESPONDENT(S CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2159 OF 2020 JUDGMENT SA Bobde CJI An interesting but important question of far reaching consequence arises for consideration in these appeals.
It is this “Whether the vote cast by a Member of the Legislative Assembly in an election to the Rajya Sabha in the forenoon on the date of election would become invalid consequent upon his disqualification arising out of a conviction and sentence imposed by a Criminal Court in the afternoon on the very same day ” We have heard learned counsel for the parties The brief facts sufficient for answering the issue arising for consideration in these appeals are as follows: By a notification dated 05032018 the Election Commission of India notified the biennial elections for two seats in the Council of States from the State of Jharkhand Three candidates by name Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia Samir Uraon and Dhiraj Prasad Sahu filed their nominations on 12032018.
It is stated that the first two candidates belonged to the Bharitya Janata Party and the third candidate belonged to the Indian National CongressOn 23032018 the election was held between 9.00 A.M. and 400 PM at the Vidhan Sabha.
A total of 80 members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand cast their votes One Shri Amit Kumar Mahto who was an elected member of the Assembly belonging to Jharkhand Mukti Morcha Partywould have it Shri Amit Kumar Mahto was convicted by the Court of the Additional Judicial Commissioner XVIII Ranchi in Sessions Trial No.481 of 2010 for the offences punishable under Sections 147 323 149 341 149 353 149 427 149 and 506 149 IPC on the same day but the conviction and sentence were handed over at 230 PM He was sentenced to various periods of imprisonment for those offences but all of them were to run concurrently.
The maximum punishment was for the offence under Section 506 149 and the Court awarded RI for a period of two years Since the election to the Council of States is by a system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote the counting of votes began at 730 P.M on 23032018 Out of the 80 votes cast two were declared invalid by the Returning Officer.
The remaining 78 votes which were validly cast were converted into pointsand Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia was declared to have secured 2599 value of votes Samir Uraon was declared to have secured 2601value of votes and Dhiraj Prasad Sahu was declared to have secured 2600 value of votes.
Thus the election petitioner was declared defeated and the other two declared duly elected It appears that an objection was lodged at 1120 P.M requesting the Returning Officer to declare the vote cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto invalid on the basis of the conviction and sentence imposed in the afternoon on the same day by the Criminal Court viii) However the Returning Officer went ahead and declared the results at 12.15 A.M. on 24032018.
Shri Samir Uraon and Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu were declared by the Returning Officer to be duly elected and they were also issued with a certificate in Form No. 24 in terms of Rule 85 of the Conduct of Election Rules 1961 Therefore Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia the defeated candidate filed an election petition in Election Petition No01 2018 praying for a declaration that the Returning Officer has caused improper reception of the void vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto He also prayed for setting aside the election of Shri Dheeraj Prasad Sahu with a consequential declaration that the petitioner was duly elected as a member of Rajya Sabha The High Court framed as many as 6 issues for consideration in the Election Petition and they are as follows: Whether Shri Amit Kumar Mahto has cast his vote in favour of respondent no. 1 in Biennial Election to the Council of States 2018 in connection with State of Whether on conviction and sentence of two years in Sessions Trial No. 4810 by the Additional Judicial Commissioner XVIII Ranchi Shri Amit Kumar Mahto ceased to be a Member of Legislative Assembly and his disqualification came into effect immediately from the date of his conviction and sentence of two years and therefore the vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto could not have been taken into consideration at the time of Whether the disqualification of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto rendered his vote void illegal that was cast to respondent no1 and therefore reception of his vote was improper and thus in terms of Section 100(d of the Representation of People Act 1951 the election of respondent no. 1 is liable to be declared void Whether the communication from the Returning Officer e mail dated 24032018) rejecting the objection made on behalf of the petitioner on the ground that the Returning Officer had not received the judgment of conviction of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto till the declaration of the results is absolutely illegal and unlawful Whether disqualification of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto in terms of Section 8of the Representation of People Act 1951 takes effect from the date of his conviction and sentence of two years ie 23032018 which means the day as per English calendar beginning at midnight and covering a period of 24 hours i.e. with effect from 23032018 at 0000 hours The respondent no. 1 having been declared to be elected in the Biennial Election to the Council of States 2018 by a margin of 001 vote and in the event the vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto which has been received improperly is ignored then whether the petitioner is entitled to be declared successful and consequently for being elected as a Member of Rajya Sabha By a judgment dated 17012020 the High Court dismissed the Election Petition after recording a finding in favour of the election petitioner on Issue Nos. 1 2 3 & 5.
On Issue Nos. 4 6 the High Court did not record any finding Despite deciding Issue Nos. 1 2 3 & 5 in favour of the election petitioner the High Court refused to grant any relief to the election petitioner primarily on the ground that the election to the Council of States by a system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote is a highly complex technical issue and that it is not possible for the Court to find out whether the election petitioner could have won the election if that one vote had been rejected Finding that the surgery was successful but the patient died the election petitioner has come up with one appeal in Civil Appeal No.611 of 2020.
Aggrieved by the findings on Issue Nos. 1 2 3 & 5 one of the two returned candidates namely Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu has come up with the other appeal namely Civil Appeal No.2159 of 2020For the purpose of convenience we refer to the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 6120 as the appellant throughout and the appellant in the other appeal as the returned candidate Before proceeding further it must be recorded that there is no dispute either before us or before the High court about the fact that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote at 9.15 A.M. on 23032018 and that the judgment of the criminal court was rendered at 230 pm on the very same day Before the High court a preliminary objection was raised about the validity of the presumption on the part of the election petitioner that Sri.
Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu.
Unless Shri Amit Kumar Mahto had cast his vote in favour of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu the entire edifice on which the election petition was built could have crumbled.
Therefore the Returning Officer Mr. Binay Kumar Singh was examined as PW 1 and through him the original ballot paper by which Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote was marked as Exhibit 9.
On the basis of the same the High Court came to the conclusion that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu the Congress candidate.
It was also clear from the evidence of PW 1 and Exhibit 9 that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto did not cast his 2nd 3rd and 4th preference vote.
Therefore the validity of the vote cast by Amit Kumar Mahto assumed significance especially in view of the margin Since the factual position that Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour of Dhiraj Prasad Sahu has now become unassailable many of the issues framed by the High Court have now paled into insignificance.
There are only 2 issues which now survive for consideration and they are: Whether the vote admittedly cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto in favour of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu at 9.15 A.M. on 23032018 should be treated as an invalid vote on account of the disqualification suffered by the voter under Article 191(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section 8(3) of the Representation of the People Act 1951 by virtue of his conviction and sentence by the Sessions Court in a criminal case rendered at 230 PM on the very same date 23032018 Whether in the event of the first issue being answered in the affirmative the election petitioner is entitled to be declared as duly elected automatically It is needless to say that the second question as formulated above would arise only if the answer to the first question is in the affirmative and not otherwise Before proceeding further we may point out that two ancillary issues namelythe non joinder of the Election Commission of India as a party to the election petition andthe absence of a specific prayer for recounting of votes were also dealt with by the High Court These issues may have gained importance but for the appeal filed by Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu against the findings on Issue Nos. 1 2 3 & 5 Therefore these ancillary issues need not deter us at this stage The primary contention of Shri Mukul Rohatgi and Shri K.V Vishwanathan learned senior counsel appearing for the defeated candidate who is the appellant in the first civil appeal is that wherever a statute uses the word “date” with reference to an event courts have always interpreted the same to have happened at the intersection of the previous day and the present day namely 0001 a.m.
This is firstly because it is at that time that the day begins and secondly because law abhors fractions.
Therefore it is their contention that though the Sessions Court delivered its judgment of conviction and sentence at 230 PM on 23032018 the date of such conviction is deemed in law to have commenced at about 0001 A.M when the date of March 22 lapsed and the date of March 23 began.
It is the further contention of the learned Senior Counsel that if the time at which the judgment was delivered is irrelevant and the focus is actually on the date of conviction then the disqualification would also commence at 0001 A.M. on 23032018.
As a corollary the vote cast at 9.15 A.M. on 23032018 would be a vote by a disqualified member and thus invalid In order to test the veracity of the above contention it is necessary first to take note of the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the Representation of the People Act 1951 Article 191 of the Constitution speaks of the circumstances under which a person will be treated as disqualified either for being chosen asor for being a member of the State Legislative Assembly.
The language of Article 191 makes it clear that it covers both a contest in an election and the continuance in office after getting elected.
It reads as follows: “191.
Disqualifications for membership 1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule other than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to disqualify its holder b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court c) if he is an undischarged insolvent d) if he is not a citizen of India or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament Explanation.
For the purposes of this clause] a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for 2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified under the If a person being a member of the Assembly suffers a disqualification his seat becomes vacant.
This situation is taken care of by Article 190 which reads as follows “190.
Vacation of seats 3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clauseor clauseof Article 191 or b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or the Chairman as the case may be and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman as the case may be his seat shall thereupon become vacant: Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub clauseif from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit the Speaker or the Chairman as the case may be is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine he shall not accept such resignation]” It is clear as daylight that the event which causes the disqualification under Article 191(1)(e) read with Section 8(3) is a conviction of a person for any of the specified offences.
The consequence of such disqualification is that the seat becomes vacant Obviously therefore a Member of the Legislative Assembly who has become disqualified and whose seat has become vacant is not entitled to cast his vote for electing a representative from his State under Article 80(4) which provides that the representatives of each State “shall be elected by the elected members”.
His name is liable to be deleted from the list of members of the State Legislative Assembly maintained under Section 152 of the Representation of the People Act 1951.
He ceases to be an elector in relation to election by assembly member and cannot cast his vote The Representation of the People Act 1951 was enacted for the purpose of providing for the conduct of elections of both houses of Parliament and to the House Houses of State Legislatures the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those houses the corrupt practices etc. .
Section 8 of the Act deals with disqualification on conviction for certain offences.
For the purpose of disqualification the offences are classified in section 8 into 3 categories namely i) offences falling under sub sectionii) offences falling under sub sectionand iii) offences not falling either under sub sectionor under sub The disqualification results in the Member becoming liable to be removed from the list of voters under Section 152 of the Representation of the People Act 1951 though the actual deletion may take time.
In any case he ceases to be an elector vide Rule 2(d of the Conduct of Election Rules 1961 which provides that an elector in relation to an election by assembly members means any person entitled to vote at that election 16.
We are concerned in this case with sub sectionof section 8 as Amit Kumar Mahto was convicted for offences which do not fall either under sub sectionor under sub sectionof section 8 alone is extracted as follows: “8.
Disqualification on conviction for certain 3) A person convicted of any offence and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two yearsor sub sectionshall be disqualified from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years since his release.
]” The disqualification under Section 8 of Act 43 of 1951 is relatable to Article 191(1)(e) of the Constitution.
Therefore any interpretation to Section 8 should be in sync with the Constitutional As this Court had an occasion to point out in Saritha S Nair vs. Hibi Eden1 Section 8(3) of the Act deals both with the conditions of disqualification and with the period of disqualification.
As regards the period of disqualification Section 8(3) is comprehensive in that it indicates both the commencement of the period and its expiry.
The date of conviction is prescribed to be the point of commencement of disqualification and the date of completion of a period of six years after release is prescribed as the point of expiry of the period of 1 SLPNo.
106720 dated 08 12 2020 19.
Once the period of disqualification starts running the seat hitherto held by the person disqualified becomes vacant by virtue of Article 190(3) of the Constitution.
While speaking about the seat of the disqualified person becoming vacant Article 190(3) uses the expression “thereupon”.
We may have to keep this in mind while interpreting the words “the date of such conviction” 20.
One fundamental principle that we may have to keep in mind while interpreting the phrase appearing in Section 8(3) is that in cases of this nature the Court is not dealing with a fundamental right or a common law right.
As pithily stated by this Court in Jyoti Basu vs Devi Ghosal2 an election dispute lies in a special jurisdiction and hence it has to be exercised without importing concepts familiar to common law and equity unless they are ingrained in the statute itself.
We may usefully extract the relevant portion of the decision in Jyoti Basu which reads as follows: “8.
A right to elect fundamental though it is to democracy is anomalously enough neither a fundamental right nor a Common Law Right.
It is pure and simple a statutory right.
So is the right to be elected.
So is the right to dispute an election.
Outside of statute there is no right to elect no right to be elected and no right to dispute an election.
Statutory creations they are and therefore subject to statutory limitation.
An Election petition is not an action at Common Law nor in equity.
It is a statutory proceeding to which neither the Common Law nor the principles of Equity apply but only those rules which the statute makes and applies.
It is a special jurisdiction and a special jurisdiction has always to be exercised in accordance with the statutory creating it.
Concepts familiar to Common Law and Equity must remain strangers to Election Law unless 21 SCC 691 21.
Placing heavy reliance upon the decision of this Court in Pashupati Nath Singh vs. Harihar Prasad Singh3 it is contended that wherever the statute uses the words “on the date” it should be taken to mean “on the whole of the day” and that law disregards as far as possible fractions of the day But in our considered view Pasupati Nath Singh hardly supports the contention of the Appellant.
In that case the election to the Bihar legislative Assembly from Dumro constituency was in issue As per the schedule the filing of nominations was to take place from 13011967 to 2001.1967.
The date of scrutiny of nomination papers was fixed as 21011967.
The returning officer upon scrutiny of nominations on 21011967 rejected the nomination paper of the Appellant before this Court on the ground that he had not made and subscribed the requisite oath or affirmation as enjoined by clauseof Art. 173 of the Constitution before the date fixed for scrutiny of nomination paper.
In other words is a candidate entitled to make and subscribe the requisite oath when objection is taken before the Returning Officer or must he have made and subscribed the requisite oath or affirmation before the scrutiny of nomination The answer to the above question turned on the interpretation to Section 36(2) of the Act clauseof which used the words “on 3 AIR 1968 SC 1064 the date fixed for scrutiny”.
The contention of the appellant before this court in Pashupati Nath Singh was that he was entitled to take the oath or affirmation before the Returning Officer immediately after an objection is made but before the objection was considered by the Returning officer.
Since Section 36(2)(a) uses the expression “on the date fixed for scrutiny” it was contended by the appellant in Pashupati Nath Singh that the whole of the day on which the scrutiny took place was available to him.
However this contention was rejected by this Court in the following manner: “16.
In this connection it must also be borne in mind that law disregards as far as possible fractions of the day.
It would lead to great confusion if it were held that a candidate would be entitled to qualify for being chosen to fill a seat till the very end of the date fixed for scrutiny of nominations.
If the learned counsel for the petitioner is right the candidate could ask the Returning Officer to wait till 1155 p.m on the date fixed for the scrutiny to enable him to take the oath” In other words this Court interpreted the words “date” in Pashupati Nath Singh not necessarily to mean 0001 A.M. to 2400 PM This was despite the fact that in common parlance a date would mean 24 hours in time.
But the running of time got arrested the moment the nomination of the appellant in Pashupati Nath Singh was taken up for scrutiny.
Thus the benefit of the whole day of 24 hours was not made available by this court in Pashupati Nath Singh to the appellant therein and the act of the Returning officer in drawing the curtains down at the happening of the event namely scrutiny of nomination papers was upheld by this court in Pashupati Nath Singh.
25.
In fact Pashupati Nath Singh can be said to be a mirror image or the converse of the case on hand.
In the case on hand the period of commencement of an event is in question while in Pashupati Nath Singh the period of conclusion was in issue.
If the date on which scrutiny was taken up can be held to have ended at the time when the event of scrutiny was taken up we should by the very same logic hold that the date of commencement of an event such as conviction and the consequent disqualification should also begin only from the time when the event happened In fact the argument of the appellant in this case is a double edged weapon.
If the event of conviction and sentencing that happened at 230 PM on 23032018 can relate back to 0001 A.M. the event of voting by Shri.
Amit Kumar Mahto which happened at 9.15 A.M. can also relate back to 0001 A.M. Once both of them are deemed to relate back to the time of commencement of the date the resulting conundrum cannot be resolved.
This why the emphasis in Pashupati Nath Singh was to provide an interpretation that will avoid confusion.
The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant relied upon the decision of this Court in Prabhu Dayal Sesma vs. State of Rajasthan4in support of their contention that a legal date commences after 12 o’ clock midnight and continue until the same hour of the following night.
But Prabhu Dayal Sesma arose in the context of Rule 11B of the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services 44 SCC 59 Rules 1962 which prescribed the minimum and maximum age for participation in the selection for direct recruitment to Rajasthan Administrative Service.
The appellant in that case was born on 02011956 and Rule 11B prescribed that an applicant for participation in the selection must not have attained the age of 28 years on the first day of January next following the last date fixed for receipt of application.
Therefore when a notification was issued in the year 1983 the upper age limit was to be reckoned as on January 1 1984.
Since the appellant was born on 02011956 and attained the age of 28 years on 01.01.1984 his candidature was rejected.
It was in such circumstances that this Court took note of Section 4 of the Indian Majority Act 1875 which stipulated the method of computation of the age of any person.
In view of the fact that Rule 11B used the words “must not have attained the age of 28 years” this court concluded that the appellant therein attained the said age at 12 o’clock midnight when January 1 was born.
We should point out here that if Prabu Dayal Sesma concerned a case of retirement he would be taken to have attained the age of superannuation on January 1 by the very same logic but at 2400 hours on January 1.
But Rule 11B mandated that the candidate “must not have attained”.
Therefore Prabhu Dayal Sesma also does not go to the rescue of the appellant.
28.
Tarun Prasad Chatterjee vs. Dinanath Sharma5 relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the appellant concerned the question of computation of the period of limitation for filing an 58 SCC 649 Election petition under section 81(1) of the R.P.
Act 1951.
Therefore this Court referred to Section 9 of the General Clauses Act 1897 that laid down the manner in which statutes prescribing the commencement and termination of time can be worded by using expressions such as “from” and “to”.
But this decision is also of no assistance to the appellant for the simple reason that Section 8(3) of the Act uses the word “from” as well as the expression “the date of conviction” and Tarun Prasad Chatterjee concerned the interpretation to be given only to the word “from” 29.
In any case Tarun Prasad Chatterjee need not have gone as far as the General Clauses Act since Section 12(1) the Limitation Act 1963 itself provides for the exclusion of the date from which the period of limitation is to be reckoned while computing the period of 30.
We must point out at this juncture that even in criminal law there is a vast difference betweenthe interpretation to be given to the expression “date” while calculating the period of imprisonment suffered by a person andthe interpretation to be given to the very same expression while computing the period limitation for filing an appeal revision.
Say for instance a person is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment and also taken into custody pursuant thereto on 23032018 the whole of the day of March 23 will be included in the total period of incarceration.
But in contrast the day of March 23 will be excluded for computing the period of limitation for filing an appeal Though one contrasts the other both interpretations are intended to benefit the individual Placing reliance upon the decision of the Constitution bench in BR Kapur vs. State of TN & Anr6 it was contended by the learned senior counsel for the appellant that the disqualification under Article 191 of the Constitution and Section 8 of the R.P.
Act is not a penal provision and that therefore the question of beneficial construction would not arise especially when the object of such disqualification is to cleanse politics 32.
We have no doubt that disqualification is not a penal provision and that the object of disqualification is to arrest criminalisation of But what triggered the disqualification in this case under Section 8(3) was a conviction by a criminal Court for various offences under the Penal Code.
Therefore the phrase “the date of conviction” appearing in Section 8(3) should receive an interpretation with respect to the penal provisions under which a person was convicted The rule that a person is deemed innocent until proved guilty is a long standing principle of constitutional law and cannot be taken to be displaced by the use of merely general words.
In law this is known as the principle of legality and clearly applies to the present case.
In Pierson vs Secretary of State for the Home Department7 House of Lords held that unless there be clearest 67 SCC 231 73 All ER 577 provision to the contrary Parliament is presumed not to legislate contrary to rule of law which enforces ‘minimum standard of fairness both substantive and procedural’.
In our view to hold that a Member of the Legislative Assembly stood disqualified even before he was convicted would grossly violate his substantive right to be treated as innocent until proved guilty.
In Australia this principle has been described as an aspect of the rule of law “known both to Parliament and the Courts upon which statutory language will be interpreted”8.
In the present case it would be significant to add that it is not necessary to make a declaration incompatible in the use of the word “date” with the general rule of law since the word “date” is quite capable of meaning the point of time when the event took place rather than the whole day The well known presumption that a man is innocent until he is found guilty cannot be subverted because the words can accommodate both competing circumstances.
While it is known that an acquittal operates on nativity no case has been cited before us for the proposition that a conviction takes effect even a minute prior to itself.
Moreover the word “date” can be used to denote occasion time year etc.
It is also used for denoting the time up to the present when it is used in the phrase “the two dates”.
Significantly the word “date” can also be used to denote a point of time etc.83 ALJR 327 para 47 To say that this presumption of innocence would evaporate from 0001 A.M. though the conviction was handed over at 1430 P.M would strike at the very root of the most fundamental principle of Criminal Jurisprudence.
Inasmuch as a conviction for an offence is under a penal law it cannot be deemed to have effect from a point of time anterior to the conviction itself.
As rightly pointed by Dr. AM Singhvi this court held in Union of India vs. M S GS Chatha Rice Mills9 that legal fiction cannot prevail over facts where law does not intend it to so prevail.
It was a case where a notification was issued by the Government of India under section 8A of the Customs Tariff Act 1975 introducing a tariff on all goods originating in or exported from Pakistan.
The notification was uploaded on the e gazette at 20:46:58 hours on 16022019.
The Government of India took a stand that the enhanced rate of duty was applicable even to those who had already presented bills of entry for home consumption before the enhanced rate was notified in the e gazette.
The importers successfully challenged the claim of the customs authorities before the High court and the Union of India came up on appeal to this Court.
An extensive analysis was made in Section H of the decision in M S G.S.
Chatha Rice Mills on the interpretation of the words “day” and “date”.
After taking note of several decisions some of which arose under the law of Limitation some under the law of Insurance and some under the Election law this Court pointed out that these expressions were construed in varying contexts and that a general position in law divorced from 9SCC Online SC 770 subject context and statute has not been laid down.
As succinctly put by this Court “Legislative silences create spaces for creativity” and that “between interstices of legislative spaces and silences the law is shaped by the robust application of The decision in K Prabhakaran vs. P Jayarajan10 relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant did not deal with the question that we are now confronted with.
It was a case wherethe effect of several sentences of imprisonment each for a period of less than 2 years ordered to run consecutively and not concurrently thereby totalling to more than the period prescribed under section 8(3) of the Act andthe effect of the decision of the Appellate Court rendered in a criminal case after the election was over were in question.
It is in that context that the Constitution Bench held in K Prabhakaran that Section 8 of the RP Act has to be construed in harmony with the provisions of Cr.P.C so as to give effect to the provisions contained in both Cases arising under the law of insurance have no relevance to cases of disqualification.
Even under the law of insurance different principles of interpretation have been carefully nurtured and developed.
For instance New India Assurance Company Limited vs. Ram Dayal & Ors11 this Court was concerned with a case where a vehicle had insurance cover upto 31.08.1984 which was not renewed.
However a fresh policy was taken on 28091984.
It was on 101 SCC 754 112 SCC 680 the very same day that the vehicle got involved in an accident.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal upheld the repudiation of liability by the insurer but the High Court held that the policy of insurance obtained on the date of the accident became operative from the commencement of the date of insurance namely from the previous midnight.
While upholding the view taken by the High Court by a short order this Court referred to In Re FB Warren12 wherein it was held that a judicial act will be referred to the first moment of the day on which