Court No. 52.
Case : CRIMINAL MISC.
BAIL APPLICATION No. 36542 of Applicant : Rahul Kothari Opposite Party : Serious Fraud Investigation Office Counsel for Applicant : Sankalp Narain Counsel for Opposite Party : Gyan Prakash Sanjay Kumar Hon ble Om Prakash VII J Order on Criminal Misc.
Application No. IA 05 2021 Heard Shri Vikram Chaudhary learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Sankalp Narain and Shri Pranjal Krishna learned counsel for the applicant Shri Gyan Prakash learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Sanjay Kumar Yadav learned counsel appearing for the SFIO through video conferencing.
Prayer made in the aforesaid application is quoted “WHEREFORE it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon ble Court may kindly be pleased to allow the Application for Interim Relief and the applicant namely Mr. Rahul Kothari may be released on Interim Bail during the pendency of the Criminal Misc.
Bail Application No. 36542 of 2020 on such terms and conditions as are deemed fit and proper in the circumstances of the case so as to meet the ends of justice Any other orders or direction which this Hon ble High Court deems fit proper in the facts and circumstances of the matter may also be passed in the interest of justice.” Submission of the learned counsel for the applicant is that both father and mother of the applicant were suffering from Covid 19 disease and were in critical condition.
Father of the applicant also met with an accident.
No one is to look after them in the house.
Applicant is the only son.
Thus referring to the documents annexed with the interim bail application prayer was made to allow the interim bail application.
Sri Gyan Prakash learned Sr. Advocate appearing for the SFIO argued that earlier the applicant had also approached this Court for interim bail on other grounds but same was rejected.
Since argument has been completed on the main bail application therefore interim bail application cannot be allowed.
At this juncture learned counsel appearing for the SFIO also referred to the prayer made in the interim bail application and prayed for rejection of the application.
Having considered the rival submissions and going through the affidavit annexed with the interim bail application and also the documents annexed therewith the court is of the view that interim bail application moved by the applicant is not liable to be allowed as main bail application moved by the applicant is being decided today itself.
Thus the interim bail application is hereby rejected.
ORDER ON CRIMINAL MISC.
BAIL APPLICATION No. 365420 This application has been filed with the prayer to enlarge the applicant Rahul Kothari on bail in ST No. 577 of 2020 SFIO Vs. Rotomac Global Pvt Ltd and others) for the alleged offences under Sections 36r w 447 185 186 447 448 r w 447 of the Companies Act 2013 and Section 211 r w 628 of the Companies Act 1956.
Heard Shri Vikram Chaudhary learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Sankalp Narain and Shri Pranjal Krishna learned counsel for the applicant Shri Gyan Prakash learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri Sanjay Kumar Yadav learned counsel appearing for the SFIO through video conferencing.
Sri Chaudhary learned Sr. Advocate submits that present bail application has been moved taking recourse to the provisions of Sections 167 and 439 Cr.PC both.
Although no regular bail application has been moved before the court below yet keeping in view the pandemic situation in the country and non regular functioning of the District Sessions Court regular bail prayer of the applicant could be heard and decided by this Court itself.
It is also argued that initially one FIR was lodged by the Central Bureau of Investigation against the applicant and he was arrested and thereafter applicant moved bail application and he was allowed on bail by the co ordinate Bench of this Court.
CBI approached the Apex Court but the SLP was rejected.
It was next contended that since the applicant was allowed on bail on the basis of same set of facts in the case started by the CBI therefore applicant is also entitled to be released on bail in the present matter started by the SFIO Referring to the provisions of Section 212of the Companies Act it was further argued that bar created in this Section will not come in the way to release the applicant on regular bail as no new facts have been brought up by the 10.
Sri Chaudhary also referred to the provisions of Section 167 173 and 309 Cr.PC and further argued that mere filing of the complaint police report within the period of 60 days will not be sufficient to deprive the applicant from an indefeasible right accrued in his favour.
Referring to the dates and events of the filing of the complaint taking of the cognizance and also the date of extended remand it was next contended that cognizance had not been taken within 60 days therefore indefeasible right had been accrued in favour of the applicant to release him on bail as applicant had applied for default bail on 18052020 itself.
At this juncture learned Sr. Advocate also referred to the legal position and further argued that right of the default bail accrued in favour of the applicant will not be extinguished by filing of the complaint challan only.
Trial Court while rejecting the default bail prayer has committed illegality Remand of the accused after filing the police report complaint could not continue under Section 167 Cr.PC therefore on this ground also remand extended by the concerned Magistrate is illegal and applicant is entitled to be released on bail as custody of the applicant is illegal in the present matter.
It was further argued that ratio laid down by the Hon ble Supreme Court in Sanjay Dutt Case could not be applied in the present matter The same was propounded on the basis of concession given by the learned counsel appearing for the accused in that matter.
At this juncture learned counsel appearing for the applicant also referred to the observations recorded by the co ordinate Bench of this Court in Bail Application No. 29218 and 34918 and further argued that bar created under Section 2125 SCR 37 AIR 1964 SC 1541 2.
KS Puttaswamy Versus Union of India 10 SCC 1 3.
Beni Madhava Versus State of Rajasthan 1981 SCC Online Raj 88 1983 Cri LJ 633 4.
Gopal Das Sindhi Versus State of Assam AIR 1961 SC 1993 SC 1 5.
Aslam Babalal Desai Versus State of Maharashtra AIR 6.
Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya Versus State of Gujarat AIR Online 2019 SC 1199 7.
Mithabhai Pashabhai Patel Versus State of Gujarat AIR 2009 SC1658 6 SCC 332 8.
Ram Narayan Singh Versus State of Delhi 1953 Cri 538 3 SCC 628 9.
Narendra Kumar Amin Versus CBI 3 SCC 417 10.
Sanjay Dutt Versus State through CBI 1994 AIR SCW 11.
Uptron India Ltd Versus Shammi Bhan 6 SCC 12.
Union of India Versus Mohanlal Likumal Punjabi 3 SCC 77 14.
Vineet Narain Verus Union of India 1 SCC 226 15.
CBI Versus Ashok Kumar Aggarwal14 SCC 16.
State of Bihar Versus JAC Saldanha 1 SCC 17.
Hussainara Khatoon and Ors.
Versus Home Secretary State of Bihar Patna1 SCC 108 18.
Ranjitsingh Brahmajeetsing Sharma Versus State of Maharashtra 5 SCC 294 19.
Natabar Parida Versus State of Orissa 2 SCC 220 SCC484 20.
Nikesh Tarachand Shah Versus Union of India 11 SCC 1 2 SCC302 21.
Sanjay Chandra Versus CBI 1 SCC 40 22.
Bikramjit Singh Versus State of Punjab10 SCC 23.
Rakesh Kumar Paul Versus State of Assam 15 24.
Achpal Versus State of Rajasthan 14 SCC 599 2019) 17 SCC 326 SCC 14 1 SCC 554 2001) 5 SCC 453 25.
Yogesh Mittal Versus Enforcement Directorate MA 1487 2017 in Criminal Appeal No.20117 26.
Shri Chamundi Mopeds Ltd.
Versus Church of South India Trust Association 3 SCC 1 27.
Mohd.
Iqbal Madar Sheikh Versus State of Maharashtra 1 SCC 722 28.
State of UP Versus Lakshi Brahman 2 SCC 29.
Pradeep Ram Versus State of Jharkhand & Another 30.
Union of India Versus Thamisharasi 4 SCC 190 31.
Deepak Bajaj Verus State of Maharashtra 16 32.
State of Bihar Versus JAC Saldhana and Ors. 3 SCC 141 Learned Sr. Advocate also referred to the points disclosed in the written argument and further argued that there are two stages in Section 167 Cr.PC Section 167Cr.PC is related to the prosecution agency but Section 167 Cr.
P C is related to the Court.
It is next contended that in action on part of the Court in taking cognizance will not be a ground to deprive the accused to release him on default bail.
Material question in the present matter is that cognizance was taken on the complaint after prayer made by the applicant for default bail Thus it is argued that present bail application be allowed and applicant be released on bail.
12.
Sri Gyan Prakash learned Sr. Advocate argued that regular bail prayer made by the applicant cannot be entertained as the applicant has not moved regular bail application before the court below.
It was next contended that there is no illegality infirmity or perversity in the impugned order passed by the court below on the default bail application.
Contention is also that provision of Section 167 Cr.PC itself is ample clear and default bail can only be granted in case charge sheet complaint was not filed within the stipulated period.
It is further argued that if charge sheet had been filed within the prescribed period default bail prayer cannot be allowed.
13.
Sri Gyan Prakash learned Sr. Advocate also referred to the dates and events of the filing of the complaint i.e 15052020 and date of first remand in the matter i.e 21032020 and argued that complaint was filed within sixty days.
It was further argued that if sixty days period is calculated from the date of first remand i.e. 21032020 then also there was no fault on part of the prosecution.
Thus default bail application moved by the applicant has rightly been rejected by the Trial Court.
It was next contended that transit remand period for producing the accused before the concerned Magistrate having jurisdiction shall not be taken into consideration at the time of calculating the sixty days period Referring to the law laid down in Suresh Kumar Bhikamchand Jain and Pradeep Ram case it was next contended that since complaint police report was filed within the period of sixty days no right shall accrue in favour of the applicant to release him on default bail.
It was further contended that regular bail application of the applicant could also not be allowed as there is clear bar under Section 212of the Companies Act will not come in the way in allowing the regular bail application.
Both the courts i.e. High Court and Sessions Court have concurrent jurisdiction therefore regular bail prayer could be moved directly before this Court.
Remand was extended without taking cognizance on the complaint in the present matter thus it indicates that it was beyond the scope of Section 167 Cr.PC In that situation only provision for extended remand is given in Section 309 CrP.C Thus referring to the aforesaid facts it was next contended that the applicant is entitled to be released on default bail and also on regular bail.
15.
Prosecution case in nutshell as disclosed in the bail application and affidavits filed by the parties are that the applicant has been arrayed as an accused no. 42 in the complaint dated 15052020 filed by the SFIO.
It has been averred in the said complaint that applicant was one of the promoter Director of the Rotomac Global Private Limited hereinafter will be referred as RGPL) Crown Alba Writing Instruments Private Limited Kothari Foods and Fragrances Private Limited Rotomac Exports Private Ltd and also Rotomac Exim Private Limited and other sister companies which caused wrongful loss to the public sector banks to the tune of Rs. 4168 crores as NPA Aforesaid companies and sister companies of the Rotomac Group of Companies were engaged in the business of commodities and merchant trading MT).
Aforesaid companies had secured the credit faciltiies by way of margin money FDs as well as other co lateral.
It has also been averred that since its incorporation RGOC had duly serviced all its loan and obligation towards bank and other creditors in a timely manner and over a period of time banks have increased sanctioned limit from time to time.
Later on on the basis of complaint MCA &of the Companies Act formed an opinion that the investigation into affairs of 11 Companies of Rotomac Group is necessary to be conducted by the SFIO and pursuant to the aforesaid order complainant was appointed as Investigating Officer.
On completion of investigation investigation report dated 06.05.2020 was submitted to the MCA who in turn granted direction to initiate prosecution against the accused whose name appears in the complaint Complaint also reveals that RGOC and its promoters and directors have fraudulently induced the banks to obtain credit facility.
False deceptive documents for opening of Letter of Credit was also furnished before the banks concerned manipulating and misrepresenting the financial statement Allegations is also that aforesaid group of companies flouting the R.B.I.
Guidelines obtained M. T. finances and credit facility from the banks.
Complaint also reveals that fictitious MT Trade were also shown in the financial statement showing it to be profitable.
Aforesaid companies were also engaged in speculative currency transaction.
For the aforesaid reason and showing the false MT Trade over the years Rs. 4168 crores became outstanding which in turn became NPA Thus aforesaid group of companies caused a loss of multi crores rupees to the public sector banks.
Complaint also reveals that aforesaid companies adopting aforesaid modus operandi obtained bad debts write off.
They also made manipulation in share capital.
They have not shown true and fair picture of the business done by them and also furnished wrong reflection of sales and purchase figure.
They have also wrongly classified the interest income.
It has also been averred that applicant under the garb of MT conducted moping of interest arbitrage thereby fraudulently inducing the public sector Banks to obtain credit facilities Applicant had knowingly falsified the books of accounts and the financial statements deliberately concealing material facts.
It is also averred that applicant was also indulged in speculative currency trading unrelated to MT being undertaken by RGC thereby gambling with Banks money which resulted in huge loss.
Applicant was instrumental in holding the currency losses in the books of accounts under the garb of debit notes.
These debit notes were raised against foreign parties and made part of trade receivable.
Later on these debit notes were adjusted against the payment received from the LC rotated funds.
17.
Allegation against the applicant is also that he abused his position as promoter director and caused wrongful loss of Rs 4188 Crores to public sector Banks.
He utilized the corporate identity to perpetrate fraud of rotating the funds obtained through Letter of Credit discounting for mopping the interest arbitrage available between LC issuance and discounting charges and that between the interest on fixed deposits.
This whole conspiracy was played under the garb of doing MT Applicant and co accused also used the corporate identity to rotate LC funds for mopping the interest arbitrage and showed it in the books as Merchanting Trade business Since it was not actually into MT business the corresponding sales and purchase shown in the financial statements and books of accounts was false.
Since mopping of interest was done by keeping the rotated funds obtained through LC discounting in Fixed Deposits to camouflage the same and the interest income from FD was shown as part of revenue from operation in the financial statements to give a false picture of profitability of MT business.
A large amount of these fictitious trade receivables were standing against their undisclosed 19.
Thus the sum and substance of the investigation conducted in the matter and the facts mentioned in the complaint for prosecution are that concerned Companies were engaged in fraudulent merchantine trade and caused wrongful loss to the Public Sector Banks to the tune of Rs. 7820 Crores approximately applying different modus operandi including siphoning of Bank funds through merchantine trade falsification of financial statement of the Companies involved in the matter by not showing true and fair views.
I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and have gone through the entire record including the case laws relied upon by the parties.
21.
Before dealing with the matter I find it necessary to quote the order passed in Bail Application No. 29218 and 34918 passed on 30112018 : “These two bail applications were heard together on several dates and some significant orders were passed by this Court on 25102018 14112018 and 20112018.
By order dated 25102018 the Court directed for impleadment of the informant Bank of Baroda on whose behalf arguments were made by Sri Chandra Shekhar Sinha learned counsel.
The order passed on 14112018 opened the hearing but for lack of understanding the issues dimensionally the matter was posted on 20112018.
The following order was passed on The three dimensional question which this bail application involves ispersonal liberty of the accused persons read with Section 13(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
1988 Police Station CBI BS&FC New Delhi District Kanpur Delhi.
Charge sheet was filed on 1952018 under the same very sections.
Supplementary charge sheet was also filed on 782018.
Both the charge sheets mention of pendency of further investigation but not against the applicants.
The relevant portion of the charge sheet in this regard may be extracted as under That further investigation is pending against Smt. Sadhna Kothari Directgor of M s RGPL FIR named accused in this Sri Ravindra Dalal case and also pending against Sri Brijesh Shankar Mishra CFO of M s RGPL Sri Manoj Upadhyay Senior Manager of M s RGPL Sri Shailesh Rawat GM Banking and Finance of M s RGPL Sri Pawan Kumar Gupta Assistant Accountant of M s RGPL Sri Umesh Kumar Verma Accountant of M s RGPL Sri Krishan Narain Pandey GM Accounts & Audit) of M s RGPL Sri N.K.
Agarwal Credit AGM Branch Head Officer Scale II Sri Dheeraj Agrawal Assistant Manager Operation & Forex) Sri Radhey Shyam Senior Manager Joint Manager Smt. Ankita Srivastava the then Scale I Officer.
Sri Sunando Bandopadhyay Assistant Manager Scale I) Sri Dipesh Narain Officer Sri Anil Kumar Rakhit Senior Manager Forex Incharge Ms. Parul Nigam Assistant Manager Operation Sri Keerthy Anjaneyulu Chief Manager Branch Head Sri Sanjiv Jha Sr Manager Forex) all staff posted at BOB IBB Kanpur and Shri Mangalore Devadas Mallya the then Chairman & Managing Director Sri Rajiv Kumar Bakshi the then Executive Director Sri Atul Agarwal the then Direkctorposted at BOB Head Office Mumbai and unknown private persons unknown public servants After completion of investigation under Section 173(8 against the above mentioned accused persons supplementary charge sheet will be filed in this Hon ble Court in due course."
The Court has heard the case of both the applicants in the light of material gathered in the charge sheet filed on 1952018.
The charge sheet prima facie makes a distinction of complicity between the two accused applicants in the backdrop of their role which each of them has severally played in the business of the Company of which they are joint beneficiaries.
The distinction lies in the framing of charges itself which read as follows i) M s Rotomac Global Private Limited(A 1 u s 420 IPC through its CMD Sh. Vikram Kothari authorised representative.
Sri Vikram KothariCMD of M s RGPL u s 120 B r w 420 467 468 471 IPC and Section 13(2) r w 13of PC Act 1988 and substantive offence u s 420.
471 r w 467 & 468 Sri Rahul Kothari Director of M s RGPL u s 420 467 468 471 IPC and section 13r w 13(d) of PC Act 1988 and substantive offence u s 420 IPC.
The arguments put forth by learned counsel for the applicants is that if everything that is projected in the charge sheet is believed to be true yet distinction in the complicity of the two applicants is manifest from the charges itself and there is no reason as to why Rahul Kothari who has not played any representative role in the business affairs of the Company may be responsible for commission of the offences in the nature of cheating or forgery therefore accused Rahul Kothari is entitled to be enlarged on bail.
It is further argued that all the properties and business establishments have been sealed attached Consequentially not only that the personal liberty of the applicants has been curtailed but the applicants are deprived of the right of defence in the present case as well as in the civil proceedings resorted to against them which is a blatant disregard of the procedure established by law.
The submission put forth by learned counsel for Rahul Kothari could not be successfully refuted by learned counsel for CBI or the Bank on any tangible ground except for the fact that the Company was joint family business and each Director having equal mens rea was vicariously liable for the commission of offence.
This is a submission relevant at the time of trial but not at this stage when the Court is considering the case of Rahul Kothari for bail is to face who Regard being had to the entirety of material placed on record this Court would find that after filing of charge sheet against Rahul Kothari his further detention in jail would be nothing but a measure of punishment before holding trial This in my humble view is not permissible looking to the scope of Article 21 of the Constitution of India hence a case for grant of bail is made out in favour of Rahul Insofar as the co accused Vikram Kothari Managing Director of the Company is concerned it has strongly been argued that even if it is assumed that there is a prima facie case against him yet after filing of the charge sheet there is no justification for the CBI to harp on his continued detention which impinges upon the personal liberty of the accused applicant In nutshell it is argued that the same very ground on which the co accused is entitled to be granted bail in equal measure is applicable to the case of Vikram Kothari he may also be set This Court would note that the advances made to M s Rotomac Global Pvt Ltd have not been secured by primary or collateral security as per the mandate of Section 21 of Banking Regulation Act 1949.
The consortium of nationalised banks prima facie appears to have failed to secure the advances by adhering to the condition of primary security margins and even not to the extent of collateral Securities despite the fact that there exists a pervasive control of the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India.
The Court may strike a note of caution that the public money in the pursuit of windfall profits by the persons of creditworthiness cannot be advanced in dark and without ensuring cent percent security.
This Court would therefore not lose sight of the fact that the creditworthiness of the Company has come under the cloud on the basis of alleged misrepresentation by the Managing Director.
Hoping that the CBI would retrieve the loss and shall not spare anybody who has shaken the trust of public in the interest of investigation and looking to the apprehensions raised the prayer for bail made by Vikram Kothari at this stage is rejected This Court is also constraint to observe that the matters of economic offences are bound to be tried by the courts of law with expedition so that the delay does not become a cause of Learned counsel for the applicants cited a series of the system to distrust concern which Mohan Singh Advocate Vs. Union Territory Chandigarh 1978) 2 Supreme Court Bhagirathsinh Judeja versus State of AIR 1984 Supreme MP Lohia versus State of WB and 2005) 2 Supreme Court Som Mittal versus Government of 2008) 3 Supreme Court SK Alagh versus State of U.P and 2008) 5 Supreme Court Maksud Saiyed versus State of Gujarat and others 2008) 5 Supreme Court Dalip Kaur and others versus Jagnar Singh and another 2009) 14 Supreme Court cases 696 Ratiram and others versus State of 2012) 4 Supreme Court Sunil Bharti Mittal versus Central Bureau of Investigation 2015) 4 Supreme Court Rajendra Prakash Agrawal versus Union of India and another 2015) 15 Supreme Court cases 233 Dataram Singh versus State of U.P 2018) 3 Supreme Court Learned counsel for CBI also cited the following Nimmagadda Prasad versus Central Bureau of Investigation Court cases 466 7 Supreme YS Jagan Mohan Reddy versus Central Bureau of Investigation Court cases 439 7 Supreme Gulabrao Baburao Deokar versus State of Maharashtra and others 2013) 16 Supreme Court cases 190 Prem Prakash Verma versus Central Bureau of Investigation Court cases 414 5 Supreme Virupakshappa Gouda and another versus State of Karnataka and Court cases 406 3 Supreme State of Bihar and another versus Amit Kumar alias Bachcha Rai 2017) 13 Supreme Court cases 751 Reference to each decision cited by the applicants and dealing with the principles embodied therein in my humble view is uncalled for once the fact situation of the present case is dealt with by recording reasons in the discretionary exercise of powers Insofar as the decisions cited by learned counsel for CBI are concerned emphasis has been laid on the nature of offences being economic.
It is urged that the apex court in the matters of this category of offences has not disapproved the apprehensions of investigating agency and curtailing the right of personal liberty has been dealt with firmly and without attaching more importance to the right of personal liberty which each offender may claim This submission advanced by learned counsel for CBI is not convincing for the reason that no material has been supplemented against the accused applicants after filing of the charge sheet on 1952018 and the accused applicants are languishing in jail since last more than nine months without any progress in the trial.
This Court while dealing with the right of personal liberty must have due regard to such a fundamental right of a citizen and the procedure established by law has to be essentially weighed of which the premise cannot be founded on mere apprehensions.
That apart for any such conduct it is always open to the investigating agency to approach the court of law for seeking cancellation of bail but at this stage nothing would turn on the basis of presumptive apprehensions of the investigating agency insofar as the grant of bail to Rahul Kothari is concerned.
In view of the aforesaid discussions the bail application of Vikram Kothari is rejected at this stage and that of Rahul Kothari is allowed Let Rahul Kothari involved in involved crime no RC BD1 2018 E 0001 under Section 120 B IPC read with Section 420 467 468 and 471 IPC and Section 13 read with Section 13(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 Police Station CBI BS&FC New Delhi District Kanpur Delhi be released on bail on his furnishing a bail bond and two heavy and reliable sureties to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to the following conditions.
i) The applicant shall surrender his passport before the ii) The applicant shall give due intimation to the court concerned about any movement within the country with specific time schedule immediately on his court The applicant shall file undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in court.
In case of default of this condition it shall be open for the trial court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law iv) The applicant shall remain present before the trial court on each date fixed either personally or through counsel.
In case of his absence without sufficient cause the trial court may proceed against him under Section 229 A of the Indian Penal Code In case the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure his presence proclamation under Section 82 Cr.PC is issued and the applicant fails to appear before the court on the date fixed in such proclamation then the trial court shall initiate proceedings against him in accordance with law under Section 174 A of the Indian Penal Code vi) The applicant shall remain present in person before the trial court on the dates fixed foropening of the case ii) framing of charge andrecording of statement under Section 313 Cr.PC If in the opinion of the trial court absence of the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause then it shall be open for the trial court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance with law.
The trial court is also expected to expedite the trial once the charge sheet has been filed.” It is admitted fact in the present matter that the applicant has not moved regular bail application before the court below Only default bail application was moved and same was rejected by the court below.
Thereafter present bail application has been moved before this Court taking recourse to the provisions of Section 439 and 167 Cr.PC It is true that provision of Section 212 Cr.PC has not been mentioned in the bail application but on this technical ground alone prayer made by the applicant to consider the bail application on regular side cannot be rejected Thus preliminary objection raised on behalf of the SFIO cannot be accepted particularly keeping in view the pandemic situation arose in the country and non regular functioning of the subordinate courts.
23.
As far as default bail is concerned applicant was allowed on bail through aforesaid Bail Application No. 34918 in a case lodged by the CBI Present matter is related to the Companies Act and SFIO is only authorized to investigate the matter.
Applicant s judicial custody was firstly made on 21032020.
It is settled proposition of law that period of transit remand cannot be included in the total period of judicial custody for calculating the sixty days period for filing the charge sheet police report complaint.
In this matter complaint had been filed on 15052020 itself in the court.
Sixty days period for filing the police report complaint was to be expired on 17052020.
24.
Submission of the learned counsel appearing for the applicant is that since cognizance was taken on 29.05.2020 therefore remand extended after expiry of sixty days period was illegal and indefeasible right had accrued in favour of the applicant to release him on default bail.
25.
To analyse the submissions raised across the Bar on this score court has minutely perused the case laws relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
26.
Submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the applicant and disclosed in the written submission regarding the application of provisions of Section 167Section 167Cr.PC.
in the present matter till the court takes cognizance on the complaint as has been discussed herein above.
Custody of the applicant on this score will not be deemed to be illegal and applicant was not deprived of his constitutional right as enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
There was valid ground to extend the judicial custody of the accused applicant under Section 167of the Companies Act have not been considered while allowing the bail application of the applicant in the F.I.R. lodged by the CBI which clearly prohibits the release of the accused unless and until the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
Bar created under Section 212 of the Companies Act is also against the release of the applicant.
Thus regular bail application of the applicant in the opinion of the court is also not liable to be allowed.
28.
Thus on the basis of discussion made herein above and keeping in view the entire facts and circumstances of the case and also the amount involved in the matter which has become NPA the court is of the view that no case for regular bail is made out.
29.
The prayer for regular bail is also hereby rejected.
Order Date : 11052021