IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS No.355520 Arising Out of PS.
Case No. 39 Year 2020 Thana AHIYAPUR District Muzaffarpur Dipak Kumar @ Dipak Kumar Rai @ Dipak Raison of late Sakaldeo Rai resident of Village Mithan Sarai P.S.
Ahiyapur District ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar For the Petitioner s For the State Mr. Bhavesh Kumar Advocate Mr. Sanjay Kumar APP CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH ...
Opposite Party s Date : 22 06 2021 The matter has been heard via video conferencing.
2.
Heard Mr. Bhavesh Kumar learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Sanjay Kumar learned Additional Public Prosecutorfor the State 3.
The petitioner apprehends arrest in connection with Ahiyapur PS Case No. 320 dated 09.01.2020 instituted under Sections 272 273 of the Indian Penal Code and 30(a) 36 38 of the Bihar Prohibition and Excise Act 2016of the Act shall not apply.
6.
Learned APP submitted that villagers had taken the name of the petitioner as being involved in the business of liquor with Chandan Sahani.
However it was not controverted that there is no recovery from the house of the petitioner and further that villagers have taken his name along with others in dealing in the liquor along with Chandan Sahani.
7.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of learned counsel for the parties in the event of arrest or surrender before the Court below within Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.355520 dt.22 06 2021 six weeks from today the petitioner be released on bail upon furnishing bail bonds of Rs. 25 000 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and furtherthat one of the bailors shall be a close relative of the petitioner that the petitioner and the bailors shall execute bond with regard to good behaviour of the petitioner and (iii that the petitioner shall also give an undertaking to the Court that he shall not indulge in any illegal criminal activity act in violation of any law statutory provisions tamper with the evidence or influence the witnesses.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of the bonds or the undertaking shall lead to cancellation of his bail bonds.
The petitioner shall cooperate in the case and be present before the Court on each and every date Failure to cooperate or being absent on two consecutive dates without sufficient cause shall also lead to cancellation of his 8.
It shall also be open for the prosecution to bring any violation of the foregoing conditions of bail by the petitioner to the notice of the Court concerned which shall take Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.355520 dt.22 06 2021 immediate action on the same after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner 9.
The application stands disposed off in the (Ahsanuddin Amanullah J J Alam