IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI W.P.(C) No. 5318 Rajesh Kumar Verma son of Late Ram Kumar Verma aged about 38 years resident of Ved Narayan Lane Kachahri Road PO G.P.O P.S Kotwali Town and District Ranchi.
….
Petitioner 1.The State of Jharkhand through the Chief Secretary having office at Project Building Dhurwa PO & PS Dhurwa Town and District 2The Principal Secretary Urban Development and Housing Department Government of Jharkhand having office at Project Building Dhurwa PO & PS Dhurwa Town and District Ranchi.
….
Respondents HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE CORAM: For the Petitioner For the Respondents Oral Judgment: Order No.12 Dated: 15th March 2021 Mr. Manoj Tandon Advocate Mr. Piyush Chitresh A.C to AG 1.
With consent of the parties hearing of the matter has been done through video conferencing and there is no complaint whatsoever regarding audio and visual quality.
2.
The instant writ petition is under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for the following reliefs: “(i) To declare Rule 314 of Jharkhand Municipal Elected Representative Discipline and Appeal) Rules 2017 ultra vires the Constitution of India and thereby to quash and set same as notified by Notification No01 Policy Decision 10 2016 U.D.H 5421 Ranchi dated 2282017 and Notification No. 01 Policy Decision 10 2016 U.D.H 6669 Ranchi dated 30102017issued under the pen and signature of respondent no.2.
ii) To also declare section 18(n) of Jharkhand Municipal Act 2011 ultra vires the Constitution of iii) During the pendency of this writ petition the operation implementation and execution of provisions enshrined in Section 18 (n) of the Jharkhand Municipal Act 2011 and both Notifications dated 2282017 and 30102017 to the extent of Rule 314 may kindly be stayed.” 3.
Mr. Manoj Tandon learned counsel for the writ petitioner has submitted that the provision as contained in Rule 314 of Jharkhand Municipal Elected RepresentativeRules 2017 ultra vires the Constitution of India as has been notified vide notification dated 22.08.2017 which provides the provision of disqualification of councilors if he has more than two living children provided that a person having more than two children on or up to the expiry of one year of the commencement of the Act shall not be deemed to be disqualified.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner in view of such provision the petitioner will not be able to contest the municipal election of the Councilors of the Municipal Corporation and as such he will be deprived from contesting the election on the pretext of a law which ultra vires the Constitution of India.
According to the learned counsel the provision as contained under Section 18(1)of the Jharkhand Municipal Act 2011 is in the teeth of Section 590 of the Jharkhand Municipal Act 2011 and further based upon unreasonable classification and therefore the same is fit to be held ultra vires.
4.
Mr. Piyush Chitresh learned A.C to learned Advocate General has submitted that the issue has already been decided by the Hon’ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Javed and Others vs. State of Haryana and Others reported in 8 SCC 369 wherein the provision of disqualification on the basis of having more than two living children have been held to be not ultra vires therefore submission has been made that the instant writ petition is fit to be dismissed on the basis of the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Javed and Others vs. State of Haryana and Otherspertains to disqualification from holding the office of Sarpanch Up Sarpanch and Panch if the person having more than two living children.
The Hon’ble Apex Court while dealing with the issue has been pleased to hold that such provision of debarment is not ultra vires.
7.
We therefore are of the view that the instant writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the basis of the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Javed and Others vs. State of Haryana and 8.
Accordingly the instant writ petition is dismissed.
Dr. Ravi Ranjan CJ) Sujit Narayan Prasad J.) Others (supra).
Saket