Appeal No. 42921 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 42921 Vignesh Reddy Angadi CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 27 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005of the RTI Act.
The respondent also advised the appellant to lodge his grievance on the SCORES portal and also refer to the FAQs available on the SEBI website.
Further the respondent also provided the toll free helpline numbers launched by SEBI to facilitate replies to various queries of the general public on matters relating to securities market.
Appeal No. 42921 4.
Ground of appeal On perusal of the appeal it appears that the appellant is not satisfied with the response provided by the respondent.
The appellant in his appeal submitted that his original RTI application is based the SCORES Portal and NICE Portal.
The appellant also submitted that “the appeal concerns verification of facts for Arbitration and acceptance for Fee receipt.” 5.
On perusal of the application I find that the same is vague since the precise information or the exact context in which the information is sought is not ascertainable from the query.
An applicant is expected to specify the subject matter and the exact information required by him while filing an application under the RTI Act.
In the matter of Shri S C Sharma vs. CPIO Securities and Exchange Board of Indiathe Hon’ble CIC held: “Since the Appellant had not clearly stated what exact information he wanted the CPIO could not have provided any specific information to him.
We would like to advise the Appellant that he might like to specify the exact information he wants from the SEBI and prefer a fresh application before the CPIO.” In view of these observations I find that the respondent is not obliged to provide a response where the information sought is not clear or specific.
Accordingly no interference is warranted at this stage.
6.
Notwithstanding the above I note that the respondent has adequately guided the appellant by providing the information with respect to lodging his grievance if any on the SCORES portal.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 02 2021 ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA