IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.321 1.
Md Sahroj Alam S o Md Sidhiki Resident of Village Gyandov Ward No.2 P.O.
Amour P.S.
Amour District Purnea and worked as Instructor from 1994 to 1994 2.
Ajay Kumar S o Anandi Prasad Yadav Resident of Village Devottar PS Banmankhi District Purnea and worked as Instructor from 1995 2000 ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar through the Chief Secretary Govt. of Bihar Patna The Principal Secretary Education Department Govt. of Bihar Patna The Principal Secretary Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms Govt. of Bihar Patna The Director Mass Education Govt. of Bihar Patna The District Education Officer Purnea ... Respondent s For the Petitioner s For the Respondent s CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE P B BAJANTHRI Date : 27 10 2021 Mr.Kumar Vishoka Nand Adv Mr. Abhanjalli AC to GA 12 Learned counsel for the petitioners is hereby directed to furnish a copy of writ petition to the learned counsel for the State 2.
In the instant petition petitioners have prayed for “(A) For issuance of an appropriate writ order direction especially in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents authority to absorb the petitioner on the post of class II to class IV under the employment of State Govt. as the petitioner is exinstructors of non formal education including the order several rounds respondents authorities have already absorbed Patna High Court CWJC No321 dt27 10 2021 the non formal supervisor class III post in the light of order passed by this Hon’ble Court B) For issuance of any appropriate writ(s) rules or direction especially in the nature of mandamus direction the respondents give a similar treat as the case of other several similar situated has been considered by this Hon’ble High Court as well as by the Hon’ble Apex Court C) For issuance of an appropriate writ(s) rules or direction this Hon’ble Court may found fit and proper to the facts and circumstances of the case as well as for which the case petitioner may be found entitled their.” 3.
The grievance of the petitioners is only for issuance of direction to the concerned respondent to consider their names for absorption in the concerned department 4.
The concerned department is hereby directed to take note of the grievance of the petitioners and redress the same in accordance with law to the extent that whether petitioners are entitled for absorption in the respective department or not.
If the petitioners fulfill the requisite criteria for absorption in such manner necessary action to be taken to absorb their services in the concerned department.
In the event petitioners are not entitled to absorb in the respective department necessary speaking order shall be passed and communicated to the respective petitioners Above exercise be completed within a period of four months from the date of receipt of this order Patna High Court CWJC No321 dt27 10 2021 5.
With the aforesaid observation the writ petition stands disposed of.
P B Bajanthri J