 1 AFRHIGH COURT OF CHHATTISGARH AT BILASPURW.P.
(C) No. 27821Dr.
Manu Gouraha S o Late Narendra Kumar Gouraha Aged About 45Years Permanent Address House No. 08 Phase 2 Rajkishor Nagar Bilaspur Tahsil & District Bilaspur Chhattisgarh Present Address M 2 1University Campus Vikram University Ujjainrks eaMy rhu ekg ls vf kd vof k ds fy rFkkvU ekeys esa] d ekg ls vf kd vof k ds fy vkcaVu tkjh jgus nsldsxk@eaMy HkkM+snkj ds uketn O fDr k mlds dkuwuh okfjlksa dk ukeHkkM+snkj ds uke ds LFkku ij j[k ldsxk] c krsZ fd og@os djkj ds vf kdkjksarFkk nkf Roksa dks Lohdkj djus ds fy lger gksA 6.The nomination form attached with this Hire Purchase Agreement purportsthat name of Manu Gouraha was nominated to be recorded after death ofNKGouraha as against the house HIG 128 at Danganiya.
NKGourahadied on 10082012 thereafter the dispute started.7.After death of NKGouraha the wife Smt. Pushpa Gouraha filed anapplication on 06.03.2013 to record her name being the wife.
In responseto such letter the Housing Board wrote a letter to two daughters and thewife observing that since there is some dispute existing in between thelegal heirs therefore they may obtain the decree of declaration from thecompetent civil court which is Annexure P 5.
One of the daughter Mrs.Shefali Shrivastav also emailed a letter on 09112013 to the Estate OfficerHousing Board that uptill the decree is obtained the name of all the legalheirs be recorded in respect of the house HIG 128.
Thereafter theHousing Board in 2015 & 2018 communicated to the wife and thedaughters with a copy to the petitioner herein that name of all the legalheirs would be recorded and they were asked to appear to sign certainpapers so that all the four names may be recorded.
Lastly since thepetitioner insisted that only his name may be recorded as per clause 12 of 4 the Hire Purchase Agreement the impugned letter dated 15032021 hasbeen issued.
8.The facts of this case would suggest that there is no WILL by LateNKGouraha in favour of the petitioner alone.
Section 8 of the HinduSuccession Act 1956 provides for general rules of succession in the caseof males which contemplates that the property of a male Hindu dyingintestate shall devolve according to the provisions of chapter II.
Section 8 Clausereads that devolution would be firstly upon the heirs being therelatives specified in class I of the Schedule.
Heirs of class I of theSchedule include son daughter widow and so on.
Therefore thepetitioner being son two daughters namely Mrs. Shefali Shrivastav & Mrs.Madhulika Sharma and the widow Smt. Pushpa Gouraha would be class Iheirs as per Section 8.
In absence of any WILL all the heirs would bejointly inherit the property even if the Hire Purchase Agreement and thenomination of the petitioner would not bind the other heirs so as to defeatthe devolution as per Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956 infavour of class I heirs who are the widow and daughters.
9The Supreme Court in case of Smt. Sarbati Devi & Another v. Smt.Usha Devi1 has discussed the right of nominee and observed whiledealing a case of life insurance it held that the nominee s interest wouldbe subject to claim of the assured under the law of succession.
10Following the analogy in the instant case after death of Late NKGourahain whose name the house was held it would become a part of estatewhich would be governed by the law of succession.
Since in this case there is no testamentary succession as such all the heirs by applicationof Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act would get equal right to theproperty left over i.e. estate of the deceased.
The right of nominee assuch cannot be held to be over and above to the exclusion of the legal1(1984) I SCC 424 5 heirs and consequently the letter written by the Housing Board wherein allthe names have been recorded subject to any declaration from the civilcourt no fault can be attributed to it.
The petition is devoid of merit andaccordingly it is dismissed.
Sd (Goutam Bhaduri)JUDGEAks