Appeal No. 43221 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 43221 CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 21 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005 dealing with Fees Charges Tariff.
The respondent also informed that Point Number 186 of the said Master Circular mentions about the dissemination of tariff charge structure of DPs on the website of the depositories.
The respondent also provided the link for accessing the Master Circular on the SEBI website.
The appellant was also advised to access the websites of NSDL and CDSL for specific information as sought in the query.
Appeal No. 43221 4.
Ground of appeal The appellant has filed the appeal on the ground that the information provided was incomplete misleading or false.
The appellant in his appeal inter alia stated that SEBI should provide the charges of NSDL for each equity sale transaction for clarity.
I have perused the queries and the response provided thereto.
I note that the respondent has clearly informed regarding the Master Circular which deals with the dissemination of tariff charge structure of DPs on the website of the depositories.
On consideration I find that the requested information is available in the public domain and the same can be accessed by the appellant.
In this context I note that Hon’ble CIC in Shri K Lall vs. Shri M K Bagriheld that “….. unless an information is exclusively held and controlled by a public authority that information cannot be said to be an information accessible under the RTI Act.
Inferentially it would mean that once a certain information is placed in the public domain accessible to the citizens either freely or on payment of a pre determined price that information cannot be said to be ‘held’ or ‘under the control of’ the public authority and thus would cease to be an information accessible under the RTI Act.” Similar observations were made by this forum in the matter of Nirali Mehta vs. CPIO SEBI October 15 2018).
In view of these observations I find that the respondent cannot be obliged to provide a response to such request for information as made by the appellant through his application.
6.
Notwithstanding the same I note that the respondent has guided the appellant to access the websites of NSDL and CDSL for seeking specific information regarding tariff charge.
The respondent has adequately addressed the query by providing the information available with him.
Accordingly I do not find any deficiency in the response.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 15 2021 ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA