 Hig h C o urt of H.P on 17 03 HCHP IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH SHIMLACWPOA No. 1719Reserved on: 9.3.2021Decided on : 10.03.2021 Rajesh Kumar Petitioner.
VersusState of H.P and others Respondents.Coram:Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sureshwar Thakur Judge.Whether approved for reporting 1 Yes.
For the petitioner:Mr. PP Chauhan Advocate.
For the respondents:Mr. Ashwani Sharma Mr. NarenderGuleria and Mr. Hemant Vaid Addl.A.Gs with Mr. Vikrant Chandel Dy.A.Gfor respondents No. 2.
Mr. ML Sharma Advocate forrespondent No3.
Sureshwar Thakur Judge The writ petitioner claims the making of amandamus upon the respondents for quashing the selection and consequent therewith appointment of co respondentNo3 as Computer Operator Development Block Nankhari District Shimla Himachal Pradesh.
2.The gravamen of the afore striving becomesembedded in the selection committee proceeding to on theparameter of experience hence award 15 marks to co 1 Whether reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the judgment Hig h C o urt of H.P on 17 03 HCHP respondent No3.
The apposite abstract of the score sheetmaking the afore reflections is appended with the instant writpetition as Annexure P 11.
The validity of awarding of marksqua therewith by the selection committee is contended to befallacious as co respondent No3 did not in tandem with themaximum of 15 marks allocable to her under the parameter ofexperience render or perform duties hence relevant to theadvertised posts in any Panchayati Raj institution GovernmentOffice undertaking institution agency.3.The afore made contention does acquire merit as the performance(s) by the aspirants concerned of duties in the capacity of computer operator prior to the appositeselection and consequent therewith appointment being made enjoined imperative performance(s) thereof in any PanchayatiRaj institution Government Office undertaking institution agency encapsulated in norms embodied inAnnexure P 10.
The sequel thereof is that the claim made in thewrit petition becomes amenable for acceptance and the…2… Hig h C o urt of H.P on 17 03 HCHP awarding of 15 marks by the selection committee concerned of the respondents under the norm “experience” is annulled.4.Be that as it may since it is averred on affidavit byco respondent No3 that in the relevant year in as much as2008 and whereat the relevant recruitment hence began rather thereatwith the petitioner rendering work as acomputer Teacher in Government School Nankhari DistrictShimla HP and his drawing per mensem salary of Rs2760 thereupon the awarding of 5 marks to him under BPL norm hence by the selection committee as unfolded by score sheet Annexure P 11 becomes also construable to be legally fallible unless it is demonstrated by cogent evidence that despite drawing(s) of the afore per mensem salary by the petitioner inthe year 2008 whereat the recruitment process began heunder the rules appertaining to the issuance of BPL certificate did not qualify to fall within the realm of BPL category.5.In summa the allotment of 15 marks to co respondent No3 under the parameter of experience is annulled and set aside and with the aforemade observations vis a vis the allotment of marks to the petitioner under thehead “BPL norm” be also reconsidered and the respondent…3… Hig h C o urt of H.P on 17 03 HCHP concerned is directed to thereafter prepare and redraw the Seniority list appertaining to the selection and consequenttherewith appointment as made to the advertised post ofComputer Operator(s).In view of the above the present petitionstands disposed of alongwith all pending applications.
Judge.
10 th March 2021 (priti)…4…