IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Pronounced on: 22nd October 2021 CM(M)IPD1 2021 CM APPL.17401 2020BALDEV SINGH SOLE PROPRIETOR OF M S MADAAN PLASTIC INDUSTRY Petitioner Through: Mr. Mahir Malhotra Mr. Satish Kumar and Ms. Smriti Papreja HON BLE MS. JUSTICE ASHA MENON JUDGMENT Through: Mr. Naqeeb Nawab Mr. Shashwat Rakshit Mr. Raghav Vig and Mr. Himanshu Deora Advocates for R 1 and R 2.
Mr. Anirudh Bakhru and Mr. Abhishek Singh Advocates for R INDIAN PLASTIC FOOTWEAR AND CLOTHING PVT. LTD. & ORS. .....Respondents CM(M)IPD 1 2021 CM APPL.17401 2020This petition has been filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India against the order dated 27th January 2020 passed by the learned Commercial Court dismissing the application of the petitioner moved under Order I Rule 10in CS180 2020 seeking to implead „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ as a co defendant.
The facts as are relevant for the disposal of the present petition are that the petitioner plaintiff claims be a leading manufacturer of plastic footwear under the mark MPIand „MADAAN‟.
It is claimed that this business has been in existence since 1997 and the goods of the petitioner plaintiff are sold in various parts of India and petitioner plaintiff has a well established sales network throughout the 3.
While resolving various family disputes petitioner plaintiff and his brother Mr. Darshan Singh and sons of Mr. Darshan Singh who are also the directors of Respondent No. 1 defendant No. 1 namely Mr. Simarpreet Singh and Mr. Charanjeet Singh a Dissolution Deed dated 01st April 1995 was executed whereby the petitioner was given the two registered trademarks namely the word mark and label „MADAAN‟ for footwear of all kinds.
Several litigations are pending between the parties however the present suit had been filed since the respondent No1 defendant No. 1 company had begun to infringe this registered trademark of the petitioner plaintiff by using the mark „HOUSE OF MADAAN‟.
In the written statement filed by the respondent No1 defendant No1 it was claimed that it had obtained a license from Respondent No. 2 M s Darshan Singh and Sons HUF.
It was also mentioned that Mr. Simarpreet Singh and Mr. Charanjeet Singh were presently directors of one „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ which had been incorporated in 2001 but the details were not mentioned in the written statement.
As such the petitioner plaintiff felt that there was nothing to be done on such a vague disclosure.
However it was from the filing of a Caveat that the petitioner plaintiff discovered the commonality between the entities i.e. Respondent Defendant No1 and „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ inasmuch as the directors being the nephews of the petitioner plaintiff were common.
In these circumstances an application under Order I Rule 10 CPC was filed by the petitioner plaintiff to implead M s Darshan Singh and Sons HUF as also „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟.
Vide the impugned order dated 27th January 2020 the learned Commercial Court allowed the impleadment of M s Darshan Singh and Sons HUF but rejected the application for impleadment of „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ on the ground that there were no pleadings qua the said entity.
Aggrieved the present petition has been filed.
6.
Mr. Mahir Malhotra learned counsel for the petitioner plaintiff submits that the impugned order was liable to be set aside primarily on the ground that the observation of the learned Commercial Court that the petitioner plaintiff could file a fresh suit against the said „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ was violative of the fundamental principle of avoiding multiplicity of litigation.
It was submitted that the mention of „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ in the written statement was without material particulars and as such the petitioner plaintiff believed that it had no cause of action against it.
However in December 2017 after the written statement had been filed in September 2017 five entities filed caveats and an email was sent to the petitioner plaintiff bearing in the letterhead with prominence the name „MADAAN‟.
Investigations and inspection of documents of the Registrar of Companies in Gwalior revealed that the company called „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟ was a defunct company since 2006 as it was not carrying on any business of any kind.
The directors of the respondent No1 defendant No1 namely Mr. Simarpreet Singh and Mr. Charanjeet Singh became directors of the said company on 01st March 2017 after which the two original directors of the said company resigned leaving the company completely in the hands of the said Mr. Simarpreet Singh and Mr. Charanjeet Singh.
„MADAAN‟ was the surname of the original founders despite which the shoes that they were manufacturing was sold under the trademarks of AEROCARE SHOES under application No. in Class 25 and COSMIC SHOES under registration No1166011 in Class 25.
These trademarks were eventually abandoned and removed when the entity itself went out of business.
According to the learned counsel the adoption of the name „MADAAN‟ now was a devious attempt by the Respondent No. 1 Defendant No1 to get over the injunction that was issued vide orders dated 24th October 2017 restraining them from using the mark „HOUSE OF MADAAN‟ as trademark „MADAAN‟ belonged petitioner plaintiff.
Furthermore this „M s Madaan Footcare Company‟ had filed petitions for cancellation rectification of the trademarks in the name of the petitioner plaintiff.
Thus it was a necessary and proper party to the suit.
Hence it was submitted that the dismissal of the application was improper.
The respondents impleaded in the present petition are Indian Plastic Footwear and Clothing Private Limited and Darshan Singh and Sons HUF.
However vide the order dated 31st July 2020 on the oral request of the learned counsel for the petitioner plaintiff M s Madaan Footwear Private Limited was impleaded as respondent No3 in the present petition.
10.
Mr. Anirudh Bakhru learned counsel for the respondent No3 M s Madaan Footwear Private Limited submitted that by means of this application the petitioner plaintiff only intended that the injunction order be extended to the operations of the respondent No3 without the claims of the petitioner plaintiff qua the respondent No3 being tested before any court.
It was submitted that on the facts as well as law there was no commonality between the case that could be agitated against the respondent No3 and the respondents No1 and 2 because the respondent No3 was not deriving any right from the Dissolution Deed.
Merely because the directors of respondent No1 had acquired respondent No3 would not make the rights of respondent No3 subject to limited by the Dissolution Deed.
It was further contended by learned counsel for Respondent No. 3 that whereas the petitioner plaintiff had claimed the use of the trademark „MADAAN‟ since 2003 even as per the record the respondent No3 had started using the trade name „MADAAN FOOTCARE‟ way back in 2001 when respondent No3 was incorporated.
Thus it had the prior use.
Therefore the learned Commercial Court was right in holding that if at all the petitioner plaintiff so desired it could file a separate suit against respondent No3.
Relying on the judgements of Nav Jagriti Niketan Education Society v. Delhi International School 2019 SCC OnLine Del 7832 and Heiniger v. Droz 1900 SCC OnLine Bom 47 it was submitted that allowing the impleadment of respondent No3 would result in a completely altered plaint which was not permissible.
Similarly the cause of action would also be changed as respondent No3 had been incorporated by third parties and not by family members.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent No3 also submitted relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Yunus v. Mohd.
Mustaqim 1983) 4 SCC 566 that since there was no perversity in the impugned order the powers under Article 227 could not be exercised in the present matter.
Relying on the judgement of a Coordinate Bench of this Court in Gunjan Kumar v. Vipin Parwanda 2015 SCC OnLine Del 9521 it was submitted that there was no common facts or questions of law and the transaction was not the same and as such the defenses would also be different and in the light of these circumstances respondent No3 could not be impleaded as a party to the instant suit.
to be noted the suit had been filed by petitioner plaintiff for permanent injunction restraining infringement of his registered trademark of „MADAAN‟.
The petitioner plaintiff is using the same for footwear.
On 11th February 1994 the petitioner plaintiff‟s firm applied for the registration of the trademark MADAAN when all three brothers were partners.
However by mutual agreement vide the Dissolution Deed dated 1st April 1995 the business of M s Madaan Plastic Industry came to the petitioner plaintiff alongwith the goodwill of the firm and the trademark was also transferred in favour of the 14.
Apparently in the fourth week of May 2017 Mr. Darshan Singh filed an opposition to the plaintiff‟s application for registration of the trademark „MADAAN SHOES‟ though he had no claim whatsoever in the same.
Thereafter the respondent No3 company recently adopted the mark „HOUSE OF MADAAN‟.
No doubt in the written statement the respondent No1 defendant No. 1 had mentioned having obtained a license from Darshan Singh and Sons HUF and also mentioned the existence of respondent No3 but the commonality between respondent No1 defendant No1 and respondent No3 was discovered by the petitioner plaintiff only when the caveat notice was served.
15.
The suit is to prevent infringement of the registered trademark of the petitioner plaintiff.
The respondent No3 is also selling footwear and seeking to brand it as “HOUSE OF MADAAN” Whatever be the defense that respondent No3 would like to raise against the allegations of infringement of the trademark of the petitioner plaintiff would be seen at the appropriate stage.
For the present while respondent No1 defendant No1 claims license from the respondent No.2 defendant No.2 the directors of respondent No1 defendant No1 being the directors of respondent No3 are seeking to setup another case of independent use of a surname of the original founders of „M s Madaan Footcare Private Limited‟.
16.
As held by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in Association for Investment Management and Research v Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts of India 2008 SCC OnLine Del 894 the plaintiff being the dominus litis is entitled to implead the parties considered necessary for enforcing his claim.
The only issue in the present matter seems to be that unlike in Association for Investment Management and Research(supra) where an application under Order VI Rule 17 was filed alongwith an application under Order I Rule 10 in the present case the petitioner plaintiff chose to file an application only under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC.
It is in that context that the learned Commercial Court observed that there are no pleadings qua the respondent No3.
The only pleas taken are in respect of the respondent No1 defendant No1 which is a distinct company and the commonality of the directors will not suffice to overcome this status.
All the averments that have been made in the application Order 1 Rule 10 CPC are appropriately to be made in an application under Order VI Rule 17 to incorporate them in the plaint.
17.
As observed in Nav Jagriti Niketan Education Society(supra) unless the petitioner plaintiff has disclosed the commonality of the transaction or series of transaction between respondent No1 defendant No1 and respondent No3 on the same pleadings the respondent No3 could not have been held to be a necessary or proper party in the present suit without appropriate pleading.
The conclusion of the learned Commercial Court is therefore neither erroneous nor perverse.
Learned Commercial Court had also given liberty to the petitioner plaintiff to incorporate specific pleadings or to file a separate suit.
Thus there is no ground made out to interfere with the said order.
18.
The petition lacks merit and is accordingly dismissed with the pending application.
19.
The judgment be uploaded on the website forthwith.
ASHA MENON) OCTOBER 22 2021