32 years R o. Kera Road Janjgir Tahsil Janjgir 1.
Ganpati S o Ram Ratan aged about 50 years R o Janjgir Tah.
Janjgir Distt.­Janjgir­Champa2.
State of Chhattisgarh Through:­ Collector Janjgir­ 1.
This second appeal preferred by defendant No1 was “Whether the lower appellate Court was justified in reversing the well reasoned by the 1st Civil Judge Class­I Janjgir­ Champa in Civil Suit No.211­A 2003 and granting relief of permanent injunction For the sake of convenience the parties would and nomenclature given in the suit before the 2.
The plaintiff filed a suit that he is title and possession holder of the suit land bearing Khasra which he has purchased from original holder Nathan Singh by registered sale deed dated 691961 and he is in possession of his land and making construction on his own land.
Therefore the 4.
During the pendency of the suit the trial Court appointed Revenue Commissioner to ascertain whether part of Khasra No3820 9 in which the Commissioner 5.
The trial Court upon appreciation of oral and documentary evidence available on record by its judgment and decree dated 28.12.2006 dismissed the plaintiff against which defendant No1 preferred this second appeal under Section 100 of the CPC 6.
Mr.Sourabh Sharma learned counsel for the appellant defendant No1 would submit that the first appellate Court is absolutely unjustified in the plaintiff ignoring the Commissioner s report in is the defendant who is in possession of the said land and there is no objection to report of the Commissioner therefore the first appellate Court ought to have accepted the report of the not have been looked into by the first appellate appellate Court to grant decree in favour of the possession of the suit land.
It is only the as such the judgment and decree of the first 7.
On the other hand Mr.Somnath Verma learned counsel for respondent No1 plaintiff would support the impugned judgment and decree of the first appellate Court and submit that written statement is not and defendant­Vinay Kumar has even not entered into witness box to examine himself therefore the defendant did not have opportunity to cross­examine the plaintiff as such adverse inference against the defendant has to be drawn.
He would reply upon the Bhai C. Patel alias Bachu Bhai Patel v. Harihar Behara and another1 and S. Kesari Hanuman Goud v taking the evidence of the Commissioner and other evidence on record inevitable conclusion would be 1 AIR 1999 SC 1341 212 SCC 64 decree for permanent injunction has rightly been granted in favour of the plaintiff as such the 8.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and considered their rival submissions made hereinabove and also went through the records with utmost 9.
The suit land was earlier held by Nathan Singh he decimal by registered sale deed dated 691961 Ex.P­1) to the plaintiff showing no boundaries of land sold to the plaintiff and thereafter it was the land bearing Khasra No3820 9 area 006 decimal to defendant No1­Vinay Kumar showing boundaries in the sale deed.
When defendant No1 started raising bearing A B C and D as shown in map appended with plaint belongs to him and defendant No1 is not inter­alia that the suit land in which construction is being made is owned by him and therefore on the suit land.
Defendant No1 after entering appearance disputed the same by holding that it is therefore the plaintiff is not entitled for to identification of the land directed for defendant vide order dated 111298 which demarcation report was submitted by revenue officer examined as Court witness No.2.
The Commissioner in his report has clearly reported that defendant has Khasra No3820 10 area 010 acre total area 016 acre but in the spot out of two khasra numbers only held that the defendant s land bearing Khasra No3820 9 area 006 acre is available on the spot By virtue of Order 26 Rule 10(2) of the CPC the evidence in the suit and shall form part of the subjected to lengthy cross­examination by the plaintiff but nothing could be extracted to hold that the plaintiff s land is also available in the 006 acre is available on the spot in which he is making construction as such from perusal of the Commissioner s report it is quite vivid that in the spot defendant No1 was making construction on his land and he is in possession of the said land as such defendant No1 was making construction on his own land being in possession of the suit land and of Balkrishna Datariya Galande v. Balkrishna Rambharose Gupta and another3 in which the Supreme Court has clearly held that in a suit filed under the date of suit is a must for grant of permanent injunction as such the first appellate court failed into error in reversing the judgment and decree of 3SCC Online SC 135 There is one more reason for not upholding the The Supreme Court in the matter of Subhaga and any other specific description is well established Here the attempt had been to identify the suit property with reference to the boundaries and the Commissioner has identified that property with In that view of the matter the defendant s his report is binding to the parties as such the plaintiff has failed to establish that he is in possession of the suit land and on his land Commissioner s report and sale deed filed by is in possession of his own land bearing Khasra 45 SCC 466 No.3820 9 area 006 decimal and he was making from sale deedas such the first appellate Court fell in grave legal error in reversing the judgment and decree of the trial Court as such the judgments cited by learned counsel for respondent No1 plaintiff are distinguishable to the facts of Consequently the judgment and decree of the the trial Court is hereby restored meaning thereby The second appeal is allowed to the extent indicated hereinabove leaving the parties to bear Sd