IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION CIVIL APPEAL NO3574 OF 2009 B SANTOSHAMMA & ANR. ….Appellants D SARALA & ANR …..Respondents CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3575 3577 OF 2009 JUDGMENT Indira Banerjee J These appeals are against a common judgment and order passed by the High Court of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad dismissing the appeals being AS Nos.8994 8994 8994 and 17894 and inter alia confirming the judgment and decree of the Trial Court in OSNo.293 and OS No. 993 and the decree of dismissal by the Trial Court of the Suit being OSNo.993.
The Appellant No.1 in Civil Appeal No. 3574 of 2009 B Santoshamma hereinafter referred to as the ‘Vendor’ wife of the Appellant No.2 in the said appeal B Darshan Reddy purchased 300 square yards of land in survey No. 262 of Hayathnagar Village and Taluk in Ranga Reddy District hereinafter referred to as the ‘suit land’ from one D Tanesha under a registered sale deed dated 20th August 1982 After about ten days the Vendor allegedly entered into an oral agreement with the proforma respondent in the said appeal P Pratap Reddy for sale of 100 sq.
yards out of the suit land in his favour for a total consideration of Rs3000 out of which Rs2 500 was paid in advance.
The Vendor claims to have delivered possession of the said 100 sq.
yards to Pratap Reddy on the date of the oral agreement On or about 20th January 1984 the alleged oral agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy was allegedly reduced into writing upon payment of the balance consideration of Rs.500 .
The Vendor and her husband allegedly agreed to execute the sale deed on an auspicious day after consulting the family priest On 21st March 1984 the Vendor entered into an agreement with the contesting respondent in Civil Appeal No. 35709 Smt D Sarala hereinafter referred to as the Vendee for sale of the suit land to the Vendee for a total consideration of Rs.75 000 out of which Rs40 000 was paid by the Vendee to the Vendor in advance The Vendor claims to have informed the Vendee of the oral agreement with Pratap Reddy which had been reduced to writing on 20th January 1984.
The Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy contend that the Vendor had also specifically informed the Vendee that the Vendor had received the sale consideration for 100 sq.
yards from Pratap Reddy and had delivered possession of 100 sq.
yards of land to him The Vendor has alleged that she specifically requested the Vendee to incorporate a clause with regard to the earlier agreement with Pratap Reddy in the sale agreement between the Vendor and the Vendee.
However the Vendee assured the Vendor that she would get the earlier agreement with Pratap Reddy cancelled as her husband knew Pratap Reddy well and had already spoken to Pratap Reddy According to the Vendor the Vendee represented to the Vendor that there was no need for the Vendor to get any clearance from Pratap Reddy as the Vendee and her husband had been assured by Pratap Reddy that no difficulty would be created by him On or about 25 May 1984 that is about two months after execution of the sale agreement with the Vendee the Vendor executed a registered deed of conveyance transferring 100 sq.
yards of the suit land in favour of Pratap Reddy.
The Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy as also Pratap Reddy have alleged that the Vendee had tried to interfere with Pratap Reddy’s possession of 100 sq.
yards of the suit land On or about 20th June 1984 the Vendor allegedly issued notice to the Vendee contending that the agreement of sale dated 21st March 1984 was conditional upon clearance from Pratap Reddy in view of the earlier agreement of the Vendor with Pratap Reddy for sale of 100 sq.
yards of the suit.
The purported notice if any was issued after execution of the registered deed of conveyance for sale of 100 sq.
yards of the suit land in favour of Pratap Reddy On 22nd June 1984 the Vendor’s husband Darshan Reddy lodged a complaint with the Station House Officer Hayathnagar alleging that the original sale deed of the suit land in favour of the Vendor in respect of the suit land had been stolen from his residence alongwith other documents By a letter dated 28th June 1984 the Vendee replied to the notice contending that the document had been handed over by the Vendor to the Vendee.
Sometime thereafter the Vendee filed a suit being OSNo.2284 in the Court of the Principal Subordinate Judge Rangareddy District for specific performance of the agreement of sale dated 21st March 1984.
In the said suit the Vendee being the plaintiff claimed delivery of possession of 300 sq yards of land from the Vendor.
Pratap Reddy was not impleaded defendant in the said suit for specific performance of the Agreement dated 2131984.
Later the Vendee filed an application being I.A.No.489 for impleading Pratap Reddy pursuant to which an order dated 5th April 1989 was passed whereby Pratap Reddy was added as defendant No3 in the said suit In the meanwhile in 1985 Pratap Reddy filed a suit being OSNo.190 of 1985 in the court of the Principal District Munsif Hyderabad East and North seeking a decree of perpetual injunction restraining the Vendee from interfering with his possession over 100 sq.
yards of the suit land In the suit filed by Pratap Reddy it was alleged that he was not aware of any agreement of sale between the Vendor and the Vendee in respect of the suit land or of payment of Rs40 000 to the Vendee in terms thereof It is the case of Pratap Reddy that even if the Vendee had entered into any agreement as alleged with the Vendor there could be no question of sale of 100 sq.
yards of the suit land earlier agreed to be sold to Pratap Reddy and actually sold to Pratap Reddy by a registered deed of conveyance dated 2551984 The Vendee also filed a suit being OSNo.4085 against Pratap Reddy in the Court of Principal District Munsif Hyderabad for a declaration that the agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy with regard to 100 sq.
yards was null and void.
The Vendor was not impleaded as party to the said suit.
On or about 19th July 1989 the Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy filed their Written Statement in OSNo.2284 subsequently renumbered as OSNo.20 of 1993 being the suit for specific performance of the sale agreement between the vendor and the Vendee which is hereinafter referred to as the suit for specific performance.
Pratap Reddy also filed his written statement in the suit for specific performance.
The three suits have from time to time been renumbered The suit for specific performance which had been transferred to the Additional District Court of Rangareddy District and renumbered OSNo.293 was clubbed for hearing along with Suit No.190 of 1985 renumbered as OSNo.91 of 1993 and OSNo.7091 renumbered as OSNo.993 The Trial Court framed the following issues in the suit being O.S No.20 1993 that is the suit for specific performance: “1.
Whether the plaintiffwas put in possession of the suit plot admeasuring 300 sq yards 2.
Whether the suit agreement of sale was subject to the clearance of any agreement of sale of 100 sq.
yards out of the suit plot in favour of one Sri.
P Pratap Reddy 3.
Whether the sale of 100 sq.
yards out of the suit plot to Sri.
P Pratap Reddy is true and binding on the plaintiff(sic 4.
Whether the suit is bad for non joinder of necessary 5.
Whether the defendantscommitted breach of contract of sale 6.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to the specific performance of the suit agreement of sale 7.
To what relief ” An additional issue was framed as to whether 3rd defendant that is Pratap Reddy was a bona fide purchaser of 100 square yards of the In OSNo.91 1993 being the suit for injunction filed by Pratap Reddy the Trial Court framed the following issues “1.Whether the plaintiff is entitled to perpetual injunction as prayed for 2.To what relief ” The following additional issue was also framed “Whether the plaintiffis entitled to the declaration and possession sought ” In Original Suit No.993 being the suit for declaration filed by the Vendee against Pratap Reddy the following issues were “1.
Whether the suit is bad for non joinder of parties 2.
Whether the plaintiffis entitled to declaration as prayed for 3.
Whether the defendants are entitled to exemplary costs of Rs3 000 4.
To what relief ” By a common judgment and decree dated 30th March 1994 the learned District Judge Rangareddy disposed of all the three suits The suit for specific performance was allowed in part holding that the Vendee was not entitled to seek specific performance of the agreement in respect of 100 sq.
yards covered by the sale deed dated 25th May 1984 but entitled to relief of specific performance in respect of the remaining 200 sq.
yards of the suit land.
The Vendee’s suit for declaration against Pratap Reddy was dismissed for non joinder of the Vendor.
Since Exhibit A 1 being the sale agreement dated 21st March 1984 between the Vendor and the Vendee showed that the sale consideration for 300 sq yards land was fixed at Rs.75 000 which meant that the price fixed per sq.
yard was Rs.250 the Court held that the Vendee had to pay Rs50 000 to the Vendor towards sale consideration.
As the Vendee was found to have paid Rs40 000 under Ex.A1 and a further Rs5 000 under the receipt being Ex.A3 the Trial Court effectively held that the Vendee was liable to pay a further sum of Rs5 000 to the Vendor.
The Vendee was directed to deposit Rs5 000 in Court towards the balance sale consideration payable by her on or before 15th April 1994 whereupon the Vendee would have to execute a sale deed in respect of 200 sq.
yards from out of the suit land in favour of the Vendee.
In case of failure to deposit Rs5 000 in Court within the time stipulated the suit would Being aggrieved by the judgment and order referred to above the Vendor filed an appeal in the High Court against the judgment and decree in the suit for specific performance being OS of 1993 which was numbered as AS 1785 of 1994.
The Vendee also filed three appeals being AS No.8994 against the judgment and decree in OSNo.993 an appeal being ASNo.8994 against the judgment and decree in OSNo.293 and an appeal being A S No894 of 1994 against the judgment and decree in OSNo.993.
By a common judgment and order dated 7th September 2006 which is under appeal in this Court the High Court inter alia dismissed all the appeals that is AS Nos.892 893 894 filed by the Vendee and AS No.17894 filed by the Vendor and confirmed the judgment passed by the Trial Court.
While the appeal being CA.
No35709 has been filed by the Vendor the three appeals being CA Nos 3575 3577 have been filed by the Vendee Mr. Gowtham appearing on behalf of the appellant in CA 35709 being the Vendor submitted that the agreement dated 21st March 1984 between the Vendor and Vendee was liable to be cancelled as the Vendee had defaulted in making payment of the balance amount within the time stipulated in the said agreement Mr. Gowtham argued that there was a clause in the agreement dated 2131984 executed by and between the Vendor and the Vendee in terms whereof the Vendor agreed to register the sale deed in favour of the Vendee within 45 days from the date of the said agreement subject to receipt of the full consideration amount within 451984.
Mr. Gowtham submitted that full payment was not made within the aforesaid date.
The appellants after waiting for 20 more days executed and registered a sale deed in favour of Pratap Reddy in respect of 100 square yards of land Mr. Gowtham argued that the sale agreement was conditional upon cancellation of the prior agreement with Pratap Reddy.
It was argued that the Vendee who knew of the pre existing agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy had assured the Vendor that she and or her husband had already spoken to Pratap Reddy to get the agreement between the Vendee and Pratap Reddy cancelled Mr. Gowtham emphatically argued that the agreement dated 2131984 was a composite agreement for sale of 300 sq yards of land for a lump sum consideration of Rs.75 000 .
Since it was not possible to sell 300 sq yards to the Vendee as per the sale agreement the sale agreement became infructuous and incapable of specific performance.
There was no scope for sale of 200 sq.
yards of land at a reduced consideration Mr. Gowtham argued that there could be no question of any decree of specific performance of the agreement dated 2131984 in favour of the Vendee in the absence of readiness and willingness on the part of the Vendee to perform her obligations under the The Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy contended that they had not refused to execute the registered sale deed as alleged It was the contesting respondent who had failed to bring about a settlement with Pratap Reddy as agreed and had also failed to pay the balance consideration within the time stipulated in the agreement.
Time being of essence to the agreement it could not be 30.
The Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy also asserted that the Vendee was also not ready to pay the balance sale consideration and had sought further time for payment on the ground that he did not have the money.
The suit for specific performance was thus not maintainable.
In any case the agreement for sale of 300 sq yards of land to the Vendee was incapable of performance since the appellant did not have 300 sq yards of land The Vendor and her husband Darshan Reddy have categorically denied that they had delivered possession of 300 sq yards of land to the Vendee.
They have asserted that the Vendee had taken possession of 200 sq.
yards of land 100 sq.
yards having been transferred to Pratap Reddy Mr. Radhakrishnan appearing on behalf of the Vendee argued that the Vendee should have been granted specific performance of the agreement dated 2131984 in its entirety.
The Court should have set aside the purported sale deed in respect of 100 sq.
yards of land in favour of Pratap Reddy and directed the Vendor to sell the entire suit property comprising 300 sq yards to the Vendee Mr. Radhakrishnan argued that the purported sale agreement of the Vendor with Pratap Reddy was not genuine.
It is difficult to believe that the Vendor would within 11 days from purchase of 300 sq yards of landenter into an agreement for sale of 100 sq.
yards out of the suit land Mr. Radhakrishnan further argued that the execution and registration of the sale deed in favour of Pratap Reddy in respect of 100 sq.
yards of land was in any case subsequent to the Agreement dated 2131984 between the Vendor and the Vendee Mr. Radhakrishnan emphatically argued that the agreement dated 2131984 was for sale by the Vendor to the Vendee of 300 sq yards for a consideration of Rs.75 000 pursuant to which possession of the entire 300 sq yards of land was delivered to the Vendee.
This has of course been denied by the Vendor Refuting the contention advanced by the Vendee of want of readiness and willingness on the part of the Vendee to perform her obligations under the Agreement dated 2131984 Mr. Radhakrishnan further argued that the fact that the Vendee had paid Rs40 000 to the Vendor on the date of execution of the sale agreement itself apart from Rs5 000 which the Vendee had admittedly paid to Darshan Reddy demolishes the contention of the Vendor.
These payments towards part consideration were duly Mr. Radhakrishnan pointed out that on 3041984 the Vendee approached the Vendor and her husband with the balance amount of Rs30 000 and requested them to register the sale deed but the Vendor and her husband refused to receive the amount and instead requested the Vendee to make the payment by Demand Draft According to the Vendee the Vendee obtained a Demand Draft No463961 dated 451984 for Rs30 000 from Canara Bank but the Vendor did not accept the same.
On 2551984 the Vendee issued a legal notice.
Receipt of the legal notice was duly acknowledged by the Vendor and her husband.
A further legal notice was issued by the Vendee on 12.8.1984.
In the meanwhile by a letter dated 2061984 in reply to the legal notice of 2551984 the Vendor admitted receipt of Rs.45 000 but claimed that the agreement was subject to the Vendee securing the approval of Pratap Reddy to end the earlier agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy for transfer of 100 sq.
yards of land to Pratap Reddy Mr. Radhakrishnan concluded his arguments with the submission that the Vendee had not delayed performance of her obligations under the agreement dated 2131984.
Within 3041984 the entire consideration was tendered but unfortunately not accepted by the Vendor with ulterior intent of resiling from her obligations under the said argument to transfer the suit property to the Vendee By 4th May 1984 that is within 47 days from the date of the agreement dated 2131984 the Vendee was ready with a Demand Draft for the balance Rs30 000 Mr. Navare appearing on behalf of Pratap Reddy submitted that the Appeals are all liable to be dismissed.
First of all on the date on which the Vendee filed the suit for specific performance of the agreement against the Vendor and her husband she was aware of the registered sale deed executed by the Vendor in favour of Pratap Reddy in respect of 100 sq.
yards of land.
Yet the Vendee filed a suit against the Vendor and her husband for specific performance of the agreement in which Pratap Reddy was not impleaded defendant There was no challenge to the sale deed in favour of Pratap Reddy Mr. Navare argued that the Vendee filed a second suit against Pratap Reddy for a declaration that the sale deed executed by the Vendor in his favour was void without impleading the Vendor Mr. Navare pointed out that as late as on 5.4.1989 the Vendee filed an application for impleading Pratap Reddy as defendant in her suit for specific performance filed in 1984.
The Vendee only added Pratap Reddy.
There was no amendment either in the pleadings or in the prayers.
The reliefs claimed by the Vendor in the suit for specific performance were thus barred by limitation as against Pratap Reddy in the absence of any clarification by the Trial Court as required under Section 21 of the Limitation Act 1963 Mr. Navare further submitted that there being no prayer against Pratap Reddy in the suit for specific performance Pratap Reddy would not be bound to join the original owner in execution of the deed of conveyance in favour of the Vendee.
In support of his submission Mr. Navare cited Durga Prasad and Anr. v. Deep Chand and Ors1 1.
AIR 1954 SC 75 Mr. Navare submitted that the Vendee chose not to challenge the registered sale deed in favour of Pratap Reddy or to seek any relief against Pratap Reddy in the Suit for Specific Performance Failure to make any such prayer amounted to relinquishment of the claim to such relief in view of Order II Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Mr. Navare submitted that the second suit filed by the Vendee is bad for non joinder of the Vendor.
A registered sale deed executed by the Vendor cannot be declared void in her absence Mr. Navare concluded that the second suit was also hit by Order II Rule 2 and was thus barred under the law.
In any case the second suit filed by the Vendor was only for a declaration and there was no prayer for any consequential relief.
The second suit was thus hit by Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 Mr. Navare finally referred to Section 50(1) of the Registration Act 1908 set out hereinbelow for convenience “(1) Every document of the kinds mentioned in clausesb) andof section 17 sub sectionand clauses a) andof section 18 shall if duly registered take effect as regards the property comprised therein against every unregistered document relating to the same property and not being a decree or order whether such unregistered document be of the same nature as the registered document or not” Referring to Section 50 Mr. Navare argued that a registered sale deed with respect to a property will take effect over any unregistered document with respect to the same property Mr. Navare submitted that Pratap Reddy had also filed a suit for declaration and possession being OS No.190 1985.
All 3 suits were clubbed together and heard together.
However consolidation of 3 suits does not convert 3 suits into one ii) Consolidation of suits is for practical reasons such as saving costs time and efforts of the parties convenience of the parties avoiding repetitive exercises in 3 suits and avoiding conflict of judgment in the 3 suits.
However the 3 suits consolidated clubbed together retain their separate identity.
In support of his argument Mr. Navare cited Mahalaxmi Coop Housing Society Ltd and Ors. v. Ashabhai Atmaram Patelthr.
Lrs.
and Ors2 Mr. Navare emphatically argued that the right which have accrued to Pratap Reddy as a result of defective suits filed by the Vendee cannot stand abrogated by consolidation of the suits.
There is no provision in the CPC which permits a party to be deprived of such accrued right because of defects in the suit Mr. Navare submitted that the bar of the second suit under Order II Rule 2 of the CPC is not a defect of a technical nature.
The 24 SCC 404Order II Rule 7 requires only objection as to mis joinder of causes of action to be taken at the earliest opportunity before issues are settled and otherwise such objection is deemed to be waived ii) Similarly Section 21 of the CPC specifically provides that any objection as to the place of suing must be raised at the earliest opportunity before issues are settled and the same cannot be raised in Appellate or Original Court for the first time iii) Legislature has specifically clarified the cases where the raising of an objection is necessary.
There is no provision in the CPC with respect to objection under Order II Rule 2.
The maxim “Expressum facitcessaretacitum” squarely applies here iv) There is a bar of Law prescribed by Order II Rule 2 against the second suit.
It is a kind of bar contemplated under Order VII Rule 11 is in the following words “the Plaint shall be rejected...” Thus it casts an obligation on the Court to reject the same.
Irrespective of whether an objection is raised by the defendant in the suit or not the consequence must follow Mr. Navare concluded that this Court might decline to invoke jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution even if an impugned order is illegal.
This Court should certainly not invoke its jurisdiction under Article 136 to reverse the judgment thereby effectively validating the second suit although it is barred by Order II Rule 2 of CPC.
The Appeal should therefore be dismissed It is not in dispute that the Vendor agreed to sell the entire suit land comprising 300 square yards to the Vendee for a consideration of Rs.75 000 .
The agreement dated 2131984 is admitted by the Vendor It is also not in dispute that the Vendee paid Rs40 000 to the Vendor on the date of the agreement itself and also paid a sum of Rs5 000 to the Vendor’s husband which was duly acknowledged The defence of the Vendor that the Vendee was unable and or unwilling to perform her obligations under the agreement dated 2131984 has been rejected by the Trial Court as also the Appellate Court that is the High Court The finding of the Trial Court affirmed by the High Court that the Vendee was ready and willing to perform her obligations under the agreement dated 2131984 which is based on evidence and supported by cogent reasons is unexceptionable as discussed The contention of the Vendor that the agreement dated 2131984 was subject to the condition that the Vendee would get the earlier agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy cancelled cannot be accepted for the following reasons i) The agreement dated 2131984 which is in writing does not incorporate any such condition It is incredible that the Vendor who knew Pratap Reddy to whom she had as per her own assertion agreed to sell 100 square yards of land should proceed on the basis of an alleged assurance of the Vendee that Pratap Reddy would relinquish his rights under the earlier agreement between the Vendor and Pratap Reddy without ascertaining from Pratap Reddy whether Pratap Reddy was actually ready to relinquish his rights under the said earlier agreement with her iii) Pratap Reddy has denied knowledge of the agreement between the Vendor and the Vendee iv) Within a month and a few days from the date of execution of the agreement between the Vendor and the Vendee after the Vendee tendered full consideration the Vendor executed a registered deed of conveyance in favour of Pratap Reddy without any prior intimation to the Vendee and without giving the Vendee any opportunity to persuade Pratap Reddy to abrogate his earlier agreement with the Vendor It is well settled that the onus of proof lies on the party who makes an allegation.
It was for the Vendor to establish that the agreement dated 2131984 was subject to the condition as alleged by the Vendor that the Vendee and or her husband would negotiate with Pratap Reddy to get his earlier agreement with the Vendor cancelled.
The Vendor failed to discharge her onus of proving that there was such a condition in the agreement dated 2131984.
The Trial Court and the High Court rightly did not believe the Vendor.
The effective concurrent finding of the High Court and the Trial Court that the Vendee had been ready and willing to perform and had in fact performed her obligations under the Agreement dated 2131984 is also unexceptionable for the following reasons i) As observed above the Vendee paid Rs40 000 out of the total consideration of Rs.75 000 on the date of execution of the Agreement dated 2131984 itself It is not disputed that the Vendee paid a further Rs5 000 to the Vendor’s husband against a receipt iii) It is the Vendor’s own case that in terms of the Agreement dated 2131984 the full consideration was to be paid within 45 days.
The Vendee’s claim that she tendered Rs30 000 on 3041984 was not disputed by the Vendor in her legal notice letter dated 2061984 iv) In any case the Vendee obtained Demand Draft No463961 dated 451984 for Rs30 000 in favour of the Vendor towards balance consideration within 47 days from the execution of the Agreement dated 2131984 It is well settled that time is not of essence to agreements for sale of immovable property unless the agreement specifically and expressly incorporates the consequence of cancellation of the agreement upon failure to comply with a term within the stipulated date The concurrent findings of the High Court and the Trial Court that the Vendee was ready and willing to perform and had performed her obligations under the Agreement dated 2131984 which as observed above are based on evidence and sound reasons do not call for interference of this Court.
It is true that the Trial Court had directed the Vendor to pay the balance of Rs5 000 on or before 1541994 failing which the suit for specific performance would stand dismissed.
However any time granted by the Court at its discretion can always be extended by the Court In any case the Vendor had filed an appeal against the decree in the suit for specific performance.
The Vendee who had been litigating for about 10 years by April 1994 and had already paid Rs.45 000 over 10 years ago but not got the suit land could not be expected to put in more money until the decree assumed finality upon disposal of the appeal Since there was an appeal of the Vendor pending the failure of the Vendor to put in Rs5 000 within the time stipulated by Court wold not in itself disentitle the Vendor to the relief of specific performance.
It was for the Court to decide whether or not to extend the time for payment of Rs5 000 .
The Appellate Court rightly expressed its discretion in favour of the Vendee.
The question is whether as argued by Mr. Gowtham the High Court erred in affirming the common judgment of the Trial Court under appeal before the High Court whereby the Trial Court allowed the suit for specific performance in part holding that the Vendee was entitled to relief of specific performance in respect of 200 square yards of land covered by the Agreement dated 2131984 at a reduced consideration of Rs.50 000 since the agreement dated 2131984 was a composite agreement for sale of 300 sq yards of land at a lump sum consideration of Rs.75 000 While Mr. Gowtham has argued that the Courts should not at all have allowed specific performance of the Agreement dated 2131984 Mr. Radhakrishnan has argued that the conveyance in favour of Pratap Reddy should have been adjudged and declared a nullity and the suit for specific performance allowed in full by directing the execution and registration of a Deed of Conveyance in respect of the entire suit land The relief of specific performance of an agreement was at all material times equitable discretionary relief governed by the provisions of the Specific Relief Act 1963 hereinafter referred to as SRA Even though the power of the Court to direct specific performance of an agreement may have been discretionary such power could not be arbitrary.
The discretion had necessarily to be exercised in accordance with sound and reasonable judicial principles Section 10 of the SRA as it stood prior to its amendment with effect from 1102018 provided: “10.
Cases in which specific performance of contract enforceable.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter the specific performance of any contract may in the discretion of the court be enforced a) when there exists no standard for ascertaining actual damage caused by the non performance of the act agreed to be done or b) when the act agreed to be done is such that compensation in money for its non performance would not afford adequate relief Explanation.
Unless and until the contrary is proved the court shall presume that the breach of a contract to transfer immovable property cannot be adequately relieved by compensation in money and ii) that the breach of a contract to transfer movable property can be so relieved except in the following a) where the property is not an ordinary article of commerce or is of special value or interest to the plaintiff or consists of goods which are not easily obtainable in the market b) where the property is held by the defendant as the agent or trustee of the plaintiff.” After amendment with affect from 1102018 Section 10 of the SRA provides 10.
Specific performance in respect of contracts.
The Specific performance of a contract shall be enforced by the court subject to the provisions contained in sub sectionof section 11 section 14 and section 16 After the amendment of Section 10 of the SRA the words “specific performance of any contract may in the discretion of the Court be enforced” have been substituted with the words “specific performance of a contract shall be enforced subject to ...”.
The Court is now obliged to enforce the specific performance of a contract subject to the provisions of sub sectionof Section 11 Section 14 and Section 16 of the SRA Relief of specific performance of a contract is no longer discretionary after the amendment.
An agreement to sell immovable property generally creates a right in personam in favour of the Vendee.
The Vendee acquires a legitimate right to enforce specific performance of the agreement It is well settled that the Court ordinarily enforces a contract in its entirety by passing a decree for its specific performance However Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act carves out exceptions where the Court might direct specific performance of a contract in part.
Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 is set out hereinbelow for convenience.
12.
Specific performance of part of contract.Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it but the part which must be left unperformed by only a small proportion to the whole in value and admits of compensation in money the court may at the suit of either party direct the specific performance of so much of the contract as can be performed and award compensation in money for the deficiency Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it and the part which must be left unperformed either a) forms a considerable part of the whole though admitting of compensation in money or b) does not admit of compensation in money he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance but the court may at the suit of other party direct the party in default to perform specifically so much of his part of the contract as he can perform if the other party i) in a case falling under clausepays or has paid the agreed