IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA CONSTITUTIONAL WRIT JURISDICTION APPELLATE SIDE PRESENT: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ABHIJIT GANGOPADHYAY WPA 129021 Mst.
Reshma Khatun & Ors.
Versus State of West Bengal & Ors.
Via Video Conference) For the petitioners : Mr. Firdous Samim Ms. Gopa Biswas For the Madrasah Service Commission : Mr. Prosenjit Mukherjee Mr. Nirmalya Kumar Das Ms. Madhurima Sarkar Mr. Sauvik Nandy For the NCTE Heard on Judgment on Abhijit Gangopadhyay J .: 18082021 : 18082021 This writ petition has been filed by 32 petitioners.
Full court fees in respect of all have been paid against entry no. A 8559 dated 18th August 2021.
The document showing full payment of court fees be kept on record.
Affidavit of service filed today also be kept on record.
The main prayers of the petitioners in this writ application is for publishing of names of candidates by the West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education in 6th SLST who have provisionally qualified for personality test in 6th SLST (Work Education) and to publish the breakup of marks of all candidates with all details of academic qualification and marks of written examination.
They have also prayed for a direction to call the petitioners in interview for 6th SLST Physical Education) and thereafter give consequential benefit to appoint the petitioners as Assistant Teacher in Work Education.
Emphasis mine) This prayer as to calling the petitioners in interview for Physical Education and giving them appointment in the post of Assistant Teacher in Work Education is wholly inconceivable to me.
Mr. Mukherjee learned advocate for the respondent nos. 2 and 3 being the West Bengal Madrasah Service Commission and its Secretary has raised an objection by submitting that there is no jural relationship between these 32 persons who have filed this application and therefore despite payment of full court fees they cannot file this writ application jointly.
He has also relied upon a judgement of the Supreme Court reported in 1980 (Physical Education) and 6th SLST (Work Education) in accordance with the NCTE guidelines read with the WBSSC Rules 2016 adopted by the Commission for lack of such provision in the rules of the West Bengal Madrasah Service Commission.” Emphasis mine) The petitioners submit that because of this notification the Madrasah Service Commission has adopted the Rules of West Bengal School Service Commission 2016 starts which appears from page 69 of the writ application.
The petitioners and all other candidates participated in the selection process knowing that the full marks for academic qualification and professional qualification would be 35 and not 25.
Now while awarding marks against these 35 marks which is the full marks Madrasah Service Commission naturally would face a problem for awarding of marks and manner of evaluation of the candidates against full marks 35 for academic qualification including professional qualification as in their own rules the full marks in this respect was 25 and the Commission has no tool for awarding marks to candidates for their academic qualification etc.
I have also found that full marks in respect of academic qualification including professional qualification in respect of West Bengal School Service Commission Rules is 35 for Assistant Teacher in Work Education and also for Physical Education which appears from the 2016 Rules of West Bengal School Service Commission