IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.156421 M s Intelligence Security Force Bodh Gaya through its Proprietor Lakshmeshwar Thakur aged about 57 yearsS o Suryadeo Thakur R o Village Mastipur Post and P.S.
Bodh Gaya District Gaya The State of Bihar through the Principal Secretary Department of Science and Technology Bihar Patna The Principal Secretary Department of Science and Technology Bihar ... Petitioner s The Director Department of Science and Technology Bihar Patna The Billing Branch Establishment Government Polytechnic Gaya The Principal Government Polytechnic Gaya ... Respondent s For the Petitioner s For the Respondent s Mr. Ajay Kumar Sinha Advocate Mr. Kameshwar Prasad Gupta GP 10 Mr. Satya Vrat AC to GP 10 CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE and HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S KUMAR Per: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE Date : 20 12 2021 Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Petitioner has prayed for the following relief(s): Patna High Court CWJC No.156421 dt.20 12 2021 After the matter was heard for some time learned counsel for the petitioner under instructions states that petitioner shall be content if a direction is issued to the authority concerned to consider and decide the representation which the petitioner shall be filing within a period of four weeks from today for redressal of the grievance(s).
Learned counsel for the respondents states that if such a representation is filed by the petitioner the authority concerned shall consider and dispose it of expeditiously and preferably within a period of two months from the date of its filing along with a copy of this order.
Statement accepted and taken on record.
As such petition stands disposed of in the following terms: a) Petitioner shall file a representation before Respondent No. 5 namely the Principal Government Patna High Court CWJC No.156421 dt.20 12 2021 Polytechnic Gaya within a period of four weeks from today for redressal of the grievance(s) b) The said respondent shall consider and dispose it of expeditiously by a reasoned and speaking order preferably within a period of two months from the date of its filing along with a copy of this order c) Needless to add while considering such representation principles of natural justice shall be followed and due opportunity of hearing afforded to the parties d) Equally liberty is reserved to the petitioner to take recourse to such alternative remedies as are otherwise available in accordance with law e) We are hopeful that as and when petitioner takes recourse to such remedies as are otherwise available in law before the appropriate forum the same shall be dealt with in accordance with law and with reasonable dispatch f) Liberty reserved to the petitioner to approach the Court if the need so rises subsequently on the same and subsequent cause of action All issues are left open g) We have not expressed any opinion on merits The petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid Patna High Court CWJC No.156421 dt.20 12 2021 disposed of.
Interlocutory Application(s) if any stands (S Kumar J