In the High Court at Calcutta Civil Revisional Jurisdication The Hon’ble Justice Subhasis Dasgupta CO. No. 13221 Sk.
Asfar Ali & Ors Sk.
Asgar Ali For the Petitioners Mr. Bhudeb Chatterjee Adv Mr. Sanjib Kumar Ghosh Adv For the Opposite Party Mr. Sounak Bhattacharya.
Adv Subhasis Dasgupta J: The impugned order No. 37 dated 26th March 2021 passed by learned Civil Judge Additional Court Hooghly in Misc Case No. 219 arising out of Title Suit No. 3718 directing the petitioners opposite parties to furnish information regarding the names and addresses of legal heirs of deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 after rejecting the prayer of the petitioners dated 10122020 under 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for recording the abatement as against defendant No7 opposite party No7 who left this world on 14052018 is subject of challenge in this revisional application Original Title Suit No. 88 of 2014 subsequently transferred and renumbered as Title Suit No. 3718 had already been dismissed for default by order dated 04042019.
Seeking restoration of the suit opposite party plaintiff registered Misc. Case No. 219 under Order IX Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure In connection with Misc. Case opposite party Nos. 1 to 6 field a petition dated 10122020 seeking recording of abatement order as against the defendant No7 opposite party No7 namely Sri Mandan Baul Das who died on 14052018 on the ground that legal heirs of defendant No7 opposite party No7 could not be substituted by resorting to the provisions available for substitution within the time provided under the Mr. Bhudeb Chatterjee learned advocate appearing for the petitioners defendants opposite parties submitted that the Court below had mechanically rejected their prayer for recording the abatement order as against the defendant No7 opposite party No7 and proceeded thereafter illegally directing petitioners to furnish information regarding the names and addresses of legal heirs of deceased defendant No7 oppsoite party No7 It was contended by Mr. Chatterjee that under the behest of an order under Order XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure petitioners could not be compelled to furnish the names and addresses of legal heirs left by deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 and it was highly illegal having no sanction of law.
Incidentally Mr. Chatterjee referred the Vakalatnama furnished by the learned advocate appearing in the Court below for deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 and taking recourse to the Vakalatnama further contended that by reason of change of brief the subsequent learned advocate appointed petitioners opposite party Nos. 1 to 6 could not be compelled to furnish the required information as to who are the legal heirs of deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 simply for adhering to the mandate available under Section XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure Mr. Sounak Bhattacharya learned advocate representing the opposite party plaintiff in reply submitted that there had been a collusion in suppressing the death information of deceased defendant No7 which could be easily understood upon visualising the cremation burial certificate furnished by petitioners opposite party Nos. 1 to 6 in the Court Mr. Bhattacharya contended that petitioners opposite party Nos. 1 to 6 had there definite information as regards the death occurred to deceased defendant No7 oppsoite party No7.
It was thus further contended by Mr. Bhattacharya that since the original suit was for declaration and partition the question of abatement would not necessarily arise and more so the required death information neither could be furnished by the learned advocate representing the deceased defendant No7 in the court below nor by the opposite party Nos. 1 to 6 defendants or their learned advocates for taking effective steps as regards the substitution of legal heirs left by deceased defendant No7 opposite party Upon advancing such submission Mr. Bhattachaya tried to impress upon the Court that death information of deceased defendant No7 was deliberately suppressed thereby preventing the plaintiff opposite parties from taking appropriate steps simply to avoid future complication Admittedly no death information as against the deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 was the Court below Consequently Misc. Case under Order IX Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure for restoration of the suit was filed impleading defendant No7 opposite party No7 who had already left this world With the insertion of Order XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure a duty has been cast upon learned advocate to communicate to Court the death information of a party in a suit.
The relevant provisions mentioned hereinabove may be mentioned hereinbelow “10A.
Duty of pleader to communicate to Court death of a party.
Whenever a pleader appearing for a party to the suit comes to know of the death of that party he shall inform the Court about it and the Court shall thereupon give notice of such death to the other party and for this purpose the contract between the pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.” There is neither any ambiguity nor any obscurity contained in the ‘words’ used in Order XXII Rule 10A thereby laying down an express imperative upon the learned advocate appearing for a party to suit to furnish the death information immediately upon knowing the same so that the Court upon such information being furnished give notice of such death information to other party simply to facilitate the requirement of It is quite impossible for the opposite party plaintiff to gather knowledge of such death information of deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 without any required death information being filed by the learned pleader appearing for the deceased defendant No7 oppsoite party No7 who also entered his appearance for defendant No. 1 to 6 petitioners involved in this case.
In the event of such death information being furnished to the Court the opposite party plaintiff was required to act on account of the death of deceased defendant No7 who simply for ignorance allowed limitation to run against him for taking appropriate steps against the legal heirs of deceased defendant No7 Mere change of brief with subsequent appointment of learned advocate in the given context of this case as contended to have taken place would not be sufficient enough to take an exception to the provisions contained under Order XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Upon perusal of the impugned order it appears that deceased defendant No7 filed his written statement on 19th September 2014 stating purchase of some portion of the suit property along with his three brothers.
Without any controversy Mr. Madan Baul Das defendant No7 left this world whose death information neither could be furnished by the learned advocate representing the deceased defendant No7 nor by anyone of the defendants having gathered such information at any In the original suit partition has been sought for in respect of subject property shown in the schedule upon declaring a solenama decree dated 14.12.1982 passed by the learned Subordinate Judge First Court Chinsurah Hooghly in Title Suit No. 981 and the solenama decree dated 16.12.1981 passed by Civil Judge 1st Court Chinsurah Hooghly in Title Suit No. 8 of 1981 to be void inoperative concocted and fraudulent For the reasons discussed hereinabove the opposite party plaintiff was prevented by sufficient causes from taking any appropriate steps for substitution as against deceased defendant No7 oppsoite party No7 and the learned court below upon consideration of the entire materials available in the case record rightly rejected the prayer for recording the abatement order as against deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 and thereby allowing the petition of opposite party plaintiff with a direction upon the petitioners opposite party Nos.1 to 6 to furnish information regarding names and addresses of legal heirs of deceased defendant No7 opposite party No7 The technicalities thus sought to be capitalized by Mr. Chatterjee learned advocate appearing for the petitioners in the given context of this case should not be given precedence giving a contrary look to the provisions contained in Order XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure.
For a little bit change in the circumstances the imperative obligation to furnish the death information of deceased defendant No7 should not be interpreted in a manner other than the purpose actually contemplated under Order XXII Rule 10A of the Code of Civil Procedure The impugned order does not call for any interference The revisional application fails being without any merits and accordingly stands dismissed Urgent certified copy of this order and judgment if applied for be given to the appearing parties as expeditiously as possible upon compliance with the all necessary formalities (Subhasis Dasgupta J