Appeal No. 42921 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 42921 Mohan Kumar Gupta CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 17 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005 of the RTI Act 2005.
4.
Ground of appeal The appellant has filed the appeal on the ground that incomplete misleading or false information was provided.
The appellant in his appeal queried whether these companies are registered through SEBI or not.
5.
Upon a perusal of the query I note that the same is vague.
Further it is difficult to ascertain what specific information has been sought by the appellant.
I am inclined to agree with the observation of the respondent that the request for information made therein was vague and not specific and the same cannot be construed as seeking “information” as defined under section 2(f) of the RTI Act.
In this context I note that in the matter of Shri S C Sharma vs. CPIO Securities and Exchange Board of India Decision dated August 30 2012) the Hon’ble CIC held: “Since the Appellant had not clearly stated what exact Appeal No. 42921 information he wanted the CPIO could not have provided any specific information to him.
We would like to advise the Appellant that he might like to specify the exact information he wants from the SEBI and prefer a fresh application before the CPIO.” In view of these observations I find that the respondent is not obliged to provide a response where the information sought is vague and not specific.
I note that the appellant in his appeal queried whether these companies are registered through SEBI or not.
I find that the request for this particular information was raised by the appellant for the first time in this appeal.
As held by the Hon’ble CIC in Harish Prasad Divedi vs. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited decided on January 28 2014) an information seeker cannot be allowed to expand the scope of his RTI enquiry at appeal stage.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The Appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 08 2021 ANAND BAIWAR APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA