IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI Petitioner W.P.No.
14821 Mukesh Singh C.I.S.F.
No. 942294301 The Union of India represented through Home Secretary Department of Home New Delhi.
The Director General CISF CGO Complex New Delhi Senior Commandant CISF Unit UCIL Jadogoda East Singhbhum Deputy Commandant CISF Unit UCIL Jadogoda East Singhbhum.
CORAM: THE HON BLE MR. JUSTICE DR. S.N.PATHAK Through: Video Conferencing) … Respondents For the Petitioner For the Respondents Mr. Jitesh Kumar Advocate Mr. Rajiv Sinha ASGI 03 08.06.2021 Learned counsel for the petitioner undertakes to remove the defects within a period of two weeks.
The petitioner has approached this Court for staying the order of transfer dated 13042020 and subsequent relieving order dated 05032021 Annexure 4 & 5 respectively) for one year due to the reasons that his wife is on family way and has conceived through IVF Technology and as per the advice of treating Doctor she needs extra care.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner was appointed in CISF and at present posted at CISF Unit UCIL Jadugoda East Singhbhum and his wife is on family way and has conceived through IVF Technology at Jamshedpur.
Expected date of delivery as per Ultrasound report is 02 11.09.2021 and she is in regular consultation of doctors of IVF care at Jamshedpur.
Learned counsel further argues that he is very conscious of the fact that usually transfer orders are not interfered by the Hon’ble Court but in present scenario and special circumstances the prayer of the petitioner is fit to be entertained on the specific ground that as per the advice of Doctor his wife needs complete bed rest and he is only person to look after her way and as such the transfer order may kindly be stayed for 3 months only.
On the other hand Mr. Rajiv Sinha learned ASGI vehemently opposes the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner and submits that already earlier the order of relieving has been amended on 05032021 and the petitioner has been asked to join the transferred post on or before 10.06.2021.
However in compelling circumstances as expected date of delivery as per Ultrasound 2 report of his wife is 02 11.09.2021 the petitioner may approach the Competent Authority for extension of his relieving period for three months only.
Be that as it may having gone through the rival submissions of the parties this Court is of the considered view that admittedly the transfer is an incident of service and the petitioner being a Member of Para Military Force has to maintain discipline and obey the orders of the superior authority.
In the instant case as the wife of the petitioner is on family way and has conceived through IVF Technology and expected date of delivery as per Ultrasound report is 02 11.09.2021 and petitioner is only person to look after her wife.
Under such special circumstances petitioner is directed to file a fresh representation before the Competent Authority i.e. respondent No3 within three days from today along with a copy of this Order.
After receipt of the same the respondent No3 shall give sympathetic consideration to the case of the petitioner and pass an appropriate order staying the relieving order of the petitioner till 1st week of October 2021 and further a date may be fixed for relieving to the petitioner for joining the transferred place after 1st week of October 2021.
This order has been passed in special circumstances it will not be treated as a precedent for other transfer matter.
Accordingly writ petition stands disposed of.
punit