IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA CRIMINAL MISCELLANEOUS No.377520 Arising Out of PS.
Case No. 90 Year 2020 Thana GOVINDPUR District Nawada Nitish Kumar aged about 20 years son of Yogeshwar Ravidas resident of Village Ambedkar Nagar Kunda PS Govindpur District ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar For the Petitioner s For the State CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH Mr. Anil Kumar Singh Advocate Mr. Bharat Bhushan APP ...
Opposite Party s Date : 23 07 2021 The matter has been heard via video conferencing.
2.
Heard Mr. Anil Kumar Singh learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Bharat Bhushan learned Additional Public Prosecutorfor the 3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that he may be permitted to add the number of the special case i.e. POCSO Case No. 720 with the FIR number.
Prayer is allowed.
Let the same be done by tomorrow through e mode 4.
The petitioner apprehends arrest in connection with Govindpur PS Case No. 90 of 2020 dated 10052020 corresponding to POCSO Case No. 720 instituted under Sections 354 A 504 337 506 34 of the Indian Penal Code and Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.377520 dt.23 07 2021 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act 2012.
5.
The allegation against the petitioner is that when the minor daughter of the informant was at the door of her house and offering prayer in the evening at 630 PM the petitioner along with others had come and had pulled the scarf of the daughter of the informant and when the informant had gone to the house of the petitioner the informant and her family members were threatened and were sent outside the house and had stated that they would get Panchayati done and would deal with the informant but again they had abused and thrown brick bats and somehow the informant side had managed to save 6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that from the reading of the FIR it is clear that the parties being young the incident of the petitioner having pulled the scarf from the neck of the daughter of the informant even if true has been blown out of proportion.
Learned counsel submitted that even as per the FIR there is no allegation of any assault resulting in any injury to any person.
Learned counsel submitted that the story in the FIR is not the true narration of the incident It was submitted that it has come during investigation that every day as a matter of routine the petitioner and others used to play Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.377520 dt.23 07 2021 cricket and come and wash themselves at the hand pump of the informant and on the date of occurrence there was some altercation between the two sides and without waiting for any Panchayati FIR has been lodged.
Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner has clean antecedent.
7.
Learned APP submitted that the petitioner who had come to the house to the informant had pulled the scarf of the daughter of the informant which is a serious misconduct on his 8.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of learned counsel for the parties in the event of arrest or surrender before the Court below within six weeks from today the petitioner be released on bail upon furnishing bail bonds of Rs. 25 000 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 and furtherthat one of the bailors shall be a close relative of the petitioner that the petitioner and the bailors shall execute bond and give Patna High Court CR.
MISC. No.377520 dt.23 07 2021 undertaking with regard to good behaviour of the petitioner and iii) that the petitioner shall cooperate with the Court and the police prosecution.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of the bonds or undertaking or failure to cooperate shall lead to cancellation of his bail bonds.
9.
It shall also be open for the prosecution to bring any violation of the foregoing conditions of bail by the petitioner to the notice of the Court concerned which shall take immediate action on the same after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner 10.
The petition stands disposed off in the (Ahsanuddin Amanullah J J Alam