NATIONAL COMPANY LAW APPELLATE TRIBUNAL PRINCIPAL BENCH NEW DELHI Company Appeal(Ins) No. 7021 IN THE MATTER OF: … Respondent No.1 Amit Goel Through Power of Attorney Holder Ms. Pooja Chaudhary D o Mahipal Singh R o 176m Shyam Colony Ballabhgarh Piyush Shelters India Private Ltd.
Through Resolution Professional Shri Swami Deen Gupta Registered Office: 2 64 VisheshKhand Gomti Nagar Committee of Creditors M s. Piyush Shelters India Private Ltd Service to be effected through Resolution Professional Shri Swami Deen Gupta Registered Office: 2 64 Vishesh Khand Gomti Nagar Shri Naveen Kumar Gupta R o H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi.
M s. Maya Buildcon Private Limited … Respondent No.4 Registered Office: H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi.
Authorized Signatory Shri Naveen Kumar Gupta … Respondent No.3 … Respondent No.2 Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 … Respondent No.5 R o H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi.
Geotech Homz Private Limited Having its Registered Office at: H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi 110092.
Authorized Signatory Shri Naveen Kumar Gupta R o H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi.
For Appellant: For Respondent: Mr. Sanchit Garg Advocate Ms. Babita Jain AdvocateMr.
Sanjeev Panda AdvocateCompany Appeal(Ins) No. 7621 IN THE MATTER OF: Harjeet Kaur W o Sh. S Sukhwant Singh Financial Creditor of Piyush Shelters India Private Limited R o 5 B 1NIT Faridabad.
Mr. Swami Deen Gupta Resolution Professional Piyush Shelters India Private Limited R o 2 64 Vishesh Khand Gomti Nagar Lucknow.
Uttar Pradesh 226010.
Shri Naveen Kumar Gupta R o H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi 110091. ….Respondent No. 1 ….Respondent No. 2 Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 ….Respondent No. 3 Respondent No. 4 M s. Maya Buildcon Pvt Ltd. Having its Registered Office at: 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar II New Delhi 110092.
Geotech Homz Private Limited Having its Registered Office at: H. No. 744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi 110092.
For Appellant: For Respondent: Dr. Amit Geroge Mr. Piyo Harold Mr. Amol Acharya Mr. Bharat Mr. Sahil Garg and Mr. Prateek Vats Advocates Ms. Babita Jain AdvocateMr.
Sanjeev Panda AdvocateCompany Appeal(Ins) No. 9221 ….Appellant No. 1 ….Appellant No. 2 ….Appellant No.3 ….
Respondent No.1 IN THE MATTER OF: Shri Bala Pareek HNO.
1361 Sector 9 Faridabad 121006 Shri Yogesh Chandan R O 882 Sector 21 C PART II Faridabad 121001.
Ms. Pushpa Dwivedi R O A 403 Kesar Garden Sector 48 NOIDA 201301 Mr. Swami Deen Gupta Resolution Professional Piyush Shelters India Private Limited Address : 2 64 Vishesh Khand Gomti Nagar Lucknow 226010 UP Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 ….Respondent No. 2 CONSORTIUM OF MEMBERS Represented by Lead Authorized Representative Naveen Kumar Gupta) Address : HNo.
744 Pocket E Mayur Vihar Phase II Patparganj Delhi 110091 For Appellant: For Respondent: Mr. Jayprakash B Somani Mr. Videh Vaish and Mr. Lalit Mohan Advocates Ms. Babita Jain AdvocateMr.
Sanjeev Panda AdvocateJUDGMENT Date: 18012022) Virtual Mode) Dr. Alok Srivastava MemberThis judgment relates to three appeals namely Company Appeal No.700 2021 Company Appeal No. 761 2021 and Company Appeal No. 925 2021 which have been filed under Section 61(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 assailing the judgment dated 1472021 passed in CA No. 371 2019 in Company Petition No.322 ALD 2018 by the Adjudicating Authority Company Law Tribunal Allahabad Bench).
All the three appeals have been filed against and assailing the common Impugned Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Order.
Therefore these appeals are being disposed off through this common judgment.
By the Impugned Order dated 1472021 the Adjudicating Authority has approved the resolution plan submitted by Mr. Naveen Kumar Gupta as lead member of the consortium of Maya Buildcon Private Ltd Geotech Homz Private Ltd. and Naveen Kumar Gupta which is the successful resolution applicant.
The brief facts of the case as presented and argued by the appellants is that CIRP was initiated with respect to the corporate debtor Piyush Shelters India Pvt Ltd. vide order of Adjudicating Authority on 03.12.2018 and Shri Swami Deen Gupta was appointed as the IRP.
In August 2019 the final resolution plan was submitted and before the e voting could take place on 25082018 the Maya Group withdrew its resolution plan citing some defects in the lease deed that would hamper the execution of the resolution plan if approved.
The RP thereafter filed application before the Adjudicating Authority for rejection of this resolution plan.
The Appellants have stated that later in the 8th CoC meeting which took place on 25.09.2019 it was decided to publish Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 the 4th Expression of Interest which was published in Jansatta and Financial Express newspapers on 01102019 with last date for submitting EOI on 07102019.
It is claimed by the appellants that Maya Buildcon which had earlier withdrawn its resolution plan filed CA no. 282 2019 before Adjudicating Authority that it be allowed to submit a revised resolution plan.
This application remained pending but the RP allowed a consortium which included Maya Buildcon to submit a resolution plan and place it before the CoC for consideration.
A revised plan was subsequently approved by the CoC in e voting held on 6 7 November 2019.
While the resolution plan was pending consideration of the Adjudicating Authority an applicant Vishal Saxena who could not file his claim in time.
obtained order of the Adjudicating Authority in CA No. 12 2020 on 322020 for admission and consideration of his claim.
The appellants have further stated that while Vishal Saxena‟s claim and other claims that were filed after delay were admitted accepted by the RP the resolution plan approved by the CoC and the Adjudicating Authority the Impugned Order has created two separate categories of financial creditors in class one of „claimants who filed their claims in time and the other of „non claimants‟ who could not file their claims in time.
The two categories have received different shares in the approved resolution plan and so while the Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 „claimants‟ have received possession of the booked properties the „non claimants‟ have got just 10% of their booked amount after verification of their claims within one month and thereafter all such claims would stand extinguished.
The appellants have also stated that the Authorized Representative of the Homebuyers allottees who are financial creditors in class did not seek the views of the allottees prior to CoC meeting as is required in Section 25A but the voting by allottees took place alongside the e voting on the resolution plan in CoC thereby flouting the provision of section 25A in letter and spirit and as a result the interests of the majority of homebuyers allottees have been compromised.
6.
The Appellants in the three appeals have assailed the Impugned Order on the following grounds: The Learned Adjudicating Authority has passed the Impugned Order in CA No. 371 2019 while an earlier CA No. 282 2019 filed by the Resolution Applicant for consideration of his resolution plan was pending before the Adjudicating Authority.
Since no orders have been passed in CA No. 282 2019 the Committee of Creditors could not have considered the Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 resolution plan submitted by the consortium.
In the ninth meeting of CoC held on 1112019 the CoC failed to consider the circumstances under which the earlier resolution plan of the Maya Group was withdrawn and revised resolution plan was being considered iii) Section 25A of the IBC clearly stipulates that the authorized representative of the financial creditors in class shall attend the meeting of CoC on their behalf and vote in accordance with prior instructions of the financial creditors in class.
In the present case the evoting of the financial creditors in class took place along with e voting on the resolution plan by the CoC which is evident from the results of e voting.
Thus no prior voting by the financial creditors in class was organized by the representative provisions of Section 25A of the IBC.
The Resolution Professional should have considered maximization of value of the assets of the Corporate Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Debtor which was not done and the liquidation value is not sufficient to cover the amounts owed to financial creditors and other creditors.
v) Only 222 homebuyers allottees out of a total of 473 homebuyers allottees have filed claims before the RP and claims of remaining 251 allottees have been almost extinguished with the approval of resolution plan.
The 251 homebuyers allotees could not file their claims because wide publicity was not given to the CIRP as the newspapers in which the public notices appeared are published from New Delhi the project in District Faridabad(Haryana) and registered office of Corporate Debtor is in Meerut(INS) No. 761 of 2021 is an allottee in the project of the Corporate Debtor.
Similarly the Appellant in Company Appeal(Ins) No. Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 9221 Shri Bala Pareek and others are also allottees of the Corporate Debtor.
The Learned Counsels for Appellants in CA 761 of 2021 and CA 925 of 2021 have claimed that the approved resolution plan gives unequal treatment to the same category of financial creditors thus discriminating between financial creditors of the same class.
The final resolution plan provides as follows in its Para V(7) (Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 between themselves various aspects of the proposed resolution plan as a class of financial creditors.
They have also argued that CoC in the ninth meeting while considering the revised resolution plan submitted by the resolution applicant issued notice on 5thNovember 2019 for e voting to take place on 6th and 7th November 2019 and thus there was insufficient time provided to the financial creditors in class for giving due consideration to various aspects of the resolution plan.
He has also argued that the resolution plan is based on liquidation value of Rs. 40 Crores which is approximately 30% of the total resolution debt and therefore insufficient to cover the amount owed to financial creditors in full and any payments to operational creditors or other creditors including statutory due holders would be nil.
Such meager or no payments would be gross injustice to the creditors.
10.
Thus The Ld.
Counsels for Appellants Harjeet Kaur Bala Pareek and others have claimed the plan imposes a 90% haircut on the legitimate claims of Appellant Harjeet Kaur and 33 similarly based allottees solely on the ground that the claims of the Appellant were received after approval of the resolution plan by the CoC.
He has also claimed that even though the Appellants Harjeet Kaur Bala Pareek and others had filed their claim belatedly they were accepted and admitted by the Resolution Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Professional and included in the list of claims of financial creditors.
He has further adverted to the order dated 322020 passed by the Adjudicating Authority in CA No. 12 2020 which is an application filed by an investor Vishal Saxena whose claim had earlier been rejected by the Resolution Professional on the ground of delay by which the Adjudicating Authority directed the RP to admit and consider the claim stating that a claim cannot be rejected by RP solely on the ground of delay by the Applicants in filing their claim.
He has argued that all similarly situated claimants should be get their due claims.
11.
The Ld.
Counsel for Appellants in CA No. 761 2021 has further claimed that thus no information was given to the Appellants regarding the CIRP and moreover the approved resolution plan is not fair and equitable to financial creditors of the same class and unequal treatment has been meted out to them.
He has referred to the judgment of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited versus Satish Kumar Gupta that equitable treatment has to be given to creditors who are similarly 12.
The Learned Counsels for Appellants Harjeet Kaur Bala Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Pareek and others have also claimed that the publication of the public announcement was done in two newspapers namely „Financial Express‟ and „Jansatta‟ both published from New Delhi which do not have wide circulation in either Meerut or Faridabad where the project under question was being developed) and therefore more than 50% of the homebuyers allottees could not file their claims before the Resolution Professional in time.
While clarifying he has further stated that out of 473 number of allottees only 222 have filed their claims before the RP while the claims of 251 allottees could not be filed in time leading to the extinguishing of their claims in the resolution plan.
He has also claimed that the e voting of the financial creditors in class has taken place along with e voting on the resolution plan on 6th and 7th of November 2019 which is not in accordance with the requirement of Section 25A of the IBC where financial creditors in class have to be consulted „prior‟ to the actual voting in the CoC where the Authorized Representative has to present the views of the financial creditors in class.
Since all the financial creditors voted alongside the CoC members a legal fiction was created which was against the spirit of Section 25A Therefore grave injustice will be caused to the large number of homebuyers allottees who have more than 79% vote share in the CoC and Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 hence the Impugned Order should be set aside.
In arguments the Learned Counsel for RP has claimed that the appeals have been filed after the stipulated period of 30 days after passing of the Impugned Order on 1472021 and therefore they are barred by limitation.
The Learned Counsel for the Resolution Professional has also argued that the Appellant Amit Goel(in Company Appeal No. 700 of 2021) is not an aggrieved person as he is a suspended director of the erstwhile Corporate Debtor and hence does not have locus standi for filing this appeal.
She has further claimed that Impugned Order approving the resolution plan can only be appealed against under Section 61(3) of the IBC on grounds of material irregularity but the Appellant has not been able to show any material irregularity in the resolution plan.
She has further argued that the extended CIRP period was coming to end on 13th November 2019 and therefore the resolution process had to be completed within this time period.She has added that the reason why the CoC did not await the decision of the Learned Adjudicating Authority in CA No. 2819 filed by Maya Buildcon was because RP‟s efforts were focused on obtaining a workable resolution plan rather than to put the corporate debtor in liquidation and RP was working under constraint of time in the extended CIRP.
She has further claimed Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 that the resolution plan has been approved by the CoC in its commercial wisdom and therefore such action of CoC is beyond judicial review.
In support of this contention she has cited the judgment of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited versus Satish Kumar GuptaLtd.
versus Union of Indiato emphasize that liquidation of the Corporate Debtor should be allowed only as a last resort and all efforts should be made for obtaining a successful resolution plan.
15.
The Learned Counsel for Resolution Professional has further stated that after the approval of the resolution plan by the CoC it has been accorded approval by the Adjudicating Authority and hence all claims that are not included in the resolution plan stand extinguished as has been held by the Hon‟ble Apex Court in Ghanshyam Mishra and Sons Pvt. Ltd. versus Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Ltd.(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Limited" and “APM Infrastructure Private Limited” and not submitted by the Maya Group as has been alleged by the Appellant and hence no special favour is being shown to the Maya 16.
The Learned Counsel for the Resolution Professional has with regard to appeals CA Nos. 761 of 2021 and 925 of 2021 stated that the CoC which includes real estate allottees being creditors in class has approved the resolution plan by giving more than 50% votes in e voting held on 6 7th November 2019 and so the creditors in class do not now have any locus to challenge the approved plan as has been held by Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of JP Kensington Boulevard Apartments Welfare Association and Others versus NBCC Limited and Others (Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 17.
He has also urged that the Adjudicating Authority in application CA 12 2020 filed by Vishal Saxena has directed that the claim of Applicant was to be accepted and verification and determination based on material produced before it was to be done by the Resolution Professional.
Thus 33 belated claims including the claim of the Appellant was accepted by the Resolution Professional as per directions of Adjudicating Authority in order dated 322020 in application CA 12 2020.
But since they were included as non claimants in the information memorandum which was the basis for preparation of resolution plan the Resolution Professional offered 10% of the claim amount and this provision was approved by the CoC in its commercial wisdom in e voting held on 6 7112019.
18.
All the three appeals under consideration assail the Impugned Order dated 1472021 and all were filed before 2102021.
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Miscellaneous Application No. 665 2021 in SMWNo.
3 2020 has passed a suo moto order that in computing the period of limitation for any suit appeal application or proceeding the period from 1532020 till 2102021 shall stand excluded from limitation period.
Since the Impugned Order was passed on 1472021 and all the appeals were filed Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 before 2102021 therefore they are all within limitation by virtue of the above stated suo moto order of Hon‟ble Supreme Court.
19.
It is admitted by the Resolution Professional in its reply to Company Appeal AT)(Ins) 700 2021 that even though the Resolution Applicant(Consortium led by Naveen Kumar Gupta) had not submitted its resolution plan within the stipulated time limit the Resolution Professional went ahead to seek CoC approval of its resolution plan through e voting on 6 7 November 2019 since the CIRP period was to come to an end on 13112019He has also admitted in sub para that CA 282 2019 which was filed by Maya Buildcon seeking permission to submit a resolution plan since it had not participated in the process of invitation of EOI was pending before the Adjudicating Authority.
Thus it is quite clear that having once refused to allow the consortium of which Maya Buildcon was a partner to participate in the resolution process and on which Maya Buildcon filed CA282 2019to seek Adjudicating Authority‟s order permission to participate in the resolution process the Resolution Professional decided on his own to obtain resolution plan from a consortium which had not through the EOI route in time and place it before the CoC for consideration.
This plan was later approved Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 by the CoC vide voting on 6th and 7th November 2019.
Thus we do not think that the way this entire process was carried out was in accordance with legal provisions.
We feel that a new round of Expressions of Interest should have been invited which should have been done after wide publicity with sufficient time for resolution applicants to apply.
Short circuiting the process to include an applicant who did not apply in the EOI stage is not in accordance with legal provisions.
20.
We also consider the objections raised by the Learned Counsel for Resolution Professional regarding there being no locus or entitlement of the suspended director Amit Goel who is Appellant in CA No. 7021 in preferring the appeal.
We feel that a suspended director of the former Corporate Debtor does have interest in the successful resolution of the corporate debtor with which he was earlier connected.
Company Appeal No. 761 of 2021 and Company Appeal No. 9221 both of which are filed by the homebuyers allottees who are financial creditors in class but whose claims have not been accepted are interested parties who have stake in successful resolution of the Corporate Debtor and therefore they are entitled to prefer appeal.
In Company Appeal Nos. 761 2021 and 925 of Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 2021 the Appellants Harjeet Kaur Bala Pareek and others are Memorandum of Understanding holdersof the erstwhile Corporate Debtor and Shri Bala Pareek has been appointed as authorized representative of the Appellants for filing the appeal.
The Appellants have claimed that as MoU holders of the Corporate Debtor they have been placed in the category of „Non Claimants‟ in the approved resolution plan.
Their claim is that the „Non Claimants‟ category has been decided without the Appellants being made a part of the resolution process.
Thus their claim as well as debt owed by the Corporate Debtor has been extinguished in the successful resolution plan.
They have further claimed that the effect of the approved resolution plan would be that the Appellants shall lose their right over the properties which were supposed to be handed over to Appellants as the documents such as the MoU executed by the Corporate Debtor and the amounts received by the Appellants for depositing various amounts have been declared null and void with the approval of the resolution plan and within one month the properties that were supposed to be handed over to the Appellants will automatically become an asset of the Successful Resolution Applicant.
Even otherwise if the non claimants submit their documents for verification within one month of the approval of plan they will receive just 10% of their deposited amount.
The Appellants have Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 claimed that this is denial of natural justice to them as the rights for their properties called their properties has been extinguished without hearing them in the preparation approval of the resolution plan.
The Appellants have further claimed that there has been a differential treatment in the resolution plan wherein claimants have been given their properties subject to certain conditions and MoU holders have been made non claimants with just no requests to the properties booked by them.
22.
We now examine the allegation of the Appellants that the provisions of Section 25A were not complied with in letter and spirit of the IBC.
Section 25A of the IBC is as hereunder “Section 25A: Rights and duties of authorised representative of financial creditors.
25A.
The authorised representative under sub section or sub section of section 21 or sub section of section 24 shall have the right to participate and vote in meetings of the committee of creditors on behalf of the financial creditor he represents in accordance with the prior voting instructions of such creditors obtained through physical or electronic means.
2) It shall be the duty of the authorised representative to circulate the agenda and minutes of the meeting of the committee of creditors to the financial creditor he represents.
3) The authorised representative shall not act against the interest of the financial creditor he represents and shall always act in accordance with their prior instructions: Provided that if the authorised representative represents several financial creditors then he shall cast his vote in in accordance with respect of each financial creditor Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 instructions received from each financial creditor to the extent of his voting share: Provided further that if any financial creditor does not give prior instructions through physical or electronic means the authorised representative shall abstain from voting on behalf of such creditor.
3A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub section the authorised representative under sub section of section 21 shall cast his vote on behalf of all the financial creditors he represents in accordance with the decision taken by a vote of more than fifty per cent.
of the voting share of financial creditors he represents who have cast their vote: Provided that for a vote to be cast in respect of an application under section 12A the authorised representative shall cast his vote in accordance with the provisions of sub section4) The authorised representative shall file with the committee of creditors any instructions received by way of physical or electronic means from the financial creditor he represents for voting in accordance therewith to ensure that the appropriate voting instructions of the financial creditor he represents is correctly recorded by the interim resolution professional or resolution professional as the case may be.
Explanation.
For the purposes of this section the “electronic means” shall be such as may be specified.” 23.
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India Regulations 2016 hereafter called “Insolvency Process Regulations”) lays down the following regarding Authorised Representative circulation of agenda to creditors in a class and Meetings of the Committee of Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 “16A.
Authorised representative Xxx xxxxxx 5) The interim resolution professional or the resolution professional as the case may be shall provide an updated list of creditors in each class to the respective authorized representative as and when the list is updated.
Clarification: The authorized representative shall have no role in receipt or verification of claim of creditors of the class he represents.
xxx xxxxxx 9) The authorized representative shall circulate the agenda to creditors in a class and announce the voting window at least twenty hours before the window opens for voting instructions and keep the voting window open for at least twelve hours.
19.
Subject to this Regulation a meeting of the committee shall be called by giving not less than five days‟ notice in writing to every participant at the address it has provided to the resolution professional and such notice may be sent by hand delivery or by post but in any event be served on every participant by electronic means accordance with Regulation 20.” 24.
As the provision under sub section 3 of section 25A clearly lays down the Authorized Representative shall always act with the „prior instructions‟ of the financial creditors he represents.
Furthermore sub section 4 of section 25A provides that the Authorized Representative shall file with the Committee of Creditors any instructions received from Financial Creditors to Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 ensure that appropriate instructions of the financial creditors he represents is correctly recorded by the Resolution Professional.
The import of sub sections 3 and 4 of section 25A is very clear that the views of financial creditors in class should be sought in an appropriate manner by the Authorized Representative prior to the CoC Meeting.
Provision for receiving “prior instructions” and filing them with the Committee of Creditors beforehand so that it is recorded properly is included in the procedure to ensure that the views of creditors in class are appropriately sought received and conveyed to the Committee of Creditors through the Resolution Professional.
Furthermore the use of word “prior‟ also implies that the financial creditors in class shall have sufficient time to consider collectively the issue s before them and after voting which is recorded by the Authorized Representative the result is conveyed to the Committee of Creditors.
In the present case we further find that the instructions for e voting on the agenda item relating to the approval of the resolution plan was sent by the RP vide e mail dated November 5 2019 addressed to the Authorized Representative of financial creditors in class (Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 November 2019 at 6 pm and close on 7th November 2019 at 1 pm page 249 of appeal paper book Company Appeal 700 2021).
Thus an e mail was sent to the Authorised Representative by the RP at 4:35 pm on November 5 2019 informing of the start of voting on 6thNovember at 6 pm was hardly 255 hours in advance.
Regulation 19 of Insolvency Process Regulations stipulates that notice of the CoC meeting shall be given at least five days in advance which was not done in the present case.
Furthermore sub regulation of Regulation 16A requires the authorized representative to circulate the agenda and give voting instructions to creditors in class he represents at least twenty hours in advance and keep the voting window for creditors in class open for at least twelve hours.
In the present case separate voting among the financial creditors in class was not organized by the authorized representative.
Thus the provisions laid down for organizing voting among financial creditors in class of homebuyers allottees were not followed.
We thus find that neither the RP organized the CoC meeting in the manner laid down in Insolvency Process Regulations and the Authorized Representative also failed to organize prior consultation with the homebuyers allottees as is required under Section 25A 26.
We find that on the contrary the e voting on the proposed Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 resolution plan by the financial creditors in class was held simultaneously with the e voting on the resolution plan by the members of the CoC as is clear from pp. 238 240 of the Appeal paperbook in Company Appeal of 700 2021.
The e voting among homebuyers allottees was thus carried out but not in accordance with the provisions of Insolvency Process Regulations in a fashion which can be called vitiated and against the letter and spirit of law.
It did not provide sufficient time to the financial creditors to consider the various aspects of the proposed resolution plan meet together to discuss and vote upon it and thereafter for the Authorized Representative to present the views of financial creditors in class to the CoC Moreso when the financial creditors in class constitute more than 79% of total voting rights in the CoC following such a slipshod procedure is nothing short of creating a legal fiction without conforming to the letter and spirit of section 25A of IBC and Insolvency Process 27.
We now turn our attention to the allegation of the Appellants that due to inadequate publicity regarding the initiation of CIRP of the Corporate Debtor they were not aware of the public announcement and hence could not file their claims with Resolution Professional in time.
The replies on behalf of Resolution Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 Professional submitted in CA No. 7021 at page 26 para 30 mentions that “That it is respectfully submitted that the erstwhile resolution professional did not get any cooperation from the Appellant as was statutorily required from him for discharge of duties by the resolution professional during the CIRP of Corporate Debtor further the registered office of the Corporate Debtor at Meerut was closed and the only principal place of business at Faridabad as per MCA records Piyush Global situated at Plot 5 YMCA Chowk Delhi Mathura Road Faridabadwhich was sealed by the secured financial creditor HDB Financial Services Limited under SARFAESI Act 2002 and Municipal Corporation of Faridabadsince prior to start of CIRP on 3rd December 2018.
Further all the employees of the Corporate Debtor had left and no employees of the Corporate Debtor were on the rolls of the corporate debtor as on insolvency commencement date on 3rdDecember 2018.
All the business operation of the Corporate Debtor was also 28.
Thus we see that the homebuyers allottees could not have had access to either the registered office of the corporate debtor or Company Appeal(Ins) Nos. 700 761 & 9221 the principal place of business at Faridabad since both were closed.
Moreover without the meeting getting together by the homebuyers allottees it was not easy for them to discuss and convey their views to the Authorized Representative who would then represent their views in the CoC.
When we see that out of a total of 473 home buyers allottees only 222 allottees could file claims in time before the Resolution Professional and 251 allottees