This appeal is directed against the Order dated 19.02.2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras Madurai Bench in C.R.P.(NPD)(MD)No.2609 of 2018 whereby the High Court has refusal to entertain an application under Order 8 Rule 1A(3) of the of 2014 on the file of the Principal Sub­Judge Pudukottai and the respondent is the plaintiff.
For the sake of convenience parties are referred to in their respective positions before the Trial Court.
The attempting to grab the suit schedule property.
When the suit was posted for the evidence of the defendants they filed an application statement.
This application was opposed by the plaintiff.
The Trial 4.
Mr. R Anand Padmanabhan learned counsel appearing for the appellants­defendants submits that the said documents are necessary for just determination of the case.
Due to certain courts below have rejected the application on flimsy grounds.
He 5.
On the other hand Mr. S Mahendran learned counsel appearing matter of right to produce the documents particularly when the Rule 1A of Order 8 of CPC provides the procedure for “1A.
Duty of defendant to produce documents upon which written statement is presented by him and shall at the same time deliver the document and a copy thereof to be filed with the the defendant he shall wherever possible state in whose 3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant under this rule but is not so produced shall not without the leave of the Court be received in evidence on his statement.
He must list out the documents which are in his possession or power as well as those which are not.
In case the written statement such a document shall not be allowed to be merely to refresh his memory.
Sub­rule states that a document Sub­ruleas quoted above provides a second opportunity to It is often said that procedure is the handmaid of justice way of the court while doing substantial justice.
If the procedural violation does not seriously cause prejudice to the adversary party that litigation is nothing but a journey towards truth which is the foundation of justice and the court is required to take appropriate 10.
Coming to the present case the defendants have filed an along with the written statement.
They have stated that these documents were missing and were only traced at a later stage.
It 11.
Therefore for the foregoing reasons the appeal succeeds and it is appellants­defendants before the Principal Sub­Judge Pudukottai is ITEM NO27 Court 10SECTION XII S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS Petition(s) for Special Leave to AppealNo(s).
16491 2019 Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 19 02 2019 in CRP(NPD)(MD) No. 2609 2018 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At Madras At Madurai SUGANDHIMr.
Anand Padmanabhan Adv Mr. Shashi Bhushan Kumar AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. S Mahendran AOR UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E R The Appeal is allowed in terms of the Reportable Signed All pending applications are disposed of NEELAM GULATI) (KAMLESH RAWAT ASTT.
REGISTRAR cum PS COURT MASTER (NSH Reportable Signed order is placed on the file