Serial No. 14 Regular List HIGH COURT OF MEGHALAYA AT SHILLONG A.B No. 121 Date of Decision: 07.10.2021 Mr. Hammed Balogun Vs. State of Meghalaya & Anr. Hon’ble Mr. Justice W Diengdoh Judge For the Petitioner Appellant(s) For the Respondent(s) i) Whether approved for reporting in Law journals etc.: Mr. R Gurung Adv.
Mr. H Abraham GA. ii) Whether approved for publication in press: The Petitioner Mr. Hammed Balogun a Nigerian national residing at Demthring Shillong with his wife and child has approached this Court with an application u s 438 Cr.PC praying for grant of pre arrest bail in connection with Dawki PS Case No. 16(6)2021.
It is the case of the Petitioner that he had received a notice u s 41 Cr.PC in connection with the said Dawki PS Case and had accordingly reported before the Dawki PS on 16072021.
After being questioned he was allowed to leave the police station in the evening but was again directed to report before the said police station after three days and was threatened that next time he would be arrested.
The Petitioner has further stated that he had been willingly cooperating with the investigation in all possible manner but due to the threat of arrest he is apprehensive that he may be falsely implicated and arrested in the said Dawki PS caseof the Foreigners Act was duly registered against the said Michael Okpeaifoh however Michael Okpeaifoh was subsequently released on bail and investigation is still going on.
10.
The fact that the Petitioner herein is known to Mr. Michael Okpeaifoh and that he has also admitted that he had helped him would apparently make him apprehensive of arrest in connection with the said Dawki PS case1 SCC 694 the Supreme Court laying down some guidelines as far as anticipatory bail is concerned at paragraph 112 has held as follows: “112.
The following factors and parameters can be taken into consideration while dealing with the anticipatory bail: i) The nature and gravity of the accusation and the exact role of the accused must be properly comprehended before arrest is made ii) The antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether the accused has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a court in respect of any cognizable offence iii) The possibility of the applicant to flee from justice iv) The possibility of the accused s likelihood to repeat similar or other v) Where the accusations have been made only with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by arresting him or her.
vi) Impact of grant of anticipatory bail particularly in cases of large magnitude affecting a very large number of people.
vii) The courts must evaluate the entire available material against the accused very carefully.
The court must also clearly comprehend the exact role of the accused in the case.
The cases in which the accused is implicated with the help of Sections 34 and 149 of the Penal Code 1860 the court should consider with even greater care and caution because over implication in the cases is a matter of common knowledge and concern viii)While considering the prayer for grant of anticipatory bail a balance has to be struck between two factors namely no prejudice should be caused to the free fair and full investigation and there should be prevention of harassment humiliation and unjustified detention of the accused ix) The court to consider reasonable apprehension of tampering of the witness or apprehension of threat to the complainant x) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only the element of genuineness that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant of bail and in the event of there being some doubt as to the genuineness of the prosecution in the normal course of events the accused is entitled to an order of bail”.
While applying the above to the case of the Petitioner it is apparent that he is not likely to abscond or flee from justice since he has his family at Shillong and that he has cooperated with the police by responding to the first notice issued to him u s 41A Cr.PC also reflect on his antecedent.
The nature and gravity of the allegation is also such that a heinous offence has not been committed by the Petitioner herein.
This being the case this Court is therefore inclined to allow the prayer of the Petitioner.
13.
Accordingly it is hereby directed that incase the Petitioner is arrested he is to be enlarged on bail on the following conditions: That he shall not abscond or tamper with the evidence or witnesses ii) That he shall not leave the jurisdiction of India without prior permission of the IO or the court concerned and iii) That he shall produce a personal bond of ₹ 20 000 with one surety of like amount.
14.
The Registry is directed to return the case diary.
15.
Matter disposed of.
No cost.
Judge “N.
Swer Stenographer”