IN THE CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF 201 CIVIL APPEAL NO. BK PAVITRA & ORS. …APPELLANTS UNION OF INDIA & ORS. CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2369 OF 2011 2370 2373 OF 2011 2374 2377 OF 2011 2378 OF 2011 2379 OF 2011 4320 4327 OF 2011 AND 5280 5286 OF 2011 JUDGMENT ADARSH KUMAR GOEL J These appeals involve the question of validity of the Karnataka Determination of Seniority of the Government Servants Promoted on the Basis of ReservationAct 2002 No.61 of 2002 titled M Nagaraj and others v Union of India and others.
The issue referred to larger Bench in the writ petition along with connected matters was decided by this Court on 19th October 20061.
While upholding the constitutional validity of the Constitution Act 1995 the Constitution Eighty first Amendment) Act 2000 the Constitution Act 2000 and the Constitution No146710.
The High Court by the impugned judgment has held the Act to be valid.
The question framed for determination by the High Court is as follows 8 SCC 212 Para 124 of ‘M Nagaraj’it was available upto second level i.e. Assistant Executive Engineer.
In Diploma Engineers it was available upto third level i.e. Assistant Executive Engineer Division II.
According to the appellants Assistant Engineers of SC ST category recruited in the year 1987 were promoted to the cadre of Assistant Executive Engineers while in general merit Assistant Engineers recruited in 1976 were considered for promotion to the said cadre.
The representation of the SC ST group was as follows EE Cadre CE Cadre Engineer in chief 4444 43%v.
State of Punjab6 and RK Sabharwal v 2 SCC 666 2 SCC 715 7 SCC 209 State of Punjab7 issued a direction to the State of Karnataka to redo the seniority and take further action in the light of the said judgments Pointing out the consequence of accelerated seniority to the roster point promotee it has been averred in the writ petition that the roster point promotee would reach the third level by the age of 45 and fourth fifth and sixth level in next three two and two years.
The general merit promotee would reach the third level only at the age of 56 and retire before reaching the fourth level.
This would result in reverse discrimination and representation of reserved category would range between 36% to 100%.
Stand of the State and the contesting respondents who have been given promotion under the reservation is that inter se seniority amongst persons promoted on any occasion is determined as per Karnataka Government Servants Rules 1957 2 SCC 745 2 SCC 661 under reservation.
Thus all candidates promoted ‘on the same occasion’ retained their seniority in the lower cadre.
This aspect was not considered in Badappanavarthe matter was put in issue before the High Court.
The contention raised on behalf of the appellants was that grant of consequential seniority to candidates promoted by way of reservation affected efficiency of administration and was violative of Articles 14 and 16.
In spite of 85th Amendment having been upheld law laid down in Badappanavar Ajit Singh II and Union of India v Virpal Chauhan9 remained relevant in absence of ‘backwardness’ ‘inadequacy of representation’ and ‘overall administrative efficiency’ being independently determined.
The State Government had not provided any material or data to show inadequacy of reservation to the 6 SCC 684 members of SC ST nor the State has given any thought to the issue of overall administrative efficiency On the other hand the submission on behalf of the State was that reservation to SCs and STs to the extent of 15% and 3% respectively could never be said to be excessive in view of progressive increase in population of SCs and STs The High Court referring to this Court’s judgment in M Nagaraj supra) observed that concept of “catch up” rule and “consequential seniority” are judicially evolved concepts to control the effect of reservations.
Deleting the said rule cannot by itself be in conflict with “equality code” under the Constitution.
The 85th Amendment gave freedom to the State to provide for reservation in promotion with consequential seniority under Article 16(4 A) if ‘backwardness’ ‘inadequacy of representation’ and ‘overall efficiency’ so warranted There is no fixed yardstick to identify and measure the above three factors.
If the State fails to identify and measure the above three factors the reservation can be invalid.
Examining whether the State had in fact measured the above factors the High Court observed that Order dated 27th April 1978 was issued by the State of Karnataka after considering the statistics available about the representation of SCs and STs in promotional vacancies.
On 3rd February 1999 the policy was modified to limit reservation in promotion in cadre upto and inclusive of the lowest category of Group A posts in which there is no element of recruitment beyond 66⅔ %.
The said order was further amended on 13th April 1999 to the effect that reservation in the promotion for SCs and STs will continue to operate till their representation reached 15% or 3 respectively and promotion of SCs and STs and against backlog was to continue as per order dated 24th June 1997 till the said percentage was so reached in the total working strength.
As per the Karnataka Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes Reservation of seats in Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the services under the State) Act 1994seniority in the lower cadre is maintained in promotional posts for the persons promoted “on one occasion”.
Since reservation had not exceeded 15% and 3% for SCs and STs while population of the said categories had increased there was adequate consideration of the above three factors of “backwardness” inadequacy of representation” and “overall efficiency”.
Section 3 of the Act provided for an inbuilt mechanism for providing reservation in promotion to the extent of 15 and 3% respectively for the SCs and STs.
The State Government collects statistics every year.
The High Court held that contention that if all the posts in higher echelons may be filled by SCs and STs the promotional prospects of general merit candidates will get choked or blocked could not be accepted as reservation in promotion was provided only upto the cadre of Assistant Executive Engineers.
It was further observed that there was no pleading that overall efficiency of service would be hampered by promoting persons belonging to SCs and STs 10.
The impugned judgment has been challenged on behalf of the appellants mainly relying upon judgment of this Court in Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited v. Rajesh Kumar10.
It was submitted that the High Court erroneously held that there was an inbuilt mechanism under Section 3 of the impugned Act or that the seniority rule maintaining lower cadre seniority in respect of persons promoted on a particular occasion was a safeguard against excessive reservation Similarly the finding that reservation was only upto a particular level and not beyond or that accelerated promotion upto that level did not affect further promotions was erroneous.
It was also submitted that there was no provision for excluding the creamy layer which also rendered the Act invalid.
It was submitted that no exercise whatsoever in terms of M Nagaraj case has been undertaken by the State 7 SCC 1 11.
Shri Basava Prabhu S Patil learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the State submitted that the Act did not deal with the reservation.
It only dealt with seniority.
Seniority was not a fundamental right but a civil right as held in Bimlesh Tanwar vs. State of Haryana11.
M Nagaraj judgment of this Court had dealt with reservation and not with consequential seniority.
Once reservation is within the prescribed limit there was no bar to consequential seniority being granted.
It was further submitted that even if seniority is to be struck down the clock cannot be entirely reversed so as to affect seniority of persons who had retired or who are about to retire or who had reached higher positions 12.
Shri SN Bhat learned counsel for the private respondents supported the impugned judgment and submitted that the Government was not required to carry out the exercise of finding out ‘backwardness’ ‘inadequacy of representation’ and ‘overall administrative efficiency’ for providing consequential seniority to officers on the basis of reservation The said exercise was required to be carried out only for providing reservation in promotion.
Reservation in promotion was permissible only upto Class I posts in Karnataka.
Moreover inter se seniority of reserved category and general category candidates promoted together was not 5 SCC 604 disturbed.
The roster points ensured that there was no excessive representation in different cadres of service.
In view of Government Order dated 3rd February 1999 there was enough data available to justify continuance of provision for consequential seniority under the impugned Act.
Data collected by the Department of Statistics with regard to overall representation of SCs and STs as on 31st March 2002 showed that the representation of SCs and STs was not above 15% and 3% respectively Section 4 of the Act only protected consequential seniority which was already given.
Promotions already effected cannot be disturbed 13.
Reference may now be made to the impugned Act.
The preamble of the Act refers to policy of reservation in promotion in favour of Government servants belonging to SCs and STs in terms of order dated 27th April 1978.
Para 7 of the said order stipulates that inter se seniority amongst persons promoted in accordance with the said order has to be determined in the manner provided under Rule 4 or Rule 4A of the 1957 Rules.
There is further reference to the judgment of this Court in Badappanavar to the effect that there was no specific rule permitting seniority to be counted for persons promoted against a reserved roster point.
It further refers to the Constitution Act 2001 permitting consequential seniority in the case of promotion on the basis of reservation.
It states that to remove any ambiguity and to clarify that government servants belonging to SCs and STs promoted in accordance with the reservation in promotion shall be entitled to seniority as it is available to government servants belonging to other categories.
Section 3 of the impugned Act provides that government servants belonging to SCs and STs promoted in accordance with the policy reservation in promotion shall be entitled to consequential seniority on the basis of length of service in a cadre.
Proviso to the said section to the effect that inter se seniority of government servants belonging to SCs STs and those belonging to unreserved category promoted at the same time by a common order shall be on the basis of inter se seniority in the lower cadre.
Section 4 provides for protection of consequential seniority already accorded from 27th April 1978.
Since Sections 3 and 4 are the key sections the same are reproduced below “3.
Determination of Seniority of the Government Servants Promoted on the basis of Reservation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force the Government Servants belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes promoted in accordance with the policy of reservation in promotion provided for in the Reservation Order shall be entitled to consequential seniority.
Seniority shall be determined on the basis of the length of service in a cadre.
Provided that the seniority inter se of the Government Servants belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as well as those belonging to the unreserved category promoted to a cadre at the same time by a common 5 order shall be determined on the basis of their seniority inter se in the lower cadre.
Provided further that where the posts in a cadre according to the rules of recruitment applicable to them are required to be filled by promotion from two or more lower cadres i) The number of vacancies available in the promotional cadre for each of the lower cadres according to the rules of recruitment applicable to it shall be calculated and ii) The roster shall be applied separately to the number of vacancies so calculated in respect of each of those lower cadres Provided also that the serial numbers of the roster points specified in the Reservation Order are intended only to facilitate calculation of the number of vacancies reserved for promotion at a time and such roster points are not intended to determine inter se seniority of the Government Servants belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes vis a vis the Government Servants belonging to the unreserved category promoted at the same time and such inter se seniority shall be determined by their seniority inter se in the cadre from which they are promoted as illustrated in the Schedule appended to this Act.
4.
Protection of consequential seniority already accorded from 27th April 1978 onwards.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force the consequential seniority already accorded to the Government servants belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes who were promoted in accordance with the policy of reservation in promotion provided for in the Reservation Order with effect from the Twenty Seventh Day of April Nineteen Hundred and Seventy Eight shall be valid and shall be protected and shall not be disturbed.
“ 14.
Question for consideration is whether the impugned Act is consistent with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The said question has been gone into by this Court inter alia in identical circumstances in Suraj Bhan Meena v. State of Rajasthan12 and Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limitedto which we will make a reference at appropriate place.
15.
We proceed to deal with the contention that High Court judgment proceeds on incorrect understanding of the law laid down in M Nagaraj 85th Amendment was upheld with the observation that enabling the State to do away with the ‘catch up’ rule a judicially evolved concept to control the effect of reservations was valid but the exercise of power to do away with the said rule and providing consequential seniority in favour of roster point promotees of reserved category was subject to the limitation of determining the three factors of ‘backwardness’ ‘inadequacy of representation’ and ‘overall efficiency’.
The High Court brushed aside the said mandatory requirement by simply observing that Section 3 provided for an inbuilt mechanism as the extent of mechanism was 1 SCC 467 limited to 15% and 3% respectively for the SCs and STs which dispensed with any requirement of determining inadequacy of representation or backwardness.
High Court further dispensed with the requirement of determining overall efficiency by observing that there was no pleading that overall efficiency would be hampered by promoting persons belonging to SCs and STs.
This reasoning in the judgment of the High Court it is submitted is contrary to the mandate of law as recognized in M Nagarajand the view similar to the impugned judgment has been repeatedly disapproved in decisions of this Court.
16.
We find considerable force in the submission.
The issue is no longer res integra and it will be suffice to refer to the law clearly laid down by this Court in this regard In M Nagaraj this Court considered constitutional validity of 77th 81st 82nd and 85th Amendments.
In doing so the Court was concerned with the question whether the amendment infringed the basic structure of the Constitution.
It was held that equality is part of the basic structure but in the present context right to equality is not violated by an enabling provision if exercise of power so justifies.
In this regard following observations are worthwhile to note “31.
At the outset it may be noted that equality rule of law judicial review and separation of powers are distinct concepts.
They have to be treated separately though they are intimately connected.
There can be no rule of law if there is no equality before the law and rule of law and equality before the law would be empty words if their violation was not a matter of judicial scrutiny or judicial review and judicial relief and all these features would lose their significance if judicial executive and legislative functions were united in only one authority whose dictates had the force of law.
The rule of law and equality before the law are designed to secure among other things justice both social and economic In Minerva Mills 3 SCC 625 Chandrachud CJ speaking for the majority observed that Articles 14 and 19 do not confer any fanciful rights.
They confer rights which are elementary for the proper and effective functioning of democracy.
They are universally regarded by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
If Articles 14 and 19 are put out of operation Article 32 will be rendered nugatory … 33.
From these observations which are binding on us the principle which emerges is that “equality” is the essence of democracy and accordingly a basic feature of the Constitution 34.
However there is a difference between formal equality and egalitarian equality which will be discussed later on 42. ….. ….There can be no justice without equality.
Article 14 guarantees the fundamental right to equality before the law on all persons Great social injustice resulted from treating sections of the Hindu community as “untouchable” and therefore Article 17 abolished untouchability and Article 25 permitted the State to make any law providing for throwing open all public Hindu religious temples to untouchables.
Therefore provisions of Part III also provide for political and Considering the right of equality in the context of reservation affirmative action it was observed “43.
… … … Therefore the concept of “equality of opportunity” in public employment concerns an individual whether that individual belongs to the general category or Backward Class.
The conflicting claim of individual right under Article 16(1) and the preferential treatment given to a Backward Class has to be balanced.
Both the claims have a particular object to be achieved.
The question is of optimisation of these conflicting interests and claims.” 19.
Thereafter concepts of ‘equity’ ‘justice’ and ‘merit’ in public employment were referred to and it was held that application of these concepts in public employment depends upon quantifiable data in each case.
It was observed “44.
… … …Backward Classes seek justice General class in public employment seeks equity The difficulty comes in when the third variable comes in namely efficiency in service.
In the issue of reservation we are being asked to find a stable equilibrium between justice to the backwards equity for the forwards and efficiency for the entire system.
Equity and justice in the above context are hard concepts.
However if you add efficiency to equity and justice the problem arises in the context of the reservation.
This problem has to be examined therefore on the facts of each case Therefore Article 16(4) has to be construed in the light of Article 335 of the Constitution Inadequacy in representation and backwardness of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are circumstances which enable the State Government to act under Article 16(4) of the Constitution However as held by this Court the limitations on the discretion of the Government in the matter of reservation under Article 16(4) as well as Article 16(4 A) come in the form of Article 335 of the 45. … … …The basic presumption however remains that it is the State who is in the best position to define and measure merit in whatever ways it consider it to be relevant to public employment because ultimately it has to bear the costs arising from errors in defining and measuring merit.
Similarly the concept of “extent of reservation” is not an absolute concept and like merit it is context specific 46. … … …Therefore “vesting of the power” by an enabling provision may be constitutionally valid and yet “exercise of the power” by the State in a given case may be arbitrary particularly if the State fails to identify and measure backwardness and inadequacy keeping in mind the efficiency of service as required under Article 335” 20.
The above discussion led this Court to hold that conferment of enabling power on State under Article 16(4A) did not by itself violate the basic feature of equality.
If the affirmative action stipulated under Article 16(4A) could be balanced with the need for adequate representation for justice to the backwards while upholding equity for the forwards and efficiency for the entire system with the further observation that the content of a right is defined by the Courts and even while the amendment as such could be upheld validity of an individual enactment was required to be gone into.
If the State wished to exercise its discretion under Article 16(4A) it was to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class in public employment in addition to compliance with Article 335.
It was made clear that even if the State has compelling reasons as stated above the State will have to see that its reservation provision does not lead to excessiveness so as to breach the ceiling limit of 50% or obliterate the creamy layer or extend the reservation indefinitely It may also be worthwhile to note further observations of this Court in the said judgment “49.
Reservation is necessary for transcending caste and not for perpetuating it.
Reservation has to be used in a limited sense otherwise it will perpetuate casteism in the country.
Reservation is underwritten by a special justification.
59.
Giving the judgment of the Court in Indra SawhneySupp.SCC 217] Jeevan Reddy J stated that Article 16(4) speaks of adequate representation not proportionate representation although proportion of population of Backward Classes to the total population would certainly be relevant exist two circumstances 102. ….
….. …..
Therefore in every case where the State decides to provide for reservation there namely “backwardness” and “inadequacy of representation” As stated above equity justice and efficiency are variable factors.
These factors are context specific There is no fixed yardstick to identify and measure these three factors it will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
These are the limitations on the mode of the exercise of power by the State None of these limitations have been removed by the impugned amendments.
If the State concerned fails to identify and measure backwardness inadequacy and overall administrative efficiency then in that event the provision for reservation would be invalid 104. ….. ….. As stated above be it reservation or evaluation excessiveness in either would result in violation of the constitutional mandate.
This exercise however will depend on the facts of each case.
In our view the field of exercise of the amending power is retained by the impugned amendments as the impugned amendments have introduced merely enabling provisions because as stated above merit efficiency backwardness and inadequacy cannot be identified and measured in vacuum.
Moreover Article 16(4 A) and Article 16(4 B) fall in the pattern of Article 16(4) and as long as the parameters mentioned in those articles are complied with by the States the provision of reservation cannot be Articles 16(4 A) and 16(4 B) are classifications within the principle of equality under 106.
According to the Constitutional Law of India by HM Seervai 4th Edn.
p. 546 equality is not violated by mere conferment of discretionary power.
It is violated by arbitrary exercise by those on whom it is conferred.
This is the theory of “guided power”.
This theory is based on the assumption that in the event of arbitrary exercise by those on whom the power is conferred would be corrected by the courts …... ….. 107. …..
If the State has quantifiable data to show backwardness and inadequacy then the State can make reservations in promotions keeping in mind maintenance of efficiency which is held to be a constitutional limitation on the discretion of the State in making reservation as indicated by Article 335.
As the concepts of efficiency stated above backwardness inadequacy of representation are required to be identified and measured 108.
Moreover Article 335 is to be read with Article 46 which provides that the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and in particular of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from social injustice.
Therefore where the State finds compelling backwardness and inadequacy it may relax the qualifying marks for SCs STs.
These compelling interests however have to be identified by weighty and comparable data interests of 117. …..
Therefore in each case the Court has got to be satisfied that the State has exercised its opinion in making reservations in promotions for SCs and STs and for which the State concerned will have to place before the Court the requisite quantifiable data in each case and satisfy the Court that such reservations became necessary on account of inadequacy of representation of SCs STs in a particular class or classes of posts without affecting general efficiency of service as mandated under Article 335 of the Constitution 118.
The constitutional principle of equality is inherent in the rule of law.
However its reach is limited because its primary concern is not with the content of the law but with its enforcement and application.
The rule of law is satisfied when laws are applied or enforced equally that is even handedly free of bias and without irrational distinction.
The concept of equality allows differential treatment but it prevents distinctions that are not properly justified Justification needs each case to be decided on case to case basis 120.
At this stage one aspect needs to be mentioned.
Social justice is concerned with the distribution of benefits and burdens.
The basis of distribution is the area of conflict between rights needs and means.
These three criteria can be put under two concepts of equality namely “formal equality” and “proportional equality”.
Formal equality means that law treats everyone equal.
Concept of egalitarian equality is the concept of proportional equality and it expects the States to take affirmative action in favour of disadvantaged sections of society within the framework of democratic polity.
In Indra Sawhney all the Judges except Pandian J held that the “means test” should be adopted to exclude the creamy layer from the protected group earmarked for reservation.
In Indra Sawhney this Court has therefore accepted caste as a determinant of backwardness and yet it has struck a balance with the principle of secularism which is the basic feature of the Constitution by bringing in the concept of creamy layer.
Views have often been expressed in this Court that caste should not be the determinant of backwardness and that the economic criteria alone should be the determinant of backwardness.
As stated above we are bound by the decision in Indra Sawhney.
The question as to the “determinant” of backwardness cannot be gone into by us in view of the binding decision.
In addition to the above requirements this Court in Indra Sawhney has evolved numerical benchmarks like ceiling limit of 50% based on post specific roster coupled with the concept of replacement to provide immunity against the charge of discrimination 122.
We reiterate that the ceiling limit of 50% the concept of creamy layer and the compelling reasons namely backwardness inadequacy of representation and overall administrative efficiency are all constitutional requirements without which the structure of equality of opportunity in Article 16 22.
Question of application of principles laid down in M Nagaraj supra) for judging the exercise of enabling power of granting consequential seniority and promotion was raised in Suraj Bhan Meena the grant of consequential seniority was not permissible.
The High Court quashed the notification providing for consequential seniority on the ground that no exercise had been undertaken in terms of Article 16(4A) to acquire quantifiable data regarding inadequacy of representation to SCs and STs in public service and to assess whether such reservation was necessary.
This was upheld by this Court as under “66.
The position after the decision in M Nagaraj case is that reservation of posts in promotion is dependent on the inadequacy of representation of members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes and subject to the condition of ascertaining as to whether such reservation was at all required 67.
The view of the High Court is based on the decision in M Nagaraj case as no exercise was undertaken in terms of Article 16(4 A) to acquire quantifiable data regarding the inadequacy of representation of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe communities in public services.
The Rajasthan High Court has rightly quashed the Notifications dated 28 12 2002 and 25 4 2008 issued by the State of Rajasthan providing for consequential seniority and promotion to the members of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe communities and the same does not call for any interference.” 23.
Again in Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited validity of Rule 8A of the UP Government Servants Seniority Rules 1991 inserted by way of an amendment in 2007 was put in issue While a Division Bench of Lucknow Bench in Prem Kumar Singh v State of U.P.13 struck down the said rule another Division Bench at Allahabad in Mukund Kumar Srivastava v. State of U.P.14 took a contrary view.
This Court dismissed the appeal filed by the UP Power Corporation Limited and upheld the view of the Lucknow Bench Reference was made to observations in para 819 in Indra Sawhney v UOI15 to the effect that reservation under Article 16(4) of the Constitution could only be at the stage of entry into the State service and not in promotion.
Reservation in promotion is bound to generate acute heartburning and lead to inefficiency in administration.
The members of open category would think that whatever be their record or performance members of reserved category will steal a march over them irrespective of their performance and competence.
Once persons coming from different sources join a category or class they must be treated alike for promotion and no distinction was permissible on the 3 All LJ 343 1 All LJ 428 Supp.SCC 217 basis of ‘birth mark’.
Reservation in promotion will be contrary to the mandate of Article 335 viz. maintenance of efficiency in administration and put premium on efficiency.
Members of reserved category will not work hard since they do not have to compete with their colleagues and because of assured promotion which will be against the goal of excellence under Article 51 AAjit Singhversus State of Punjab and Union of India versus Virpal Chauhan Vesting of the power by an enabling provision may be constitutionally valid and yet “exercise of power” by the State in a given case may be arbitrary particularly if the State fails to identify and measure the backwardness and inadequacy keeping in mind the efficiency of service as required under Article 335 ii) Article 16(4) which protects the interests of certain sections of the society has to be balanced against Article 16(1) which protects the interests of every citizen of the entire society.
They should be harmonised because they are restatements of the principle of equality under Article 14 iii) Each post gets marked for the particular category of candidates to be appointed against it and any subsequent vacancy has to be filled by that category candidate iv) The appropriate Government has to apply the cadre strength as a unit in the operation of the roster in order to ascertain whether a given class group is adequately represented in the service.
The cadre strength as a unit also ensures that the upper ceiling limit of 50% is not violated.
Further roster has to be post specific and not vacancy based v) The State has to form its opinion on the quantifiable data regarding adequacy of representation.
Clauseof Article 16 is an enabling provision.
It gives freedom to the State to provide for reservation in matters of promotion.
Clause of Article 16 applies only to SCs and STs.
The said clause is carved