the mother­in­law of the deceased and is charged under Sections ‘Complainant’) who is the father of the deceased lodged an FIR dated Page | 1 Respondent­accused on 28­07­2017.
Soon thereafter the accused on the pretext of dowry demands.
His daughter died an unnatural allegations vis­a­vis Respondent­Accused alleging that she exploited to the deceased.
The deceased contacted the Complainant on have clandestinely administered poison to the deceased on 01.10.2017 which led to her unfortunate demise the following Page | 2 rejected on 21.12.2017.
Discontented the Respondent­Accused dismissed as withdrawn on 08032018.
Meanwhile on account of non­cooperation with the ongoing investigation the SHO of the concerned police station applied for and got issued arrest warrants against the Respondent­Accused from Judicial Magistrate.
However 04­2018 under Section 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 22.10.2019.
Thereafter taking advantage of this subsequent event and presenting the same as a material change in circumstance Respondent­Accused filed two petitions before the High Court seeking quashing of the order that declared her a ‘proclaimed offender’ and further sought the relief of Page | 3 It is noted explicitly that during the pendency of the above­ mentioned proceedings the High Court granted interim bail to the the investigation on 07.12.2020.
Thereafter vide the impugned order High Court allowed both the petitions and set aside the order her anticipatory bail.
These reliefs were primarily allowed on two grounds ­ firstly that the Respondent­Accused had joined the investigation and undertook to remain present at each date of trial proceedings secondly she was entitled to seek parity with the co­ The aggrieved Complainant is before us contending inter­alia the well­established principles which guide courts to exercise their discretion in the matter of granting anticipatory bail.
Learned State 8.
We have heard Learned Counsel for the parties at length and Page | 4 that ‘cogent and overwhelming reasons’ are present for the cancellation of bail.
Conventionally there can be supervening conducive to fair trial making it necessary to cancel the bail.
This Court in Daulat Ram and others vs. State of Haryana1 observed cogent and overwhelming circumstances are bail already granted.
Generally speaking the grounds for cancellation of bail broadly are: interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of administration of of justice or abuse of the concession granted to the on the basis of material placed on the record of the possibility of the accused absconding is yet another reason justifying the cancellation of bail a mechanical manner without considering whether any supervening circumstances have rendered it no These principles have been reiterated time and again more Page | 5 order granting bail legally untenable.
The gravity of the offence of criminal justice system.
This Court has repeatedly viewed that while granting bail especially anticipatory bail which is per se extraordinary in nature the possibility of the accused to influence prosecution witnesses threatening the family members of the 11.
Broadly speaking each case has its own unique factual scenario which holds the key for adjudication of bail matters including and protrudes our medieval social structure which still wails for In the case in hand the High Court seems to have been primarily swayed by the fact that the Respondent­Accused was ‘co­ Page | 6 operating’ with investigation.
This is however contrary to the record chose to join investigation only after securing interim bail from the as Magistrate’s Court till she got protection against arrest from the 13.
Even if there was any procedural irregularity in declaring the Respondent­Accused as an absconder that by itself was not a on record is prima facie satisfied that it is a case of false or over­ went on a wrong premise in granting anticipatory bail to the materially different.
It is indubitable that some of the allegations against all the family members are common but there are other Page | 7 absconding for more than two years without any justifiable reason should have weighed in mind while granting her any discretionary accused with whom she seeks parity.
We are thus of the considered favour of the Respondent­Accused.
It has to be borne in mind that the deceased met with a tragic end within three months of her or 304B IPC but the fact remains that a young life came to an abrupt end before realizing any of her dreams which were grimly shattered.
She died an unnatural death in her matrimonial home Investigating Agency therefore deserves a free hand to investigate the role of the Respondent­Accused if any in the unnatural and untimely 15.
Learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent­Accused may be the deceased.
According to him the entire version of the Appellant­ District Attorney has a legally trained mind.
We do not deem it Page | 8 In light of the above discussion and without expressing any views on merit we set aside the impugned order of the High Court dated 28012021 and direct the Respondent­Accused to surrender the merits of the case.
We also clarify that after the surrender the Respondent­Accused will be free to seek regular bail before the Page | 9