1.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order dated 16.09.2021 passed by the High Court of Andhra No331 of 2021 by which the High Court has condoned a appellant ­ original plaintiff respondent before the High by quashing and setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court by judgment and decree dated 01.02.2017.
That the original defendants respondents herein applied for the certified copy of the judgment and order on 04.02.2017.
The same was ready for delivery on the respondents herein original defendants preferred the the delay was also filed being IA No.1 of 2021.
By the 1011 days in preferring the Second Appeal which is the 3.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant herein original plaintiff has vehemently submitted that in the present case High Court has committed a grave error in explaining the huge delay of 1011 days in preferring the delay of 1011 days the High Court has also not observed in the application for condonation of delay there is no explanation whatsoever explaining the delay for the period 3.4 Making the above submissions and relying upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Ramlal Motilal and Chhotelal Vs. Rewa Coalfields Ltd 2 SCR 762 P.K Patil Vs. Executive Engineer Jalgaon Medium Project 2008) 17 SCC 448 and Basawaraj and Anr.
Vs. Special Land Acquisition Officer.
14 SCC 81 it is prayed to 4.
Shri Siddhartha Srivastava learned counsel appearing on 41 It is submitted that when the High Court has exercised interfered with by this Court in exercise of powers under 4.2 It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on the High Court if the delay is condoned in that case the appeal will be considered and decided on merits and submitted that in order to enable the respondents appellants before the High Court to submit the case on 5.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of 6.
At the outset it is noted that by the impugned order the High the Second Appeal by respondent Nos1 and 2 herein “In these circumstances when there are certain questions which require a debate in the second appeal it without inviting a decision on merits.
lf the delay is give an opportunity to the parties to canvass their respective case.
Since this question being of procedure assigned by the petitioner the delay in presenting this that valuable rights are accrued to her on account of payment of costs of Rs.2 000 ­ to the learned counsel for the respondent on or has not observed that any sufficient cause explaining the herein nor it suffers from want of due diligence.
However from the averments in the application for condonation of delay we are of the opinion that it was a case of a gross respondents herein appellants before the High Court in 62 We have gone through the averments in the application for for the period from 15.03.2017 till the Second Appeal was preferred in the year 2021.
In the application seeking suffering from health issues and she had fallen sick from 7.
At this stage a few decisions of this Court on delay in filing 71 In the case of Ramlal Motilal and Chhotelal it is In construing s. 5 it is relevant to bear in mind two the expiration of the period of limitation prescribed for making an appeal gives rise to a right in favour of the parties.
In other words when the period of limitation heartedly disturbed.
The other consideration which delay and admit the appeal.
This discretion has been J.L.R.
13 Mad.
269 "s. 5 gives the Court a discretion inaction nor want of bona fide is imputable to the 72 In the case of PK Ramachandranwhile refusing to condone the delay of 565 days it is observed that in the absence of reasonable satisfactory or even appropriate and the courts have no power to extend the period of limitation on equitable grounds.
It is further observed that while exercising discretion for condoning the delay the court 73 In the case of Pundlik Jalam Patilit is observed as “The laws of limitation are founded on public policy Statutes of limitation are sometimes described as based on the maxim “interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium” that is the interest of the State requires that there should be end to litigation but at the same time litigation is based on public policy fixing a lifespan for meant to see that the parties do not resort to dilatory in his Jurisprudence states that the laws come to the 74 In the case of Basawaraj it is observed and held by exercised judiciously based on facts and circumstances of each case.
It is further observed that the expression further observed that even though limitation may harshly for condoning the delay even by imposing conditions.
It is It is further observed that if courts start condoning delay 75 In the case of Pundlik Jalam Patilit is observed by this Court that the court cannot enquire into belated and stale claims on the ground of equity.
Delay defeats equity 8.
Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid Court for condonation of huge delay of 1011 days in preferring the Second Appeal.
The High Court is not at all delay.
The High Court has not exercised the discretion judiciously.
The reasoning given by the High Court while condoning huge delay of 1011 days is not germane delay of 1011 days in preferring the appeal by respondent Nos1 and 2 herein original defendants.
Impugned order In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the present Appeal is Allowed.
The impugned order dated 1011 days in preferring the Second Appeal by respondent Nos1 and 2 herein is hereby quashed and set aside Consequently Second Appeal No.331 of 2021 preferred by respondent Nos1 and 2 herein stands dismissed on the