20ITXA 208 03doc IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION INCOME TAX APPEAL NO. 208 OF 2003 formerly known as E MerckLtd Shiv Sagar Estate “A” Dr. Annie Besant Road Worli Mumbai 400 018 1.
Dy.
Commissioner of Income Tax Range 3 having its office at Aayakar Bhavan Maharshi Karve Marg Mumbai 400 020 2.
Union Of India through Ministry of Law Aayakar Bhavan Maharshi Karve Marg Mumbai 400 020 Ms Arati Vissanji a w Mr. S J Mehta for Appellant Mr. Suresh Kumar for Respondents CORAM : KR SHRIRAM MSKARNIK JJ DATED : 16th SEPTEMBER 2021 ORAL JUDGMENTby an order dated 8th July 1992 upheld the disallowance of Rs.7 06 590 by the Assessing Officer.
Petitioner challenged the order of CIT(A) before ITAT.
ITAT dismissed this issue in its order dated 1st January 2002 as not pressed for.
Petitioner filed a miscellaneous application relating to this disallowance of Rs.7 06 590 under Section 43B of the Act which also came to be rejected by ITAT vide its order dated 7th November 2002 without The fact that appellant was entitled to a set off or adjustment made on the sales tax amount is not disputed.
According to Mr. Suresh Kumar 20ITXA 208 03doc this amount of Rs.7 06 590 was never paid but was retained by appellant and even if any adjustment or set off is claimed there was no actual payment and unless there is actual payment Section 43B of the Act does not come into play and therefore appellant cannot claim any benefit thereof.
The only question to be decided therefore is whether the expression “actually paid by him” in Section 43B also included the amount which has been set off or adjusted By an order dated 7th October 2004 this court was pleased to admit the appeal as it was satisfied that the case involved a substantial question of law.
The court was pleased to frame the following two questions of law “1.
Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the conclusion of the Tribunal that the appellant had not pressed the ground relating to the disallownce of the sales tax set off Rs.7 06 590 under Section 43B for the assessment year 1988 89 is correct 2.
Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law the claim for sales tax set off of Rs.7 06 590 for the assessment year 1988 89 has been rightly disallowed under Section 43B of the Act ” As regards the first question Mr. Suresh Kumar submitted that since this point was not pressed for by appellant before the Tribunal the court should not even consider the second question.
We are at final hearing stage In question no.1 the court has recorded whether the conclusion of the Tribunal that appellant had not pressed the ground relating to the dis allowance under Section 43B of the Income Tax Actis correct Therefore the court was aware that it was respondents’ case that it was not pressed for.
Notwithstanding that the court 20ITXA 208 03doc still framed question no2.
Therefore we are inclined to answer question Section 43B reads as under “43B: Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act a deduction otherwise allowable under this Act in respect of a) “any sum payable by the assessee by way of tax duty cess or fee by whatever name called under any law for the time being in force or shall be allowedonly in computing the income referred to in section 28 of that previous year in which such sum is actually paid by him Section 43B of the Act therefore provides for deduction notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the Act in respect of any sum payable by the assessee by way of tax duty cess or fee by whatever name called under any law for the time being in force According to respondents it shall be allowed provided the sum is actually paid.
As noted earlier the amount of Rs.7 06 590 has been set off because appellant was entitled to set off this amount.
In our view the amount of Rs.7 06 590 which has since been liability due to be paid having been adjusted is a deemed payment amounting to actual payment within the meaning of Section 43B of the Act.
Since the law permits appellant to set off or adjust the sales tax already paid at the time of purchase of raw 20ITXA 208 03doc materials against the sales tax collected at the time of sale of finished goods the assessee has retained the sales tax amount which has already paid and claimed a set off.
In fact to the extent of the sales tax paid on the raw materials the assessee has actually been reimbursed to that extent by the sales tax collected at the sale of the finished product.
Therefore it is presumed to be a deemed payment within the time to be included in the relevant assessment.
Since the assessee was entitled to adjustment or set off the amount of Rs.7 06 590 is a liability adjusted deeming actual payment by legal fiction.
This adjustment by legal fiction is deemed to be an actual payment of the tax liability and is deductible under Section 43B of the Act We find support for this view in a judgment of the Calcutta High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. National Standard Duncan Ltd1 where the court held as under Section 43B of the 1961 Act provides for deduction notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the Act in respect ofof the Bombay Sales Tax Rules.
Therefore it is to be presumed to be a deemed payment within the time to be included in the relevant assessment.
The allowance is allowed in respect of the sales tax payable by the assessee which is qualified by the Explanation to Section 43B of the Income tax Act to mean to have been actually paid or incurred.
That the liability was incurred is not in dispute.
In this case it has not been actually paid but was sought to 1260 ITR 97 (CAL 20ITXA 208 03doc be adjusted or set off against payment of sales tax by the assessee on its purchase of raw material used for the product against which the sales tax has since been collected by the assessee on sale of the product concerned.
Now it is to be seen whether the set off or adjustment amounts to deemed payment.
In other words whether this deemed payment is a payment of the liability contemplated under Section 43B of the Income tax Act.
Rule 41D of the Bombay Sales Tax Rules allowed incentive by way of exemption of sales tax to the extent of payment of sales tax on purchase of raw material used for the product.
Rule 45(3 entitles the assessee to adjust or set off the amount in the return itself It is a provision parallel to Sections 199 and 245 of the Income tax Act creating a legal fiction.
Therefore this sum which is subject to adjustment or set off is a liability adjusted deeming actual payment by legal fiction.
The Sales Tax Rules have allowed an incentive by way of adjustment of sales tax or in other words the liability is being adjusted as actual payment.
Section 43B of the Income tax Act allows deduction on tax payable by the assessee.
When the assessee purchases raw materials it is liable to pay purchase tax on the purchase.
An equivalent of this amount is adjusted towards the liability on the sale of the product produced out of the raw materials purchased.
This adjustment by legal fiction is deemed to be an actual payment of the tax liability.
Admittedly this amount is a tax payable If it is a tax liability on being set off or adjusted deemed actual payment by legal fiction it is deductible under Section 43B of the Act Therefore in the facts and circumstances of the case the disallowance for sales tax set off of Rs.7 06 590 for Assessment Year 1988 89 was not correct.
Question no2 is answered accordingly Appeal disposed with no order as to costs MS KARNIK J KR SHRIRAM J