IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA FROM RESIDENTAIL OFFICE VIA VIDEO APPLICATION Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No154417 Nizamuddin Ahmad S o Late Israrul Haque R o Village Sidhwaniya P.S.
Kateya District Gopalganj ... Petitioner The State Of Bihar through the Secretary Food & Consumer Protection Department Bihar Patna The Divisional Commissioner Saran at Chapra.
The District Magistrate cum Collector Gopalganj.
The Sub Divisional Officer Hathuwa Gopalganj.
The Block Supply Officer Kateya Gopalganj.
... Respondents For the Petitioner s Mr. N K Agrawal Sr. Advocate Mr. Dhananjay Nath Tiwary Advocate Mr. Alok Ranjan AC to AAG 5 For the Opposite Party s CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJEEV RANJAN PRASAD Date : 19 10 2020 Heard Mr. N K Agrawal learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Alok Ranjan AC to AAG 5.
2.
This writ application has been preferred for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the order dated 25.09.2017 passed by the Divisional Commissioner Saran at Chaprain Revision Case No. 2416 by which the respondent no. 2 has been pleased to dismiss the revision application and affirmed the order passed by the District Magistrate cum Collector Gopalganjcalled upon the petitioner to show cause as to why the license of the public distribution shop of the petitioner be not cancelled.
The said show cause noticeSafikan Khatoon Salimun Nesha andPLJR 706.
12.
The State respondents have contested the writ application and it is their stand that the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner with the charges clearly mentioned in the same and the inquiry report of the Block Supply Officer was also enclosed with the show cause notice therefore the requirement of law and compliance with the principle of natural justice have been fulfilled.
It is not correct that the impugned decision has been taken on the opinion of the Block Supply Officer rather after looking into the report of the Block Supply Officer and finding that the show cause report of the petitioner was not only silent on the point of his closure of shops whenever the Block Supply Officer went for inspection but was also not providing the proof of supply of rations for the month of May 2015 to the consumers and on finding the same the impugned decision was taken to cancel the license 13.
It is further submitted that in the writ application a new plea has been taken saying that the Government had not increased the quota to meet the supply demand of the new Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 beneficiaries who were five in numbers and had given the ration cards only one month back but in his show cause the petitioner has taken a plea that they had not visited the shop of the petitioner for lifting the ration.
As regards the certificate of Mukhiya and Pramukh it is stated that the learned Appellate authority has rightly taken a view that the certificates are not saying that the petitioner had supplied the rations to the allegationists or that they had not gone to the shop of the petitioner to lift the ration in such circumstance no fault may be found with the impugned order As recorded in this Court’s order dated 12.10.2020 learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner had informed this Court that no rejoinder is needed on behalf of the petitioner in this case and the writ application may be disposed of on the basis of the materials available on the record 15.
Having heard learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner and learned AC to AAG 9 on behalf of the State this Court finds from the materials available on the record that the five allegationists in this case were having a valid ration cards in their name still they were not provided with the rations and kerosene oil by the dealer.
The show cause noticerefers the report of the Block Supply Officer as contained in Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 letter no. 60 dated 10072015 it is not the case of the petitioner that the copy of the said report was not made available to the petitioner.
In fact the petitioner has himself enclosed the copy of the same which was an enclosure to the memo no. 1039 dated 16.07.2015 Dealer has not provided even one month ration to the five allegationists and they were scolded when they went to the ii) The allegationists were charging more than the fixed iii) The Dealer has sold the ration of May 2015 in market by shop of the petitioner price of kerosene oil way of black marketing iv) The Block Supply Officer went to the shop of the petitioner on 9th June and 9th July 2015 for inspection and on both the dates the shop was found closed 16.
In his response to the show cause notice the petitioner has not at all denied the allegation that on 9th June and 9th July 2015 the shop was closed and no board was placed in front of the shop.
As regards non supply of rations to the five allegationists he took a plea that they had made false allegations against the petitioner and according to the petitioner Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 they had not come to the shop of the petitioner for lifting the 17.
In the writ application the petitioner has taken a completely different stand saying that because the Government had not increased the quota he had not given supply to the five allgationists who had got new ration cards.
The shifting of stand of the petitioner only shows his tentative mind and an attempt to come out of the allegation by taking one plea or the another.
As regards black marketing of the ration for the month of May 2015 the petitioner made a one line statement that he had not done black marketing but did not produce even a prima facie material showing supply of rations to the beneficiaries for the month of May 2015.
If the stand of the petitioner was bona fide he should have been in possession of the materials by way of documentary evidence to satisfy the licensing authority that the beneficiaries were supplied the rations and kerosene oil and in this regard the proof would have been produced but non production of the proof by the petitioner only shows that he was unable to satisfy the licensing authority on this point by producing any cogent evidence.
The two certificates of Mukhiya and Pramukh in the opinion of this Court cannot be given much weightage as those are more in the nature of certificate than that even a prima facie proof of fact that the petitioner had supplied the ration for the month of May 2015 to the consumers 18.
So far as the judgment of this Court in the case of Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 Brahmdeo Rai is concerned this Court has gone through the same and finds that the facts situation of the said case were completely different than that of the present case.
In the said case the learned co ordinate Bench of this Court had found from the materials on the record that the petitioner in the said case was not supplied with the copy of the inquiry report as well as the statement of the complainants consumers which were not appended as enclosures with the counter affidavit.
19.
In the present case the petitioner had been made available a copy of the report of the Block Supply Officer which contained the names of the allegationists and their grievance allegation against the petitioner.
There is no pleading in the writ application that the petitioner was not supplied with the copy of the said report rather this Court as shown hereinabove that the petitioner has made contradictory statements in the writ application if compared with his stand in the show cause submitted before the licensing authority.
The Court is thus satisfied that the principle of natural justice has been duly complied with in this case.
It is well settled by several judicial pronouncements some of which this Court will take note of hereinafter that the principles of natural justice cannot be put in a straight jacket formula and plea of infraction of rules of natural justice or it is not a valid proceedings cannot come to rescue of a person unless prejudice is caused to the aggrieved person.
In the case of State Bank of Patiala vs. S K Sharma Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 reported in3 SCC 364 the Division Bench of Hon’ble Apex Court distinguished between adequate opportunity and no opportunity at all and held in paragraph ‘28’ inter alia as under “28 .
There may indeed be any number of varying situations which it is not possible for anyone to foresee.
In our respectful opinion the principles emerging from the decided cases can be stated in the following terms in relation to the disciplinary orders and enquiries: a distinction ought to be made between violation of the principle of natural justice audi alteram partem as such and violation of the facet of the said principle.
In other words distinction is between "no notice" "no hearing" and "no adequate hearing" or to put it in different words "no opportunity" and "no adequate opportunity".
To illustrate take a case where the person is dismissed from service without hearing him altogetheror without affording him a due opportunity of cross examining a witnessit would be a case falling in the latter category violation of a facet of the said rule of natural justice in which case the validity of the order has to be tested on the touch stone of prejudice i.e. whether all in all the person concerned did nor did not have a fair hearing.
It would not be 11964 AC 40:2 ALL ER 66:2 WLR 935 4.
1980 AC 574 :2 ALL ER 440 :1 SCC 43 : 1984 SCC62 184 SCC 727 : 1993 SCC1184 :25 ATC 704 Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 correct in the light of the above decisions to say that for any and every violation of a facet of natural justice or of a rule incorporating such facet the order passed is altogether void and ought to be set aside without further enquiry.
In our opinion the approach and test adopted in B Karunakar18 should govern all cases where the complaint is not that there was no hearingbut one of not affording a proper hearingor of violation of a procedural rule or requirement governing the enquiry the complaint should be examined on the touchstone of prejudice as aforesaid.” 20.
It is well settled that principle of natural justice cannot be put in a straight jacket formula and the applicability of it will depend upon the facts of the case.
The public distribution shop system caters the need of Below Poverty Linefamilies and vulnerable above Poverty Linefamilies it is meant for those who need subsidized food articles and denial of the rations kerosene to needy beneficiaries would defeat the very object of total food security and elimination of hunger.
Thus the Court is of the view that in the given facts and circumstance if the licensing authority has cancelled the license of the petitioner no fault may be found with the same.
The appellate authority has rightly appreciated the materials present on the record and upheld the order of the licensing authority There being a concurrent finding and no prima facie material to make out a case of violation of principles of natural justice the revisional authority has also rightly refused to interfere with the appellate order.
Now the Bihar Targetted PDSOrder 2016 has come Patna High Court CWJC No154417 dt.19 10 2020 into effect and the Court has been informed that the shop is still un allotted if it is so it will be open for the competent authority to proceed with the allotment under the provisions of the Bihar Targetted PDSOrder 2016.
21.
This writ application stands dismissed.
Rajeev Ranjan Prasad J Note: The ordersheet duly signed has been attached with the record.
However in view of the present arrangements during Pandemic period all concerned shall act on the basis of the copy of the order uploaded on the High Court website under the heading ‘Judicial Orders Passed During The Pandemic Period’