Appeal No. 43221 BEFORE THE APPELLATE AUTHORITY Under the Right to Information Act 2005) SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA Appeal No. 43221 Bharat Dhanji Pindoria CPIO SEBI Mumbai The appellant had filed an application dated May 18 2021under the Right to Information Act 2005 RM Lodha Committee.
The respondent had provided the link for accessing the details of the Committee for further communication.
The appellant was also advised to refer the public notice dated July 31 2020 for status of refund.
It was also informed that vide public notice dated October 15 2020 the Committee had provided the investors a facility to view the status of deficiency in their claim applications and make good those deficiencies for investors applicants with claims upto Rs. 7 000 .
Further the respondent had provided links for accessing the said public notices.
Appeal No. 43221 4.
Ground of appeal The appellant has submitted the appeal on the ground that he is not satisfied with the response provided by the respondent.
I have perused the application and I find no reason to disbelieve the said observation of the respondent that the information sought is not available with SEBI.
It is understood that the responsibility of disposal of the properties and repayment to investors is entrusted with the PACL Committee which has been constituted pursuant to the order dated February 2 2016 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
I also note that the refund process is being handled by the said Committee.
Upon a consideration of the aforesaid I find no deficiency in the respondent’s response to the instant query of the appellant’s Further with respect to the appellant’s application seeking reason for constitution of the PACL Committee reason for not specifying the duration of months for refund and the name of the scrutinizing officer who had verified the policy and reason for not replying to mails I am of the opinion that the same is in the nature of eliciting a clarification or opinion from the respondent.
It is understood that the respondent is not supposed to create information or to interpret information or to furnish clarification to the appellant under the ambit of the RTI Act.
I find that the said queries cannot be construed as seeking ‘information’ as defined under section 2of the RTI Act.
Consequently the respondent did not have an obligation to provide such clarification under the RTI Act.
In this context reference is made to the mater of Vineet Pandey vs. CPIO United India Insurance Company Limitedwherein similar observations were made by the Hon’ble CIC.
Further in the matter of Shri Shantaram Walavalkar vs. CPIO SEBI I note that the Hon’ble CIC held: “... we would also like to observe that under the Right to InformationAct the citizen has the responsibility to specify the exact information he wants he is not supposed to seek any opinion or comments or clarifications or interpretations from the CPIO...”.
Further it is understood that the details of PACL Status Report FAQs Press Releases and Public Notices etc. are available on SEBI website at : https: www.sebi.gov.in PACL.html and details of property of PACL Ltd are available at https: www.auctionpacl.com and www.sebipaclproperties.com.
Further there is a dedicated website with regard to PACL refund https: sebicommitteepaclrefund.com.
Appeal No. 43221 I find that the respondent has adequately guided the appellant to access the contact details of the Committee.
In addition to the same the email address of the Committee is mentioned below E mail address: nodalofficerpacl@sebi.gov.in.
In view of the above observations I find that there is no need to interfere with the decision of the respondent.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Place: Mumbai Date: July 15 2021 AMARJEET SINGH APPELLATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE RTI ACT SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA