IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.97819 Chandani Kumari female aged about 33 years Daughter of Sri Shambhu Jha Resident of Village Jhakhara P.O.
Kadarchak P.S.
Shambhuganj District Banka ... Petitioner s The State of Bihar through the Principal Secretary Education Department Government of Bihar Patna The Principal Secretary Education Department Government of Bihar Bihar Patna The Director Primary Education Education Department Government of The District Magistrate cum Collector Munger District Munger The District Education Officer Munger District Munger The District Programme Officer Establishment Munger District Munger The Block Development Officer cum Secretary Block Teacher Employment Unit Tarapur Block Tarapur District Munger The Block Education Officer Tarapur District Munger The Bihar School Examination Board Patna through its Secretary 10.
The Chairman the Bihar School Examination Board Patna 11.
The Secretary the Bihar School Examination Board Patna 12.
The Vigilance Department through the Additional Chief Secretary Department of Vigilance Patna Bihar ... Respondent s For the Petitioner s Mr.
Prince Kumar Mishra Adv For the State Mr.
Ran Vijay Prasad Singh AC to GA XII For the Vigilance Mr. Anjani Kumar Sr Adv Ms. Archana Palkar Khopde Adv Mr. Arvind Kumar Adv Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 For the BSEB Mr. Girijesh Kumar Adv CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ASHUTOSH KUMAR Date : 03 01 2022 Heard Mr.
Prince Kumar Mishra the learned Advocate for the petitioner and Mr.
Ran Vijay Prasad Singh the learned AC to GA XII for the State.
The Vigilance Department is represented by Mr. Anjani Kumar the learned Senior Advocate assisted by Ms. Archana Palkar Khopde and Mr. Arvind Kumar the learned Advocates.
Mr. Girijesh Kumar the learned Advocate has appeared on behalf of the Bihar School Examination Board 2.
The petitioner has approached this Court for a direction to the respondents to consider her certificate of Teacher Eligibility Test as valid and genuine as the same has been issued by the Bihar School Examination Board Patna after the petitioner had passed the TET Examination 2011 successfully and further for a direction to the respondents to pay the arrears of the salary since November 2018 till date as the same is not being paid to her on the pretext of Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 an investigation pending against her 3.
The charge against the petitioner is of having obtained employment on the basis of forged and fabricated TET certificate 4.
The background to this litigation is that in one of the Public Interest Litigationcases it was found that undeserving persons with forged degrees had obtained employment.
Under the orders of this Court an enquiry was instituted with the mandate to find out and identify such teachers who had used the forged academic qualification degrees for obtaining such appointment.
Consequently an F.I.R. was lodged in which the petitioner has also been arraigned as one of the accused person 5.
So far as the charge against the petitioner is concerned it is limited to the extent that she is said to have passed in Paper II of the TET examination even when she was shown to have failed in Paper I 6.
It has been argued on behalf of the petitioner that because of her having failed in Paper I it was presumed that her passing in Paper II was anomalous and it Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 hinted at the certificate being forged for the reason that anybody who has failed in the first paper would not be permitted to appear in the second paper or even if he she is permitted to appear in the second paper the result would not be published unless both the papers are cleared 7.
In order to dispel this confusion the counsel for the petitioner has drawn the attention of this Court to the entire scheme of the TET examination which inter alia provides that for persons desirous of being appointed as teachers for Class VI to VIII they are required to pass in Paper I only whereas aspirants for being appointed as teachers in Class I to V would be required to pass in Paper II.
Any candidate passing in Paper I and Paper II both would have the eligibility to apply for teachers for all the classes.
This necessarily implies that if the petitioner has passed in Paper II she is eligible to be appointed as teachers for Class VI to VIII 8.
During the course of the enquiry conducted by the local police even when the F.I.R. was lodged by the Vigilance no definite material could be collected against the Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 petitioner to indicate or substantiate the charge of the petitioners having obtained employment on a forged degree However while going through the investigation reports it came to light that two of the officers one from the Vigilance Department and the other from the General Police Department were reckless in making investigations and had signed the reports in a mechanical manner without even verifying the scheme of the examination of the TET 9.
On a complaint made by the petitioner and others before the Director General of Police with respect to such faulty investigation an enquiry was set up and before such enquiry committee the aforesaid two erring police officials admitted of having signed such reports mechanically without verifying the correctness of the allegation or of the defense of the petitioner 10.
At that stage the Court found it expedient to issue notice the Vigilance Department to inform the Court about the action taken against such irresponsible investigators for their incompetence and mindlessness had caused immense damage to the petitioner and her likes Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 11.
Mr. Anjani Kumar the learned Senior Advocate representing the Vigilance Department has intimated this Court by way of counter affidavit that the conduct of the Vigilance Officer was found to be absolutely unpardonable and therefore he was subjected to a departmental proceeding and has also been given a punishment of one black mark 12.
The fact of the matter now is that the petitioner has passed in Paper II examination of the TET 13.
The BSEB in its report has also admitted that in their data base the petitioner is shown to have passed in Paper II examination thereby making her eligible for being appointed as a teacher.
The petitioner after her appointment had been serving in the school where she was 14.
The present litigation has come up only on the stoppage of the salary of the petitioner since November 2018 till date on the pretext of the investigation against her being pending 15.
In this fact scenario therefore this Court Patna High Court CWJC No.97819 dt.03 01 2022 deems it appropriate to direct that in case a representation is filed by the petitioner before the Director Primary Education Department of Education Govt. of Bihar Patna along with a copy of this order within a period of three weeks the concerned respondent shall look into the matter and shall pass necessary orders accordingly resuming the salary of the petitioner which has been stopped since November 2018 only on the ground of pendency of the investigating process The aforesaid decision of the concerned respondent shall but be subject to the final outcome of the investigation of the case.
In case the petitioner is found to be guilty necessary consequences would follow.
The police is also directed to conclude the investigation at the earliest With the aforesaid observation direction the writ petition stands disposed off.
Ashutosh Kumar J Praveen II