This appeal is directed against the judgment dated Chandigarh in CRA­S­307­SB of 2002.
By the said judgment Penal Code was examined as PW1 and the mother of the deceased was examined as PW8 while another witness Bidhi Chand was appellant No1.
The evidence tendered by the said witnesses accepted by both the courts.
In that background the evidence to organo phosphorous poisoning.
Hence as noted the death was unnatural and there was demand for dowry.
In those circumstances the further evidence of PW1 and PW8 the secure fulfilment of the said demand but the parents being It was also stated by them that during such visit she had mentioned about the ill­treatment meted out to her.
But the Considering the fact that on all these aspects of the the High Court has reappreciated the same in its correct perspective to the extent of both the courts holding the appellant No1 guilty convicting him and to whether the conviction and sentence handed down to the appellant No.2 is justified or not The learned counsel for the appellant in that regard has strenuously No.2 namely the mother­in­law of the deceased had been cruelty.
As noted from the statement recorded under Section rightly noted by the trial court it had come in the evidence through the deposition of Bittu that he and appellant No1 had taken the deceased to Dr. Kalsi and thereafter to Shri Guru Ram Dass Hospital Amritsar though the version given by the said witness was because she was pregnant.
However it has been established that such shifting to poisonous substance being consumed.
Therefore though the presence of the appellant No1(Kuljit Singh) was established being inflicted by her pursuant to such demand.
From the made that the husband and in­laws of the deceased had mother had done so without specifying their roles.
However as appellant No1 guilty but same would be we are of the opinion that the appellant No.2 is For the reasons stated above the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant No1 is affirmed while the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant No.2 is set aside.
The judgment dated 08012002 in Sessions Case No74 1999 and the judgment The appellant No1 who is on bail shall 11.
Pending applications if any shall stand disposed of