RS Mongia, J - The proposition of law as to whether the continuous service rendered by an officer on officiating basis against a post meant for a direct recruit can be counted for the purpose of seniority when that Officer is promoted to the post in the promote quota, has already been answered by the Apex Court in case AK Subraman and ors. v. Union of India and ors., 1975(1) S.L.R.
380, that such a period of officiation cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority.
2.
The question that arises in the present case is that while applying the above-mentioned principle of law, whether on facts Jagdish Singh Gill respondent was junior or senior to Karnail Singh writ-petitioner as Divisional Soil Conservation Officer in the Agriculture Department of the State of Punjab.
The learned Single Judge vide his judgment dated 29th March, 1985, held that Jagdish Singh Gill was senior to Karnail Singh Dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, Karnail Singh, writ-petitioner has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
3.
The facts of the case are that Karnail Singh writ-petitioner (now appellant) joined service in the Agriculture Department of the State of Punjab on 17th January, 1958, as Agricultural Inspector, a Class III post in the Punjab Agricultural Service.
On his selection as a direct recruit by the Punjab Public Service Commission (hereinafter called the Commission), he was appointed as an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer (a Class-II post) on 21st September, 1964, and was confirmed as such with effect from 11th June, 1968.
4.
Jagdish Singh Gill, respondent, was directly recruited as Assistant Soil Conservation Officer on 22nd November, 1962, and was confirmed as such with effect from 8th June, 1968.
THe next higher post in the hierarchy is the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer, Class I (in brief DSCO).
In 1967, two posts of DSCO were created.
One Y.P Sood, who was the senior-most Assistant Soil Conservation Officer in the department, was appointed as DSCO against one of these posts on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement on 20th September, 1967.
Against the other post of the DSCO, respondent Jagdish Singh Gill was appointed on ad hoc basis as stop-gap arrangement on 15th December, 1967.
Prior to 19th August, 1968, the posts of DSCOs were treated to be Research Posts and according to the Rules governing these posts the appointments to these posts were made by direct recruitment only.
On 19th August, 1968, the Punjab Government took a policy decision and directed that the posts of DSCOs to be considered as Specialised Administrative posts and further that the posts should be filled by promotion as well as by direct recruitment in the ratio of 50:50.
The conditions of educational qualifications and experience for the said posts were also prescribed vide above mentioned decision dated 19th August, 1968 (Annexure P-1 to the writ petition).
5.
On 28th November, 1968, (vide Annexure P-2), the State of Punjab sent a requisition to the Commission that it had been decided to fill the two vacant posts of DSCOs in the Department by direct recruitment and promotion on 50:50 basis and that Sarvshri Yashpal Sood, Mohinder Singh Sujapuri and Jagdish Singh Gill possessed the requisite qualifications for the post.
On the basis of seniority-cum-merit, the Government had selected Yashpal Sood for promotion to the post and the approval of the Commission was sought regarding the promotion of Yashpal Sood.
It was further mentioned in the requisition that the second post of DSCO was to be filled by direct recruitment, and, therefore, suitable candidate be selected and recommended.
It was also mentioned that Yashpal Sood and Jagdish Singh Gill were officiating as DSCOs in an ad hoc stop-gap arrangement purely on temporary basis, from 1st September, 1967 and 15th December, 1967 and concurrence was sought for allowing them to continue till the promotion of Yashpal Sood was approved and a direct recruit DSCO recommended by the Commission.
6.
In pursuance of the requisition mentioned above, the post of DSCO was advertised by the Commission to be filled in by direct recruitment.
The last date for the receipt of application was 28th February, 1969 and the interviews were fixed for 29th May, 1969.
Respondent Jagdish Singh Gill filed C.W.P.
No. 1276 of 1969, challenging the filling up of the post of DSCO by direct recruitment and inter alia prayed that the post should be filled in by promotion.
On 28th May, 1969, this Court granted stay against the filling of the post of DSCO by direct recruitment.
The result was that Jagdish Singh Gill kept on officiating against the post of DSCO, which was required to be filled by direct recruitment.
7.
The third post of DSCO was created in 1968-69, the Government addressed a communication dated 21st August, 1969 (Annexure P-3), to the Commission on the subject of promotion to the post of DSCO, it was mentioned in the letter that as per the policy decision of the Government, the newly created post of DSCO (with the designation of Project Officer) fell in the promotion quota.
The names of Jagdish Singh Gill, Gurjit Singh Sahota and Mehtab Singh were under consideration for filling of the post and since Jagdish Singh Gill possessed the requisite qualifications and experience and his character roll was also good, the Government intended to promote him to the said post on regular basis, and the approval for that purpose was sought from the Commission.
8.
It will be relevant to mention here that since third post of DSCO had become available and the filling up of the post by the direct recruitment had been stayed by this court on 28th May, 1969 in the writ petition filed by Jagdish Singh Gill, the appellant Karnail Singh was appointed on ad hoc basis as DSCO with effect from 17th July, 1969.
9.
Vide order dated 6th January, 1971 (Annexure R 2/3 with the written statement of respondent No. 2), Punjab Government declared in consultation with the Commission that Jagdish Singh Gill was suitable for promotion to the post of DSCO with effect from the date he took over charge of that post.
In other words, the ad hoc promotion of Jagdish Singh Gill was regularised.
On his appointment by way of promotion on regular basis, Jagdish Singh Gill got his writ petition (CWP No. 1276 of 1969) dismissed on 19.1.1971 and the stay order also stood vacated on that date.
The Commission held interview on 8th March, 1971, and selected Karnail Singh appellant for being appointed as DSCO by way of direct recruitment.
He was so appointed on regular basis on 4th June, 1971.
10.
The Punjab Government promulgated the Punjab Soil Conservation and Engineering Service (Class I) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called the 1978 Rules), which came into force with effect from 3rd March, 1978.
Previous to the 1978 rules, the post of DSCO was governed by the Rules known as the Punjab Agricultural Class I Service Rules, 1947 (hereinafter called the 1947 Rules).
With the enforcement of 1978 Rules, the 1947 Rules ceased to apply to the post of DSCO.
It may be mentioned that under the 1947 Rules, the seniority inter se was determined from the date of confirmation, whereas under the 1978 Rules it is on the basis of the length of service on a post.
It may further be mentioned that neither Karnail Singh appellant nor Jagdish Gill were confirmed as DSCOs when the present controversy arose regarding their inter se seniority.
11.
The Chief Conservator of Soils framed a tentative seniority list in which Jagdish Singh Gill was shown senior to the writ petitioner Karnail Singh as DSCO.
A representation made by Karnail Singh in treating Jagdish Singh Gill as senior to the petitioner, was rejected.
Jagdish Singh Gill was promoted to the next higher rank of Conservator of Soil.
Aggrieved by the above, Karnail Singh had filed a writ petition, which was dismissed by the learned Single Judge.
12.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there is no denying the fact that Jagdish Singh Gill, respondent, started officiating against the post of DSCO on 15th December, 1967.
Admittedly at that time the post of DSCO has to be filled in only by way of direct recruitment.
Even with effect from 19th August, 1968, when the posts of DSCOs were declared by the Government to be Specialised Administrative posts, only one of the two posts of DSCOs were meant for a promottee and th other had to be filed in by direct recruitment.
The post which was meant to be filled by promotion was filled in by promoting Yashpal Sood and respondent Jagdish Singh Gill kept on officiating against the post of a direct recruit.
It is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that prior to regular promotion of respondent Jagdish Singh Gill to the post of DSCO any officiating period by Jagdish Singh Gill against the post of DSCO which was meant to be filled by direct recruitment, cannot be taken into consideration for reckoning his length of service for determining his seniority.
For this purpose, he referred to the Supreme Court judgment in AK Subraman's case (supra).
In the said case, the Supreme Court after considering the previous judgments in Bishan Sarup Gupta v. Union of India and ors., 1973(3) S.C.C.
1: Mervyn Coutinho and ors. v. Collector of Customs, Bombay and ors., 1966(3) S.C.R. 600; and Govind Dettatray Kelkar and ors. v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and ors., 1967(2) S.C.R. 29, their Lordship laid down principles 1 and 6, which are relevant for the purpose of this case, are produced below :-  (1) When Assistant Engineer (Class II) are initially appointed in a regular manner in accordance with the rules of officiate as Executive Engineers, their seniority in service in Grade I will count from the date of their initial officiating appointment in Class I provided their initial officiating appointment as Executive Engineers was within their quota.
(6) If Assistant Engineers are required as executive Engineers in excess of their quota in a particular year they will be pushed down to later year for absorption when due within their quota."
13.
In view of the above mentioned judgments, there is no doubt that the officiating period of Jagdish Singh Gill against the post of DSCO which was required to be filled in by direct recruitment, cannot be taken into consideration for determining his length of service.
Then are crucial question that arises is when did a post of DSCO in the promotion quota became available for Jagdish Singh Gill.
As stated in paragraph above, a third post of DSCO had become available in the year 1968-69.
Since the pleadings on this point as to the exact date of the availability/creation of the third post of DSCO, were not very clear, the learned Single Judge had sent for the file to see when the third post of DSCO (designagted as Project Officer) was created.
After perusing the filed the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that from the records it was clear that the third post of DSCO was created with effect from 25th November, 1968.
No argument has been addressed that this finding regarding the availability of the third post of DSCO with effect from 25th November, 1968, is wrong in any manner.
That being so, the third post of DSCO, which was in the promotion quota having become available from 25th November, 1968, and respondent No. 2 officiating against a post prior to that date and later on having been regularly promoted with effect from the date he took over as DSCO, his date of appointment as DSCO by promotion for the purpose of seniority would be taken as 25th November, 1968.
The appellant Karnail Singh having started officiating against the post of DSCO with effect from 17th July, 1969 (to which post he was regularly appointed as a direct recruit on 4th June, 1971), has a lesser length of service as DSCO as compared to Jagdish Singh Gill.
In accordance with the 1978 Rules, it is the length of service which determines the seniority and, consequently, Jagdish Singh Gill having longer length of service with effect from 25th November, 1968 as compared to Karnail Singh appellant with effect from 17th July, 1969, has rightly been held to be senior to Karnail Singh appellant as DSCO and his further promotion as Soil Conservation Officer, cannot be questioned.
14.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that he should not suffer because the interview for direct recruitment was stayed by this Court vide order dated 28th May, 1969, on the writ petition filed by Jagdish Singh Gill.
Had he interviews not been stayed, he would have been appointed earlier and in fact his direct recruitment should date back to the date of requisition for the post which was sent by the Government on 28th November, 1968.
Though therm does not seem to be any force in this argument, but even if it is conceded for the sake of argument that the appellant had to be given the date of appointment as the date of interview or even the date of requisition, both these dates are later in time than 25th November, 1968, the date when a post in promotion quota had become available for respondent Jagdish Singh Gill.
Therefore, the appellant cannot rank senior to Jagdish Singh Gill.
15.
It may be noticed here that earlier when the writ petition of Karnail Singh had come up for motion hearing, the Motion Bench relying upon the decision of full bench of this Court in NSRao v. State of Haryana and ors., 1978(1) S.L.R.
294, had dismissed the writ petition in limine on 24th October, 1978, Karnail Singh had went up in appeal to the Supreme Court and the case was remanded to this Court for decision in light of the judgment in BS Yadav and ors. v. State of Haryana and ors., 1981 S.L.R.
1024.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that out of the three posts of DSCOs, the first was meant for promotee, the second for direct recruitment and the third again for promotee.
The learned counsel went on to contend that the rotation should be read into the rule of seniority and while fixing the seniority, first the promote should be placed, then a direct recruit and then a promotee should be placed, then a direct recruit and than a promotee and so on irrespective of their dates appointments.
There is no force in this argument.
In BS Yadav's case (supra), it has been held that the moment a post in the quota of direct recruit or promotee is available the person has a right to be appointed/confirmed against the said post with their quota and it is only to be seen whether the appointment is within the quota or not.
One category is not to wait for the other category and for that purpose the rotation is not be read in the rule of seniority.
That being so, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that he being a direct recruit should have been kept above then Jagdish Singh Gill, who was a promotee on the third post, has no force.
According to the statutory rules, the length of service on the post is to determine the seniority.
16.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no force in this appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.