Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner was promoted as Lecturer in Punjabi by the respondents on 682001.
After his employment with the Government, the petitioner was desirous of doing Post Graduation while he was teaching at Government High School, Rani Majra, District Patiala.
He completed his Post Graduation.
After completion of his studies, he reported to respondent No. 2 for the selection of the station.
Vide order dated 1482001 the petitioner was promoted as Lecturer and he was required to file an affidavit that he would not claim promotion as Head Master and for endorsement by the concerned authorities.
The endorsement was made and the petitioner was permitted to join the institution allotted to him upon his promotion.
The petitioner submitted his joining report.
However, the order of promotion was recalled by the respondents vide order dated 2192001 on the ground that he did not seek approval for appearing in the examination of MA in Punjabi.
The petitioner informed the respondents that he had sought permission and ex-post-facto permission was granted to him and as such he should not be reverted.
The petitioner submitted the representation dated 11.10.2001, Annexure P-8 to the writ petition, but of no consequence.
Thus, the petitioner has no other alternative except to file the present writ petition.
2.
According to the petitioner, the impugned order withdrawing his promotion is arbitrary, unconstitutional and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, the facts are not disputed and it is stated that the promotion order of the petitioner (Annexure P-6 to the writ petition) was made inadvertently and has been withdrawn because the petitioner did not produce the departmental permission to pass MA in Punjabi.
According to the official respondents, even the Head Master concerned had no jurisdiction to grant ex-post-facto permission and the Head Master concerned has been asked to explain his position as to how he issued a certificate dated 1561997 particularly when the petitioner was not entitled to promotion.
It is also stated that the ex-post-facto sanction was not attached by the petitioner when he sent his case for promotion.
4.
From the above narrated pleading of the parties, it is clear that the question in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India which requires determination by this Court is a very limited one.
Whether the petitioner was given permission ex-post-facto for doing his MA in Punjabi as per rules by the competent authority ?
Further, whether the petitioner had made any mis-representation at the time when he was promoted to the post of Lecturer ?
Para 4 of the writ petition reads as under :-  "That the petitioner requested Respondent No. 4 - Headmaster, Govt, High School, Rani Majra, District Patiala to accord him the ex-post-facto permission regarding passing MA (Punjabi) so that he could submit it to Respondent No. 2 as per the condition.
The respondent No. 4 issued ex-post facto permission on 1561997 in response to the directions given by the respondent No. 2 dated 261997.
The copy of ex-post-facto permission dated 1561997 in Punjabi and its true translation in English is annexed as Annexure P-2."
In their written statement, paragraph 4 of the writ petition has replied by the respondents as under :-  "Denied being wrong.
The petitioner was not eligible for the post of Lecturer Punjabi.
Regarding ex-post-facto sanction dated 1561997, the departmental action has already been initiated against the Headmaster."
5.
The respondents, in fact, have clearly admitted that the ex-post-facto sanction was granted in favour of the petitioner for completing his MA in Punjabi.
Annexure P-2, the letter dated 1561997 which was issued by the Headmaster, Government High School, Rani Majra, District Patiala, reads as under :-  Annexure P-2  "Permission for passing MA Examination  It is certified that Shri LD Kailash, Science Master, who has been working in this Institution, he has passed MA Punjabi Part-I 1981-82 under Roll No. 32 obtaining 194/400 marks and MA Punjabi Part-II in 1982-83 under Roll No. 7176 obtaining 178/400 marks.
He has passed MA Punjabi from the Punjabi University, Patiala as per letter of the Director Public Instructions(S), Punjab No. 11/11-96 S.E.I (3,5) dated 261997, Shri LD Kailash is given ex-post-facto permission for passing MA Punjabi.
Sd/-  Headmaster, Governmental High School Rani Majra (Patiala)."
It is not disputed before us that in the letter of the Director Public Instructions dated 261997, the Headmaster was duly competent and authorised to issue ex-post-facto permission on behalf of the Government.
Furthermore, the letter dated 261997, vide which the Graduate Master/Mistresses for promotion to Lecturer were directed to appear for choice of station, itself contained a specific note that the Teachers who have passed MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
examination without seeking permission from the Government, should get ex-post-facto sanction from the Head of the Institution.
In furtherance to these two documents, the Headmaster being head of the Institution, had granted ex-post-facto sanction in favour of the petitioner and consequently, was given promotion and permitted to join as Lecturer on 1682001 vide Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
6.
The impugned order Annexure P-6 is factually incorrect and in fact, is contrary to the afore-noticed instructions issued by the Government.
This impugned order is also liable to the set aside as no opportunity was granted to the petitioner to show cause before the order of reversion/cancellation of his promotion was passed by the Director Public Instructions, Punjab.
The order obviously vests the petitioner with civil consequences and reduces him in rank and scale.
It was, thus, necessary for the respondent atleast to serve a show cause notice upon the petitioner.
The order suffers from the element of non-application of mind, arbitrariness, offends the principles of natural justice and is contrary in definite terms to the instructions and authority issued by the Government in that regard.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, quash the impugned order passed by the respondents Annexure P-6 dated 2192001.
The petitioner would be entitled to all consequential reliefs.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.