SP Srivastava, J - While the petitioner was holding the post of Constable 'Nagrik Police' and posted at police station Barsathi, he was sent on duty for maintaining peace and order in a village during Holi festival.
He left for discharging his duty alongwith another Constable at 21.15 P.M. on 2131989, but without any prior permission left his companion at about 8 AM next day i.e. 2231989 and did not attend to his duties.
He remained absent without permission as allegedly he was called to his house to see his wife who was said to be in a critical state and reported back to his duty at police station Barsathi on 26.3.1989 at 12.30 P.M. in an injured condition as he had fallen down from a stair case at his house.
The Station Officer sent him for medical treatment but without any information he remained absent for a period of 57 days from 2831989 which resulted in subjecting him to the disciplinary proceedings which have culminated in an order dated 12111990 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur removing him from service which order has been affirmed by the Director General of Police, Varanasi Division, the Appellate Authority.
2.
From a perusal of the order passed by the punishing authority it transpires that the unauthorised absence of the petitioner for 57 days with effect from 831989 was condoned by sanctioning the petitioner leave for that period.
Two charges had been levelled against the petitioner; that first charge was about his absence from his duty from 8 AM on 2331989 to 12.30 P.M. on 26.3.1989 and the second charge was about his absence from duty for a period of 57 days with effect from 2831989.
With the sanctioning of the leave to the petitioner for the period of 57 days with effect from 28.8.1989 his unauthorised absence during the said period stood regularised and the second charge levelled against him lost all its significance.
It is to be noted in this connection that once leave is granted to a public servant in respect of a particular period it must be considered that he is permitted to absent himself from the duty for that period.
In such a case, it is not permissible or open to the employer or any other authority to proceed against the public servant for absenting from the duty for the same period and punish him for such lapse inasmuch as the absence in such a case ceases to remain unauthorised.
Since the very purpose of granting the leave is to regularise the petitioner's absence, in this view of the matter the punishing authority passed the impugned order of punishment solely on the findings regarding the first charge which was held to be proved.
The punishing authority appears to have taken the view that since the petitioner had fled away from duty at about 8 A.M on 23.8.1989 leaving his companion all alone, though he had been deputed to see that the peace and order is maintained in the village during the holi festival.
This act of his, clearly amounted to dereliction of duty unbecoming of a police officer and further clearly amounted to an act of indiscipline which necessitated his removal from service.
The punishing authority has also noticed that the petitioner has in his statement made before him, which was recorded on 1381990, expressed remorse realising his fault.
The appellate authority has agreed with the conclusion of the punishing authority and has maintained the award of punishment holding that the misconduct in question clearly amounted to dereliction of duty and carelessness which furnished sufficient ground for the removal of the petitioner from the police force.
3.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid orders, the petitioner has now approached this Court for redress.
4.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the petitioner and the learned Standing Counsel, representing the respondents and have carefully perused the impugned orders.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has pressed only one ground in support of this writ petition.
He has asserted that on the findings recorded by the respondent authority on the first charge levelled against the petitioner, there could be no justification for awarding the extreme penalty of removal from service.
It has been urged by him that the impugned punishment awarded to the petitioner is too harsh and is clearly disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct and stands vitiated on account of arbitrariness and is thus violative of the principle enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It has further been asserted that ex-facie the impugned punishment has been awarded in utter disregard of the procedural safeguards contemplated under the relevant Police Regulations.
6.
The learned Standing Counsel on the other hand has urged that the impugned punishment has been awarded after completing the enquiry against the petitioner in accordance with the provisions contained in the Police Regulations after affording full opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and considering the fact that the very nature of the employment and service of a police officer is such that any grave laches or misconduct on his part renders him unfit for proper discharge of his duties, what should be the punishment for such negligence or indiscipline is a matter, which has to be decided by the competent authority itself and in the proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is not open to assess the quantum of punishment which, in a particular case, should be awarded to delinquent servant.
The learned Standing Counsel has, in support of his submission heavily relied upon a Full Bench decision of Orissa High Court in the case of Krishna Chandra Pallia v. Union of India & another, reported in A.I.R. 1992 Orissa page 261.
7.
It is not disputed that the petitioner's services are governed by the provisions contained in Police Act, 1861 and the Police Regulations framed thereunder as applicable in the State of UP Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 provides as follows :  "7.
Appointment, dismissal, etc., of inferior officers subject to the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution and to such rules as the State  Government may from time to time make under this Act, the Inspector- General, Deputy Inspectors General, Assistant Inspectors-General and District Superintendents of Police may at any time, dismiss, suspend or reduce any police officer of the subordinate ranks whom they shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty or unfit for the same;  or may award any one or more of the following punishments to any police officer of the subordinate ranks who shall discharge his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by any act of his own shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely  (a) fine to any amount not exceeding one month's pay;  (b) confinement to quarters for a term not exceeding fifteen days, with or without punishment drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;  (c) deprivation of good conduct pay;  (d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument."
8.
A perusal of the above will indicate that the Inspector General, Deputy Inspectors-General, Assistant Inspectors-General and District Superintendents of Police may at any time dismiss, suspend or reduce any police officer of the subordinate ranks whom they shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty or unfit from the same.
The provisions contained in the aforesaid section further provide that the said authorities may award any one or more of the punishments specified therein to any police officer of the subordinate rank who will discharge their duty in a careless or negligent manner or who by any act of his own shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof.
Under the aforesaid provision, the nature of the remissness or negligence which will entail in dismissal and the nature of remissness or negligence which may entail awarding of the lesser punishment provided for in the second part of the section have not been indicated and the question of determining the quantum of punishment commensurate with the gravity of the remissness or negligence etc. is left subject to the provision contained in the Regulations at the discretion of the punishing authority.
9.
All observed in the decision of this Court rendered by a Division Bench in the case of Lalta Prasad v. Inspector General of Police & others, reported in AIR 1954 Allahabad 436 the use of the word 'think' in section 7 referred to above is somewhat deliberate.
As clarified by this Court in the aforesaid decision, the process by which the authorities mentioned in section 7 of the Act must 'think' have been indicated by the Regulations and it is through the essential process as prescribed in the Regulations that they are required to arrive at their thought.
10.
Regulation 478 of the Police Regulations specifies the various categories of punishments to which all the police officers appointed under section 2 of the Police Act are liable.
The aforesaid Regulation contains a list of about 15 types of punishments for constables which vary in the degree of severity.
Regulation 180 of the Police Regulations mandates that punishment has to be inflicted only when they are absolutely necessary in the interest of discipline and that before inflicting or proposing a punishment a Superintendent, Assistant or Deputy Superintendent or Reserve Inspector must consider whether a repremand will not suffice.
It further stipulates that only incorrigible should be sent with the register to the Superintendent of Police for punishment.
Regulation 481 of the Police Regulations requires that an order of dismissal should be passed only when an officer's conduct renders his retention in the force undesirable.
Regulation 490(8) of the Regulations requires that after arriving at a conclusion on the facts in issue, the Superintendent of Police, in case, he finds the charge proved, should take into consideration the character and previous conduct of the officer charged before deciding which of the punishments, if any, is prima facie suitable.
11.
A perusal of the aforesaid provisions contained in the Regulations clearly indicate that the punishing authority while determining the quantum of punishment has to consider whether the punishment to be inflicted is absolutely necessary in the interest of discipline and whether the delinquent has become incorrigible or that his conduct has rendered his retention in the force undesirable.
12.
Obviously, therefore, there has to be an application of mind to assess as to whether the punishment proposed is commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and as to whether the delinquent has become incorrigible and his retention in the force is undesirable.
In this connection, it will not be out of place to notice that in the exercise of disciplinary jurisdiction in departmental proceedings, punishment is not and cannot be the 'end' in itself Punishment for the sake of punishment is never contemplated.
It should not be overlooked that ordinarily the main purpose of a punishment is to correct the fault of the employee concerned by making him more alert in the future and to hold out a warning to the other employees to be careful in the discharge of their duties so that they may not expose themselves to similar punishment.
The degree of the severity of the punishment varies with the gravity of the misconduct.
13.
As observed by the Apex Court in its decision in the case of Shankar Das v. Union of India and others, reported in 1985 (II) SCC 358 : 1985(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 117, the right to impose a penalty carries with it the duty to act justly.
Clearly, therefore, in order not to attract the charge of arbitrariness it has to be ensured that the penalty imposed is commensurate with the magnitude of the fault.
Surely one cannot reasonably or justly impose the same penalty for giving a slap as one would impose for homicide.
It is in this view of the matter that not only under Section 7 of the Police Act, but in Regulation 478 a large category of punishments have been specified varying in degree of the severity.
The statutory provisions as indicated herein before which stand attracted to the departmental proceedings in a case of delinquent police officer provide for ample procedural safeguards for ensuring that the punishment imposed may not become disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct.
It is in this view of the matter that those provisions require it to be considered as to whether the delinquent officer has become incorrigible indicating thereby the consideration of the question as to whether a punishment of certain severity less than the extreme penalty will suffice or ensure the non re-currence of the misconduct and also be a warning to others not to indulge in such a misconduct.
The question as to whether a police officer has rendered himself unfit or undesirable for being retained in the police service has also to be considered taking into account the grievousness of the misconduct and its impact on others.
It is needless to say that every misconduct irrespective of its gravity, which of course is a relative term, cannot be taken to justify the imposition of the maximum penalty.
This appears to be the underlying policy under Section 7 of the Police Act and the Regulations to which a reference has been made hereinbefore.
14.
The apex Court in its decision rendered by a five Judges constitution Bench in the case of Union of India and another v. Tulsi Ram Patel, reported in 1985(3) SCC 398 clearly observed that where the Court finds that the penalty imposed by the impugned order is arbitrary or grossly excessive or out of all proportion to the offence committed or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case or the requirements of that particular Government service the Court could strike down the impugned order.
In an other case of Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, reported in AIR 1983 Supreme Court 454 the Apex Court observed that a penally imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of misconduct would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
15.
In an other case, while elaborating the scope of judicial review in the matter relating to the quantum of punishment in disciplinary proceedings, the Apex Court in its decision in the case of Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India and others, reported in AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2386 had observed that the judicial review in such matter, generally speaking, is not directed against a decision but is directed against the decision making process.
It was observed that the doctrine of proportionality as part of the concept of judicial review would ensure correction indicating that irrationality and perversity are recognised grounds of judicial review.
The Apex Court reiterated with approval its earlier decision in the case of Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh, reported in AIR 1983 Supreme Court 454 emphasising that the penalty imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and that all powers have legal limits.
16.
In its recent decision in the case of Ex-Naik Sardar Singh v. Union of India & others, reported in AIR 1992 Supreme Court 117 : 1992(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 583 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
688, the Apex Court reiterated the principles governing the quantum of punishment as laid down in its earlier decision in the case of Ranjit Thakur and Bhagat Ram (supra).
17.
Learned Standing Counsel while relying upon the decision of the Full Bench of the Orissa High Court in the case of Krishna Chand Pallai (supra) has asserted that in the proceedings under Article 226, the punishment awarded by the disciplinary authority cannot be set aside even if the punishment awarded is shown to be arbitrary or grossly excessive or out of proportion to the offence committed in the case wherein the punishment had been imposed pursuant to a full fledged enquiry; and the High Court while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot substitute any other punishment in its place which in its opinion is considered to be just and proper in the circumstances of the case.
The Full Bench decision of the Orissa High Court referred to above is based on the observations made by the Appeal Court in the case of Union of India v. Parmananda, reported in AIR 1989 SC 1185 wherein it has been laid down to be the established law that if the order of a punishing authority could be supported on any finding as to special mis-demeanour for which the punishment could be imposed, it is not for the court to consider whether the charge proved alone would have weighed with the authority in imposing the punishment and that the court is not concerned to decide whether the punishment imposed provided it is justified by the Rules, is appropriate having regard to the misdemeanour established.
In the aforesaid decision the Hon'ble Supreme Court had carved out three exceptions to the proposition that there should be no interference with the penalty awarded in the disciplinary proceedings.
The first exception indicated was where the punishment imposed is not justified by the rules.
The second exception pointed out was where the penalty stands vitiated on account of being mala fide and the third exception indicated was where a penalty is imposed under clause (a) of the second proviso of Article 311(2) of the Constitution, in which cases the adequacy of the penalty could be gone into for rendering substantial justice and that too on the ground of proportionality.
18.
The Full Bench decision of the Orissa High Court has taken the view that since the Apex Court in its decision in the case of Parmananda (supra) has taken notice of the decision in the case of Tulsi Ram Patel (supra), it was not open to it to take any other view and has thus ignored the observations made in paragraph 127 of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Tulsi Ram Patel (supra) which is a decision rendered by a Larger Bench as compared to the Bench which had decided the case of Parmananda (supra).
A Full Bench of our Court in its decision in the case of Ganga Saran v. Civil Judge Hapur, reported in 1991 A.CJ.
114 while agreeing with the Full Bench decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of Indo-Swiss Time Ltd v. Omarao, reported in AIR 1981 P & H 213 held that when the Judgments of Supreme Court are of equal Benches of matching authority then their weight inevitably must be considered by the rationale and the logic therein and not by the very fortuitous circumstance of the time and date on which they were rendered and the High Court must follow the judgment which appears to lay down the law more elaborately and accurately and mere incidence of time where the judgment of co-equal Benches of Superior Court are earlier or later is a consideration which is hardly relevant.
19.
In its decision in the case of State of UP v. Ram Chandra, reported in AIR 1976 SC 2547 the Apex Court had observed that it has to be borne in mind that even in cases where a High Court finds any conflict between the views expressed by the larger and smaller Benches of that Court, the proper course as observed in the case of Union of India v. KS Subramanaim, reported in AIR 1976 Supreme Court 2433, is to try to find out and follow the opinion expressed by the larger Benches of the Supreme Court in preference to those expressed by smaller Benches which practice, hardened as it has into a rule of a law, is followed by that Court.
20.
In fact whether it is a case attracting the second proviso to Article 311 (2) of the Constitution or a case contemplated under the first proviso to the said article or any other case, the principle governing the quantum of penalty has to be the same.
In the cases contemplated under the clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution the conviction stands recorded by a court of competent jurisdiction, which prima facie establishes a misconduct while in any other case the misconduct is established in the departmental proceedings.
In both the cases, therefore, the question relating to the determination of the quantum of the punishment is involved, the stage whereof reaches after the establishment of the misconduct.
In this view of the matter also the principle governing the determination of the quantum of punishment as explained in the case of Tulsi Ram Patel (supra) cannot be ignored and lose its binding correct envisaged under Article 141 of the Constitution of India.
21.
Taking into consideration, this ratio of the decision of the Apex Court in the cases of Tulsi Ram Patel decided by a Constitution Bench, Ranjit Thakur and Sardar Singh (supra) in the light of the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Ram Chandra and KS Subramaniam, referred to herein before and the Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Ganga Saran (supra), I am clearly of the opinion that the principle laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ram Pravesh Rai v. Union of India, reported in 1988 UPLBEC 783, to the effect that a punishment which is strikingly disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct cannot be allowed to remain uncorrected in judicial review and such punishment can be tested on the doctrine of proportionality requiring it to be commensurate to the gravity of the charge levelled against the delinquent so as not to be violative of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, is in accordance with the decision of the Apex Court which continues to have binding effect as envisaged under Article 141 of the Constitution.
I therefore prefer not to follow the Full Bench decision of the Orissa High Court in the case of KC Pallai (supra) to the extent it holds to the contrary.
22.
Ordinarily the maximum penalty resulting in an economic death of an employee could be awarded only in cases of grave charges where lesser punishment would be inadequate and may not have any curative effect or where the charge is such that in the exigencies of the case of lesser punishment may not be found fit in the interest of administration or where considering the charge and the conduct of the delinquent indicating his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service it becomes necessary to dispense with the services of the delinquent.
23.
In the present case the punishing authority itself has not chosen to impose the penalty of dismissal contemplated in the first part of section 7 of the Police Act.
This shows that the District Superintendent of Police was not satisfied that the misconduct in question was sufficient to warrant the award of the punishment of dismissal.
24.
In the circumstances of the present case, what I find is that the impugned punishment is too harsh and it is clearly disproportionate to the charge established against the petitioner and considering the admission of the guilt with the condition of non-repetition of the misconduct in future, the penalty of removal awarded under the impugned order is too severe and grossly excessive.
Moreover, I further find that the respondent authority has not at all taken into consideration the effect of the relevant provisions regulating the procedural safeguards and the factors indicated hereinbefore which have to be taken note of, while determining the quantum of punishment.
In the circumstances, therefore, the impugned orders passed by the respondent authorities stand vitiated in law.
25.
Sufficient ground has therefore been made out for interference by this Court and the matter requires to be remanded on the question of awarding any of the lesser punishments.
26.
Accordingly, in view of the conclusions indicated herein before, the writ petition succeeds in part.
The impugned punishment is set aside and the matter is remanded to the punishing authority which shall award any of the lesser punishments having due regard to the nature and circumstances of the case and in the light of the observations made hereinbefore with a further direction that the matter should be disposed of as expeditiously as possible preferably within three months.
27.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.