GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a writ to quash orders, Annexures P-5 and P-12 and further issue of a direction to reinstate the petitioner in service with all consequential benefits including arrears of salary and interest at the rate of 18% P.A.
2.
The petitioner possesses the following qualifications :-  i. MA English IInd Class with 577% marks.
ii.
MPhil "O" Grade.
iii.
PhD iv.
M.Ed.
with 523% marks now improved to 60%.
v. J.B.T.
Test passed in English conducted jointly by all the three Universities of Punjab.
3.
In response to an advertisement issued by the Secretary of Montgomery Guru Nanak Educational Trust for recruitment to the posts of Principal and Lecturer, the petitioner submitted an application.
She was interviewed alongwith other eligible applicants.
On the recommendations of the Selection Committee, the petitioner was appointed as Lecturer in the service of respondent No. 2 vide order (Annexure P-4) dated 431991 issued by the Honorary Secretary, Montgomery Guru Nanak Educational Trust.
Her appointment was on probation of one year and was subject to the approval of the Guru Nanak Dev University and the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab.
The petitioner joined her duty in the College with effect from 431991 itself.
After about 8 months, the petitioner was relieved from her duty on the ground that no approval had been received from the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) and Guru Nanak Dev University had not approved the appointment of the petitioner.
Later on, the Director Public Instruction (Colleges) granted approval to her appointment, but respondent No. 2 wrote a letter dated 1761991 to respondent No. 4 stating therein that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed by the University.
The petitioner made representations to the respondents and ultimately filed CWP No. 1829 of 1992.
By order dated 6.2.1992, the High Court disposed of the writ petition with a direction to the respondent-University to consider the representation of the petitioner within a period of one month with a further direction that in case her representation is accepted, the petitioner shall be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
Thereafter the impugned order, Annexure P-12 came to be issued by the respondent-University conveying the decision of the Vice-Chancellor that approval cannot be given by the University.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the action taken by respondent No. 2 on the ground of non-application of mind and arbitrariness.
Her contention is that the qualifications notified by the respondent No. 3 were strictly in accordance with the University's decision and if there has been a change in the qualifications for recruitment to the post of Lecturer after the selection and appointment of the petitioner, the same cannot be applied by the University to the prejudice of the petitioner.
5.
In its reply, respondent No. 2 has pleaded that the petitioner does not fulfil the new qualifications laid down by the University because she has not done her MPhil.
or PhD in the subject of Education, but has done MPhil and PhD in the language i.e. in English and she has secured less than 55% marks in her degree of Master of Education, whereas in terms of new qualifications laid down by the respondent-University, the requirement is minimum 55% marks in M.Ed as also in MA or MSc.
6.
The respondent-University has pleaded that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications as adopted by Syndicate of the University in its meeting dated 2831991 and, therefore, the University did not approve her appointment as Lecturer.
7.
In their separate reply, respondents No. 3 and 4 have pleaded that due to non-approval of the appointment of the petitioner by the Guru Nanak Dev University the respondents had no option but to discontinue the service of the petitioner because it had been made clear in her order of appointment that it was subject to the approval by the Guru Nanak Dev University and the Director, Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab.
8.
I have heard Shri J.C. Nagpal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab and perused the record of the case.
9.
At the very outset, it may be stated that Mrs. Charu Tuli has not disputed the statement made by the petitioner that her appointment as Lecturer has been approved by the Director, Public Instructions (Colleges).
According to Mrs. Tuli, the dispute is only between the Guru Nanak Dev University and the petitioner and the Government does not stand in the way of the appointment of the petitioner.
A look at the advertisement, Annexure P-1, shows that for the post of Lecturer, respondent No. 3 had indicated the requisite qualifications to be 2nd Class MA (English) with 2nd Class M.Ed.
according to UGC/Punjab Government norms.
The Syndicate of the Guru Nanak Dev University had also laid down the qualifications for recruitment to various teaching staff for the affiliated Colleges and for the Lecturer in English following qualifications were prescribed :-  (a) Good academic record with atleast IInd Class Master's degree in Education and Master's Degree in relevant subject (10+2 level) from Indian University or equivalent degree from Foreign University.
(b) MPhil.
degree of recognised degree beyond the Master level or published work indicating the capacity of candidate for independent research work.
Provided that the Selection Committee is of the view that the research work of candidate as evident either from his thesis or from his published work is of a very higher standard it may relax any of the present qualifications prescribed in (a) above.
Provided further that if a candidate possessing the qualifications as at (b) above is not available or not considered suitable, the College on the recommendation of the Selection Committee may appoint a person possessing a good academic record on the condition that he will have to obtain an MPhil.
degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master level within eight years of his appointment failing which he will not be able to earn future increments till he obtains that degree or gives evidence of equivalent published work of high standard."
As far as UGC is concerned, it had approved the following qualifications for the post of Lecturer in English :-  5.
LECTURER IN ENGLISH "(a) Good academic record with atleast second class (c in the seven point scale) Master's degree in Education and also Master's degree in a relevant subject (10+2 level) from an Indian University or equivalent degree from a foreign University and (b) An MPhil.
degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master's level or published work indicating the capacity of a candidate for independent research work.
Provided that if the Selection Committee is of the view that the research work of a candidate as evident either from his thesis or from his published work is of a very high standard, it may relax any of the qualification prescribed in (a) above.
Provided further that if a candidate possessing the qualifications as at (b) above is not available or not considered suitable, the college, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee, may appoint a person possessing a good academic record on the condition that he will have to obtain an MPhil.
degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master's level within eight years of his appointment, failing which he will not be able to earn future increments till he obtains that degree or gives evidence of equivalent published work of high standard."
From the above extracted qualifications laid down by the Government and Syndicate of the University, it is clear that as on the date of selection of the petitioner, there was no requirement that the candidate should have done MPhil.
and PhD in the language i.e. in English or that he or she must have passed MA or M.Ed.
with 55% marks.
In the absence of any such stipulation in the advertisement or in the relevant Recruitment Rules, the respondent- University could not deny approval to the appointment of the petitioner on the basis of subsequent policy decision taken by the syndicate of the respondent- University and on that premise, respondents No. 3 and 4 could not have relieved the petitioner by deeming her ineligible for appointment on the post of Lecturer.
From the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner alongwith CM No. 2280 of 1995 it is clearly revealed that the University had prescribed the revised qualifications with effect from 1891991.
Annexure P-17 filed alongwith this CM further shows that the petitioner had secured 60% marks in her M.Ed.
examination which she passed in April 1991.
10.
It is settled law that eligibility conditions for recruitment to any Public Service are to be judged with reference to a date fixed in the recruitment Rules and in the absence of such date, the last date fixed for receipt of the applications will constitute the date of determination of eligibility.
The petitioner fulfilled all the conditions of eligibility as on the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications and therefore, subsequent amendment made by the respondent-University in the qualifications could not have been applied to the prejudice of the petitioner and on that ground the respondent-University could not deny approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
11.
In view of the discussion, it is held that the action taken by the respondent-University not to approve the appointment of the petitioner and consequential termination of her service by respondents No. 3 and 4 are liable to be declared as void.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P-5 dated 7.11.91 and P-12 dated 3.4.1992 are declared illegal and are quashed.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 are directed to reinstate the petitioner in service.
She shall get all consequential benefits including the arrears of salary.