Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Regional School Service Commission (South Region) not to call him for interview for the post of headmaster in Chaltabaria High School District South 24-Parganas, though he had duly applied for the post.
2.
By affirming an opposition (it has not been filed in Court and a copy whereof has been produced by counsel for the petitioner) the commission has stated that since the master's degree obtained by the petitioner from Himachal Pradesh University through correspondence course was not recognized, the petitioner, not eligible for the post, was not called for interview.
For this the commission has relied on the notification No. 316-SE (Apptt)/10M-51/99 dated January 21, 2000 issued by the Joint Secretary, Secondary Education Department, Government of West Bengal.
3.
In that notification it was stated that certificates awarded by Indira Gandhi Open University, Vidyasagar University, Burdwan University and other universities in the State engaged in providing distant education/correspondence courses and West Bengal Netaji Subhas Chandra Open University would only be deemed recognized.
It is therefore clear from that notification that the master's degree obtained by the petitioner from the Himachal Pradesh University through correspondence course was not recognized in the state.
This being the position it cannot be said that the commission acted illegally or arbitrarily by not calling the petitioner for interview.
Unless he possessed a recognized master's degree, he was not to be treated as a candidate eligible for the post.
4.
At the date the petitioner applied for the post the notification was in force.
He chose to participate in the selection process that was to be governed by the notification.
Even when the commission did not call him for interview he did not question that notification.
Counsel has said that the petitioner had no knowledge that he had not been called for interview because of that notification.
He invites me to examine in this case the validity of that notification.
The question is whether that can be done.
5.
In my view, in this case the question of validity of that notification dated January 21, 2000 cannot be examined by this Court.
Without challenging that notification, the petitioner participated in the selection process.
He cannot be permitted to challenge it after finding that the commission treated him as not eligible for the post.
That apart the validity of the notification was not questioned in the writ petition.
In the absence of any challenge in the writ petition, he cannot be permitted to make out a new case in the rejoinder.
The rejoinder is to be filed only for supporting the case made out in the writ petition by explaining the situation stated in the counter.
No new case can be made out in the rejoinder.
6.
There is no scope either to permit amendment of the writ petition.
This is so for the reason that in so far as the selection process in question is concerned, the petitioner chose to participate in it without questioning the notification that was to govern the process.
Hence I do not find any reason to ascertain the ratio of the decision dated May 19, 2000 given by a single judge of this Court in W.P. No. 4369(W) of 1998, in which the petitioner was one of the petitioners.
It is not necessary either to decide in this case whether the state abused its legislative or statutory or administrative power by issuing the notification when similar notifications issued in the past, as said by counsel for the petitioner, had been struck down by this Court.
The question may be relevant, if the petitioner files an independent writ petition questioning the notification.
7.
For these reasons, I hold that there is no scope to give any relief to the petitioner in the present case.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
I make it clear that nothing in this order shall prevent the petitioner from instituting appropriate original proceedings questioning the notification dated January 21, 2000.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
A xerox copy of the copy of the opposition produced by counsel for the petitioner shall be kept with the records.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.