Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the order of the Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner (CC) dated September 13th, 2005 made under Section 7A of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 determining the dues payable for the period from July 1987 to February 2004.
The authority directed the establishment (the proprietorship firm of the petitioner) to pay Rs. 1,85,25,177/- on account of outstanding statutory dues and Rs. 52,62,053/- on account of interest payable under Section 7Q.
2.
Previously the competent provident fund authority made an order dated June 27th, 1994 determining under Section 7A the dues payable by the establishment for the period from July 1987 to February, 1994.
The determined amount was paid.
For the period from March, 1994 to June 2003 the establishment deposited the dues that, according to it, were payable.
However, the second proceedings under Section 7A were initiated on June 17th, 2003.
In the notice the authority stated that the proceedings would cover the period starting from July 1987.
Final 7A order was made determining the dues for the period from July1987 to February, 2004.
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner moved this Court by filing a writ petition No. 1100 of 2004.
By order dated August 31st, 2004 the order of the authority was set aside, and the matter was remitted to the authority for giving a fresh decision.
Consequently the impugned order dated September 13th, 2005 was made under Section 7A  3.
Counsel for the petitioner has assailed the order on two grounds (1) In view of the provisions in Section 7C of the Act, the authority was not competent to initiate the proceedings for determining any dues payable by the establishment for the period from July, 1987 to February 1994, since for that period the requisite order under Section 7A had been made by the authority as back as June 27th, 1994, i.e., before June 27th, 1999 till which date, if at all, the authority could reopen the case; (2) the order, not severable, cannot be sustained even for the period from March 1994 to February 2004, for the reason that it is apparent on the face of it that it is an order non-speaking to the extent possible.
In support of this contention he has relied on an unreported single bench decision of this Court dated December 21st, 2005 in writ petition No. 2049 of 2005 (Gurbir Kaur v. The RPFC and Ors.).
4.
On the other hand, counsel for the provident fund authorities has argued that in view of the provisions in Section 7C, the authority was competent to reopen the 7A cases for any period, since by the expression `may' the statute conferred a very wide discretionary power on the authority.
His further contention is that even before July 1st, 1997, when Section 7C was inserted in the Act, the authority possessed an unlimited power to reopen the 7A cases for any period.
He has pointed out that in the previous writ petition the petitioner did not raise any contention based on the provisions in Section 7C.
According to him, the order of the authority is a reasoned one.
He has said that it is apparent from the findings of the authority that the petitioner indulged in evasion of payment of statutory dues.
5.
The provisions in Section 7C are as follows :  7C.
Determination of escaped amount - Where an order determining the amount due from an employer under Section 7A or Section 7B has been passed and if the officer who passed the order (a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the employer to make any document or report available, or to disclose, fully and truly, all material facts necessary for determining the correct amount due from the employer, any amount so due from such employer for any period has escaped his notice;  (b) has in consequence of information in his possession, reason to believe that any amount to be determined under Section 7A or Section 7B has escaped from his determination for any period notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause (a) on the part of the employer he may, within a period of five years from the date of communication of the order passed under Section 7A or Section 7B, re-open the case and pass appropriate orders redetermining the amount due from the employer in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Provided that no order re-determining the amount due from the employer shall be passed under this section unless the employer is given a reasonable opportunity of representing his case."
I do not find any merit in the contention that since in his previous writ petition the petitioner did not raise any contention based on Section 7C, he was not entitled to raise any contention based thereon at the time the authority was considering the matter for giving a fresh decision under Section 7A.
In the previous writ petition order was made setting aside the order of the authority determining the dues.
The authority was directed to make a fresh order.
The contention was specifically raised before the authority, who held as follows :  (i) It has been held by Supreme Court that the offence mentioned in the Provident Fund Act and Scheme are continuing offences and period of limitation shall not apply (RPFC v. Md K 1995 of LLJ 631 : 1995 SCC (C & S) 1995 SC 2J).
As per section 6 of the EPF and MP Act 1952 and Para 29 and 30 of the Scheme the employer is liable to pay contributions in respect of employee eligible to be extended benefits under the EPF and MP Act 1952.
To establish the offence committed by the establishments under Section 14 and 14A, it is necessary to calculate and assess the contribution payable which has not been deposited with the department.
The only provision under which the dues payable can be assessed is Section 7A of the Act and since it is held by the Supreme Court that the period of limitation should not apply in respect of offence committed under the Act, the 7A proceedings can not be prohibited on this pretext.
It appears that the Section 7C of the Act is not a disabling provision and merely seek to prohibit conduct of 7A proceedings when sufficient grounds do not exist.
However, in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court regarding continuing nature of Provident Fund offences it appears that on availability of sufficient material and convincing grounds proceeding under 7A may be conducted overriding the provision of Section 7C of the Act."
6.
I fully agree with counsel for the petitioner that the authority was totally wrong in holding that since in certain circumstances certain offence committed under provisions of the Act could be continuing offence, the provisions in Section 7C were not to be treated as disabling provisions.
The continuing offence principle had no manner of application to the 7A proceedings in which the authority was making the order.
The question before him was whether in view of the period of limitation prescribed by the provisions in Section 7C he was empowered to re-open the case in which the previous 7A order had been made for the period from July 1987 to February 1994.
The provisions in Section 7C clearly put a prohibition against reopening any 7A case after expiration of five years from the date of communication of the order passed in it.
Hence there cannot be any doubt that by initiating fresh 7A proceedings on June 17th, 2003 the authority was not competent to reopen circuitously the case in which the order dated June 27th, 1994 had been made.
The authority was wrong in ignoring the specific prohibition put by the provisions in Section 7C  7.
It is also important to note that Section 7C was inserted in the Act with effect from July 1st, 1997.
There is nothing to show that the provisions therein were given any retrospective effect.
It is thus clear that before July 1st, 1997 the authority did not possess any power to reopen any case in which order was made under Section 7A.
I am unable to accept the contention of counsel for the respondents that since Section 7C was inserted on July 1st, 1997, it should be presumed that before that date the authority competent to make order under Section 7A had possessed unrestricted power to reopen a case at any time.
The existence of a power to reopen a case after making final order, in the absence of any statutory provision conferring it, cannot be presumed.
There is no reason to say that the authority competent to make an order under Section 7A possessed inherent power to reopen a case after making final order under Section 7A Hence, I find that even otherwise the authority was not competent to reopen the case in which the order dated June 26th, 1994 had been made long before Section 7C was inserted in the Act.
8.
The other question for decision is whether the order can be sustained for the period from March 1994 to February 2004.
The authority said;  "(ii) The onus of complying with the provision of the Act rests with the establishment since the date on which it become applicable.
It is the responsibility of the establishment of identify the employees and extend the PF membership to them.
From the records available it is evident that the establishment engaged a large number of employees to whom the benefits contemplated by the Act was not extended.
(iii) As per the provisions of the law the legal duty is cast upon the person in possession of any documents to produce that document in the Court of inquiry when called upon by the inquiry Authority.
In the case of Devidas v. Shailappa AIR 1961 SC 1277 it has been held that an adverse inference can be drawn against a party for non-production of the Accounts of Book if the other side had asked the Court to order that party to produce the Books of Account and the party had failed to produce the same.
That it is clear that the establishment is merely trying to escape from the liability accruing an account of non-extension of PF membership to a large number of the security guards and associated personnel by taking recourse to convoluted interpretation of statutory provision.
The fact of evasion is overwhelmingly clear from the records seized from the establishment.
The establishment had not convincing reply for the gap existing between Salary shown in Balance Sheet and that shown in Form/6A submitted to the Provident Fund Department proving that the gap is noting but the Salary and emoluments paid to security guards and associated personnel."
9.
Here again I find that counsel for the petitioner is fully justified in saying that the order of the authority is one non-speaking to the extent possible.
As was held in the decision cited to me, the authority was under an obligation to disclose the details of the employees, i.e., their number, salary, etc.
In the impugned order the authority simply said that with respect to a large number of employees the establishment did not pay the statutory dues.
It is not known who those employees are.
And I think it cannot be said that the petitioner is wrong in expressing his grievance about the manner in which the authority saddled him with the liability for an unidentified, and unknown large number of employees.
It has not been indicated which seized records the authority relied on.
For whose benefit, and salaries of the beneficiaries, and to what extent the establishment was to be saddled with statutory liability, if any, none of these were indicated by the authority in the order.
Counsel for the respondents has read out the whole order to me, and I have quoted hereinbefore what the authority recorded in support of his order.
I am unable to agree with counsel for the respondents that the order can be treated as a reasoned one.
10.
For these reasons, I allow this writ petition and set aside the impugned order.
The authority will be at liberty to proceed afresh with the 7A proceedings for determining the dues, if any, payable by the establishment only for the period from March 1994 to February, 2004.
The fresh 7A order, if any, shall be made after considering all evidence that the parties may place on record, and after affording the parties reasonable opportunity of presenting their respective cases.
There shall be no order for costs.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.