SD Agarwala, C.J.
- All these appeals, viz. L.P.A. Nos 351 to 355, 358 to 360, 519 to 521 and 729 to 733 of 1991 have arisen out of a decision of learned Single Judge by which the Learned Single Judge had set aside the orders passed by the University disqualifying the petitioners from appearing in any examination of the University for a period of one or two years.
The University concerned is the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, which will hereinafter be referred to as the "University".
The University conducted examinations in the year 1989 in B.A./B.Sc./M.Sc.
Part-I and Part-II and certain other examinations.
The petitioners in the various petitions are the examinations in the various examinations conducted by the University.
2.
At the time when the petitioners took their examination, admittedly, they were not caught using unfair means, neither there is any allegation against them for having been found using or attempting to use unfair means, neither there is any allegation against them for having been found using or attempting to unfair means in the examination hall, except in some cases where the Flying Squad reported that due to the atmosphere in the examination hall, they were not permitted to collect the answer books from the candidates and it further reported that there was a case of mass copying.
3.
The case of the University is that after they received anonymous complaints from various sources that unfair means had been used in the various examinations, the University authorities thereafter sent the answer-books of the various examinees to the subject experts.
After the Subject Expert submitted his report, the Unfair Means Committee examined the report of the Subject Expert and thereafter took action against, those students, who had used unfair means in the examination.
The report of the Unfair Means Committee is a very exhaustive report and that report was given after examining the recommendations made by the Subject experts.
The Unfair Means Committee came to the conclusion that put of hundreds of students, who were found sitting in the examination hall, only some were guilty of using unfair means.
It is those students who have been found guilty of using unfair means, who have come by way of filing the petitions in this court.
4.
The question which arises in these appeals is as to what action can the University take against the examinees in a case where there is no direct or indirect evidence of having used unfair means or attempt to use unfair means in the examination hall, and the basis is anonymous complaints received subsequently.
5.
The University has framed ordinances relating to prevention, punishment and procedure for the cases of misconduct and use of unfair means in or in relation to examinations.
This is contained in Chapter-12 Volume-II of the University Calendar of 1986.
The University had taken action against the petitioner under Ordinances 10(j) and 13.
Ordinances 10(j) and 13 are quoted below :  "10(j).
Receiving help or attempting to receive help for answering the question paper from any source in any manner, inside or outside the examination hall."
"13.
If the answer book of a candidate shows or it is otherwise established, that he had received or attempted to receive help from any source and in any manner, or has given help or attempted to give help to candidate in any manner, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination for a period of not less than two years."
6.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents has relied upon the Ordinance 21 which relates to a case of mass-copying.
It reads as under :-  "21.
If the Syndicate is satisfied after enquiry that the integrity of an examination has been violated at an Examination Centre as a consequence of large-scale unfair assistance rendered to the examinees, it may, besides taking action under these Ordinances order re-examination, cancelling the results of such examination if already declared, and may also abolish that Examination Centre for future or for a specified period."
7.
The University had taken action against the students under Ordinance 10(j) read with Ordinance 11 and Ordinance 13.
PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the University has very fairly conceded that Ordinance 10(j) would not apply to the facts of the present case as it is not disputed that the examinees were not found receiving help or attempting to receive help for answering the question paper from any source in any manner inside the examination hall.
It is admittedly, a case where no help was received from outside the hall.
8.
Mr. Patwalia, however, urged that the order of the Unfair Means Committee clearly comes within the parameters of Ordinance 13.
The Ordinance 13 provides that if the answer book of a candidate shows or it is otherwise established that he has received or attempted to receive help from any source, then he would be disqualified from appearing in any examination for a period not less than two years.
In the instant case, the only evidence available with the Unfair Means Committee was the report of the Subject Expert which recommended that some of the examinees could be held to have used unfair means.
It is only in the form of recommendation, as after examining the answer-books, the Subject Expert came to that conclusion.
Ordinance 13, in our opinion, applies to a case where direct or indirect evidence is available from which it can be established that a particular candidate has received or attempted to receive help from any source in order to answer the questions in the examination.
The report of the Subject Expert cannot possibly be called as an evidence against a particular candidate.
The report can only be called as an opinion having no evidentiary value based on only vague probabilities and suspicion and is in the form of a recommendation.
It is no doubt true that the University is fully empowered to take action under Ordinance 13 if direct or indirect evidence is available or if probabilities and circumstantial evidence is there that an examinee has received or attempted to receive help from any source.
In any case, there has to be some evidence in regard to a particular candidate of having used or attempted to use unfair means in examination and only then the University can take action against an examinee under Ordinance 13.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that in the absence of there being any legal evidence against the petitioners in the various petitions in regard to the receiving or attempting to receive help in the examination hall, the University could not possibly, have debarred the examinees from appearing in any future examination or disqualifying them in that examination.
The view consequently, taken by the learned Single Judge that it is a case of no evidence cannot be termed as illegal or in any manner erroneous in law.
9.
In a case like the present, in our opinion, the proper course which should have been adopted by the University was to take recourse to Ordinance 21.
Ordinance 21 clearly lays down that if the Syndicate is satisfied after enquiry that the integrity of an examination has been violated at an examination centre as a consequence of largescale unfair assistance rendered to the examinees, it may, besides taking action under these Ordinances order re-examination, cancelling the results of such examination if already declared, and may also abolish that examination centre for future or for a specified period, or may cancel the results of such examinations held at that centre, if already declared.
In case the recommendation either of the Flying Squad or of the Subject Expert was that mass scale unfair means had been used in the examination, then the entire examination should have been cancelled by the University on the ground of mass copying.
In a case where evidence is found by the University that there has been mass copying and yet instead of declaring the entire examination as bad and directing re-examination, if certain students are punished and others are left scot free, it would, in our opinion, be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
10.
Learned counsel for the University has very vehemently urged that in Ordinance 21, the words besides taking action under this ordinance, order re-examination are significant.
His contention is that besides directing re-examination the University has also the power to take action under this ordinance.
The power of the University is no doubt there under Ordinance 21 to take action other than the action of ordering re-examination, but that would be in a case where the University has in its possession, a specific evidence in regard to a particular examinee.
In that case even if re-examination is ordered, the University can further direct that the particular examinee against whom the evidence is available, he be debarred from appearing in any examination of the University for one or two years or more depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case.
In the instant case, from the evidence produced before us, were of the opinion that it was a case where the University should have directed cancellation of the entire examination and ordered reexamination and it was not proper for the university to have taken action against certain examinees leaving aside other exmmees scot free.
11.
Learned counsel for the University relied upon a Full Bench decision of this Court in Kurukshetra University v. Vinod Kumar, AIR 1977 Punjab & Haryana 21.
In this case, the question with regard to the scope of interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India' with an order of a domestic tribunal like Unfair Means Committee was dealt with.
The Full Bench has observed that in dealing with the validity of the orders passed by the authorities the High Court in writ jurisdiction does not sit in appeal over the decisions of the authorities.
If the impugned order is-not supported by any evidence at A the High Court may quash it.
It is open to the authorities dealing with such a case to evolve its own procedure for acquainting the examinee with the charges and the material on the basis of which they are founded, and also for affording him an opportunity of screening those- charges and putting forward his case.
The authority has to observe the principles of natural justice in quasi judicial manner.
12.
The Full Bench of this Court, referred to above, relied upon a decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Board of High School and Intermediate Education, UP., Allahabad.
v. Baleshwar Prasad, A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 875, which held that in dealing with the validity of the impugned orders passed by the Universities under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court does not sit in appeal over the decision in question.
Its jurisdiction is limited and though it is true that if the impugned order is not supported by any evidence at all, the High Court would be justified to quash that order, but the conclusion that the impugned order is not supported by any evidence must be reached after considering the question as to whether probabilities and circumstantial evidence do not justify the said conclusion.
In accordance with this proposition, it is clear that in case an order is not supported by any evidence, then it is open to the High Court to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This is the case where there is no evidence of use of attempt to use unfair means by the examinees.
In the circumstances, it is open to the High Court to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
13.
Before we conclude, it may be mentioned that the Learned counsel for the respondents have stated at the Bar that after this court passed an interim order directing the University to declare the result of the petitioners provisionally, the petitioners appeared in higher examination and their results have already been declared and they have succeeded.
It is now more than three years since the impugned action was taken by the University.
In case, now the examinees are directed to appear again in the examination in question great irreparable injury will be caused to them and their career will be spoiled and as such also, we do not think it a fit case for interference in the order of the learned Single Judge in appeal.
In the result, all these appeals fail and the same are dismissed.
The University will take steps to declare the result of the petitioners as expeditiously, as possible.
Appeal dismissed.