Mahinder Narain.
J - Rule DB By consent of parties, we have heard the matter on merits.
2.
By this writ petition, Jayashree Ravi and Anil Kaushal question the legality and vires of a condition imposed by the University of Delhi in the matter of eligibility of the persons to take an entrance examination for the 3 Year LLB course conducted by the University of Delhi through its Law Faculty.
3.
It is stated in the petition that Jayashree Ravi did obtain a degree in BA from the University of Delhi (10 + 2 + 3) scheme in the year 1983, having passed the BA examination in the third division.
4.
It is also stated in the petition that Anil Kaushal did obtain B.Com.
(Pass) degree in the year 1980, having passed the examination held for that purpose by the University of Delhi, in the third division.
5.
Jayashree Ravi holds a degree dated 24031984, and Anil Kaushal holds a degree dated 28021991.
6.
It is stated in the Petition that on 22.06.1992, the respondent University issued an advertisement in the local newspaper declaring that there will be a test for admission to the LLB Three Year Degree Course for the Academic year 1992-93, and that the same was open only to candidates who have passed Master/BA Degree examination securing at least 50% in the aggregate.
The last date for receipt of application was fixed as 17071992, and the date of admission test was fixed as 26071992.
On 18071992, however, the last date was extended to 25.07.1992, and the date of the entrance examination was changed to 02.08.1992.
The petitioners state that inasmuch as the condition of 50% marks in the aggregate was illegal, arbitrary, irrational, and that their application for taking the examination was likely to be rejected, they instituted the instant civil writ petition, questioning the eligibility condition of 50% aggregate marks in the BA examination, asserting that such a condition denies them a chance to study the LLB Course in violation of their fundamental rights, and in violation of the provisions of Article 14 and Article 21 of the Constitution  7.
In the petition it is asserted that the petitioners' rights under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution were violated by the aforesaid eligibility requirement of 50% marks in the BA examination.
It is also asserted that the said condition was without any intelligible differentia, and that the said condition did not have any relationship or nexus to any object which is sought to be achieved.
8.
The meaning of, and the content of the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution have undergone of considerable change, as is apparent from the pronouncement of the Supreme Court.
These changes were noted in the judgment reported as Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597.
The meaning of life and personal liberty has been further enlarged in the case reported as Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 802.
Now in a case Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka & ors reported as 1993(1) SCT 377 (SC) : 1992 (4) JT SC 292 (Kuldip Singh and RM Sahai, JJ), the Supreme Court has held that right to education is one of the rights to personal liberty and life ensured by Article 21 of the Constitution.
9.
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (supra) the question was whether an order passed under section 10 (3) (c) of the Passport Act, 1967 was violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution, as also violative of Article 19(1) (a) or (g) of the Constitution.
Justice Bhagwati with whom other Judges had concurred, said that, "it is not valid argument to say that the expression personal liberty in Article 21 must be so interpreted as to avoid overlapping between that Article and Article 9(1).
The expression personal liberty of man and some of them have been raised to the status of distinct fundamental rights and given additional protection under Article 19".
10.
It was also observed by Justice Bhagwati that, "if a law depriving a person of personal liberty and prescribing a procedure for that purpose within the meaning of Article 21 has to stand the test of one or more of the fundamental rights conferred under Article 19 which may be applicable in a given situation, ex-hypothesi it must also be liable to be tested with reference to Article 14 (emphasis added).
11.
Justice Bhagwati also observed that the procedure prescribed under Article 21 must also "answer the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14 It must be right and just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive, otherwise, it should be no procedure at all and the requirement of Article 21 would not be satisfied".
12.
In this way, no doubt, Justice Bhagwati traced the history of narrow interpretation of personal liberty in Article 21 in AK Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27, as confined to freedom of person against unlawful detention and the widening of the concept of personal liberty in Kharak Singh v. State of UP, AIR 1963 SC 1295, to include the residue of all the rights left over from those enumerated in Article 19 of the Constitution It was noted that Article 21 is couched in negative language, that it confers fundamental right to life and personal liberty.
The same conclusion can be reached if we take into account the significant words used in Chapter on Fundamental Rights of the Constitution, which must be read and understood as conferring rights.
Chapter III uses the words "where right is conferred for the first time by the Constitution shall have the right in its various provisions".
13.
It seems to me that wherever a more emphatic declaration seems to have been needed to be made, Chapter III containing fundamental rights, as stronger declaration was made either by an absolute prohibition, or an absolute injunction against the impairment of a right considered to be fundamental by the Constitution makers.
By way of illustrations, the words mandating an injunction or prohibition are to be found in Articles 13, 14, 15, 16(2), 20, 21 and 22(2) and so on.
14.
The Supreme Court in the Maneka Gandhi case, on the basis of a statement made by the Government, that reasons shall be supplied for impounding of the passport of the petitioner, and that she will have a right to make representation against the same, dismissed the petition, (MH Beg.
CJ to the contra).
The following order was passed by the majority in Maneka Gandhi case :  "Having regard to the majority view and in view of the statement made by the learned Attorney-General to which reference has already been made in the judgments we do not think it necessary to formally interfere with the impugned order.
We accordingly, dispose of the writ petition without passing any formal order.
The passport will remain in the custody of the Registrar of this Court until further orders.
There will be no order as to costs".
15.
The concept of Article 21 and its interaction with Article 14 was carried further in Bandhua Mukti Morcha case (supra).
It is laid down in this case that, "Article 21 assures the right to live with human dignity, free from exploitation.
The State is under a constitutional obligation to see that there is no violation of the fundamental right of any person, particularly when he belongs to the weaker sections of the community and is unable to wage a legal battle against a strong and powerful opponent who is exploiting him.
Both the Central Government and the State Government are, therefore, bound to ensure observance of various social welfare and labour laws enacted by Parliament for the purpose of securing to the workmen a life of basic human dignity in compliance with the Directive Principles of State Policy".
16.
As has been recapitulated above, the Supreme Court has observed that the procedure prescribed by Article 21 has also to meet the tests prescribed by Article 19 and also Article 14 of the Constitution  17.
In the instant case, what has been done with regard to admission in the law faculty will have to be tested, not only in the light of Article 21, but also Article 14 of the Constitution  18.
It is contended by the petitioners that the prescription by the University of necessity to obtain 50% marks in the BA examination as an eligibility condition for the LLB entrance examination is illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory, irrational and without any basis, and has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
19.
The petitioners contend that the LLB entrance examination is only an entrance examination into the first year of LL.B.
course.
It cannot possibly pre-determine the standard of excellence, achieved at the time of completion of LLB.
course, which may be a requirement for obtaining of LL.B.
degree.
It is only after a person has undergone the course prescribed, taken the examination papers in various subjects, that he can be tested, and either found fit or unfit regarding achievement of requisite standard set down for obtaining the degree, not before.
It is rightly contended that merely because a person takes the LL.B.
entrance examination and gets a seat on merits, is no guarantee that he would be able to get the law degree also, for that will depend upon successful completion of course and after imbibing all that is needed to imbibe is lectures, tutorials and any other methodology adopted by the University.
20.
It is contended that inasmuch as the University grants BA degree to persons who have obtained much less marks than 50% marks, there is no rational basis for having a standard higher than the one which is needed to obtain BA degree for a mere entrance examination.
21.
Prior to the discussion of the eligibility condition for the entrance examination following must be kept in view :  1.
The eligibility condition is for an entrance examination - not the course itself.
2.
Even after success there is no assurance that the person found fit will complete the full LL.B.
course.
3.
Proficiency in the graduation discipline has no relationship with the law course.
4.
In Kanishka Aggarwal's case preference was not struck down.
There was no entrance examination.
The reasoning therein does not apply.
In order that we dismiss the petition, we must decide that the questions framed in the entrance examination are more significant than the graduation disciplines, which were answered by each of the students.
The questions in the entrance examination, we have seen the question papers in connection with another case - are of general nature, and are designed to test the general-knowledge of the graduate students, on the basis whereof a seat is to be provided to the 1500 students who obtain the highest marks in the entrance examination.
Because of the nature of the examination of the LL.B.
entrance examination, in my view, opportunity must be provided to all the graduates.
One of the reasons being the fact that University has given up reliance upon the relevance of the graduate examination results, so opportunity must be provided to all graduates, who wish to compete for obtaining a seat in the LL.B course on the basis of their merit established by and in the entrance examination.
5.
Classification on the basis of those with merit and those without merit is valid.
The entrance examination appears not to be designed for testing aptitude for law, but to be exclusionary.
It has been repeatedly said by the Supreme Court that the classification on the basis of merit is valid.
To me, it is clear that this particular entrance examination for LL.B.
course does not determine merit or aptitude for studying law.
It is merely designed to be exclusionary.
22.
A graduate of University of Delhi, or a graduate of any other University is a graduate.
23.
Since the LL.B.
course is a postgraduate course, the right to take the examination should be available to all graduates, and there can be no rational basis for denying to all graduates a right to compete for a position in the merit list of an entrance examination, to compete for a particular seat in the LL.B.
Ist Year Course.
The only way that each graduate can be given an equal opportunity of competing with others is to open the entrance examination to all graduates, so that any graduate can be among those in the merit list who qualify for entrance in the examination.
I am supported by the following observations of the Supreme Court.
24.
In the case Charles K Skaria and others v. Dr. C Mathew and others, AIR 1980 SC 1230 at page 1232, it was observed that, "the necessary implication of the constitutional mandate is that every basic degree-holder who fills the bill can apply for admission for postgraduate courses".
In the case Dr. Pradeep Jain etc. v. Union of India & others, AIR 1984 SC 1420, at page 1430, it was observed that, "Any one anywhere, humble or high , agrestic or urban, man or woman, whatever be his language or religion, place of birth or residence, is entitled to be afforded equal chance for admission to any secular educational course for cultural growth, training facility, speciality or employment".
25.
There are 1500 seats to be filled in this fashion, and anybody who is a graduate, and anybody who scores high enough marks in the entrance examination, can stand the chance of being selected as one of the 1500 candidates for undergoing LL.B.
course.
26.
In my view there is force in the contention of the petitioners.
Right to education has been held to be a part of right to life, to be a fundamental right by the Supreme Court in 1992 (4) JT SC 292 by reading together the provisions of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution, and the directive principles of State policy as contained in the provisions of Articles 36 to 51 of the Constitution.
Where right to life and personal liberty is involved.
I do not think it is appropriate to accept any person or body as an imperium in imperio whose decision should not be subject-matter of judicial reviews by Courts, especially the rights conferred by, or rights ensured by various injunctions and prohibitions contained in the Constitution, which include mandates not only in Chapter III of the Constitution, but any other Articles of the Constitution.
I am unable to concede such absolute power over the citizens to any person or body, constituted by or under a statute like the Delhi University Act, 1992.
Even well intentioned action of such bodies may amount to deprivation of life and personal liberty.
27.
In view of the fact that to become a lawyer, it is necessary to study law, and as law can be studied only in educational institutions, and it is necessary to ensure attaining of particular standard by students of law before they are permitted to practise law for the purposes of administration of justice in accordance with law, it would be desirable if not actually necessary, that all persons equally situate compete with each other, have an equal chance and opportunity of undertaking the study of law, completing the course of law, obtaining a law degree, and either practising law, or undertake teaching of law on successfully completion of prescribed courses and obtaining the qualification requisite for either.
28.
To do otherwise is to act arbitrarily, and without application of mind, and to act in a way in which a bar at the threshold is made to operate against certain graduates, and not the others.
29.
In my view there is no need of cut-off point of 50% marks for eligibility to take LL.B.
entrance examination as the said cut-off point will not ensure that every one who gets to sit in the entrance examination, will qualify for one of the seats in the LL.B.
Ist Year course, each of those with over 50% marks are competing for one seat.
None has previously studied law, so there is no possibility of asserting that the ones with the greatest aptitude for law are going to be selected.
The merit must also relate to law - if merit is relevant to the law course.
In any case, there is also no guarantee that even after qualifying in the entrance examination any person would qualify for the law degree at the end of the 3-Year LL.B.
course.
30.
What is stated above is with a view to emphasise that there must be a rational basis for having 50% marks eligibility criteria for the LL.B.
entrance examination.
This 50% eligibility criteria does not appear to have any nexus to the object which is sought to be achieved, that is to say the standard of excellence in the knowledge of laws at the time of conferment of law degree at the end of 3-Year degree course.
31.
A person who is denied the right to compete for a seat in the LL.B.
Ist year course, is also denied, at the threshold, the right guaranteed under Article 19 of the Constitution to carry on any profession or business.
No one can carry on the profession of law unless he obtains a law degree, unless he has acquired the discipline of law by a study of the law, and if by denial of a right to compete a person is denied, the right to try for and obtain a seat on merit in the LL.B.
Ist year course, such a denial would also be not satisfying the requirements of reasonable restriction, postulated by Article 19 of the Constitution  32.
Any person who is familiar with the history of civilisation shall have no difficulty in recalling that the great human rights now in existence have had to be won at a great sacrifice of a multitude of men and women.
All the recognised human rights had been won and extracted from ruler, despots and dictators, who had at different times of history asserted and acquired powers, whether due to personal strength (in the beginning) or through the combined wishes and or strength of supporters and courtiers.
33.
The rulers, despots and dictators claimed and asserted for themselves the right to permit some to live and to direct that some one shall die.
They claimed, asserted and enforced the power to deny personal liberty to any person within their sphere of influence, or to take away life.
Thus persons could be captured, thrown into a duengeon for indeterminate periods or their lives snuffed out in public or in private.
34.
Generations of activists, writers, philosophers struggled against exercise of absolute or arbitrary powers, and finally used the power of people to extract for themselves the right to life by getting rid of the oppressive rulers, dictators and their supporters, and declaring that some rights shall belong to human beings by virtue of their being human.
35.
One of the most famous of these declarations was the Magna Carta, which was brought into existence on 12th June, 1215.
"King John of England granted these great rights to the Barons at Runnymede with some alterations, the rights contained in the Magna Carta was confirmed in Parliament by Henry III, and Edward I".
"This Charter is regarded as the foundation of English Constitutional liberties.
Among its 38 chapters are found provisions for regulating the administration of justice, defining the temporal and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, securing the personal liberty of the subject and his rights to property, and the limits of taxation, and for preserving the liberties and privileges of the Church".
Black's Law Dictionary 6th Ed. 952.
36.
One of the great and inviolate right of all human beings was the right to life, and was available to any person by virtue of his birth.
By virtue of birth alone, another right was brought in existence and this was the right of personal liberty.
37.
These are the two primary rights of all living persons; the dead do not need rights; those incarcerated may.
38.
The only way available to ensure that allow those that are born shall have the right to life, is to prohibit every other person from taking it away.
To prohibit any person human or legal to snuff the life of any human being; to prevent any person from taking away the personal liberties of any person.
It is by these prohibitions, mandated by Article 21 of our Constitution that the right to life and personal liberty is ensured to human beings within India.
39.
One of the arguments which has been advanced by the University in support of the 50% qualifying marks in the BA examination, is that it is administratively inconvenient to throw open the entrance examination to all the graduates.
40.
As far as this argument is concerned, it appears to me that this another way of putting the principle of executive necessity into operation despite the fact that the Supreme Court had in AIR 1978 SC 718 [The Union of India & ors. v. M/s. Anglo Afghan Agencies etc.], decided that the principle of executive necessity does not exist in India.
41.
Besides the argument of administrative inconvenience, is an argument which cannot be utilised for the purpose of the defeating the right to life of an individual, especially in view of the fact that the right to education has been held to be a part of a right to life by the Supreme Court.
In the case Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka & ors, JT 1992 (4) 292 [Kuldip Singh and RM Sahai, JJ].
In my view, keeping the right declared in Mohini Jain's case in mind, administrative inconvenience cannot be the basis of not throwing open an entrance examination to all the graduates, because too many graduates will want to take that examination, and avail of the chance of getting a seat on merit, in the Ist year LL.B.
course.
42.
Besides this, the argument of administrative inconvenience is of no avail for other reasons too.
The other reasons being is that every graduate applicant for entering into the Ist year LL.B.
course by entrance examination can be asked to make payment of an amount which is spent by the University per head to take the entrance examination once each graduate who seeks admission in the Ist year LL.B.
course pays the amount which is necessary for holding the examination, then no financial burden would be on the University at all, and all arrangements which are necessary and proper to be made for such an examination can be made without any additional costs to the University.
To my mind the argument of administrative inconvenience is also of no relevance to the purpose for which the examination is to be held, and, therefore, not available as to the same arbitrary and fanciful, and in any case, does not relate to any object which may be sought to be achieved.
43.
In my view right to education must include within it the right to compete with others for proving his merit and on the basis of his merit his entitlement to further education by admission into a course.
There can be no restriction on the right to prove his merit.
The imposition of the eligibility criteria for an entrance examination is a restrictive condition which unreasonably denies a student his right to compete for a seat in an educational course on the basis of provable merit.
Such a condition is bad in law and must be struck down, as Article 21 does not permit, unlike Article 19, "reasonable restrictions".
The said eligibility criteria must, therefore, be struck down, and I hold it to be violative of the right to education, as established by 1992 (4) JT SC 292, and the said eligibility condition of 50% marks in the BA course is ultra vires the provisions of Articles 14, 21 and 39 of the Constitution.
44.
I have already dealt with the matter of 50% marks in the graduate examination not being relevant for the purposes of ensuring high academic standard for law examination.
High academic standard in the study of law would be brought into existence only after the law is taught to the students who start their LL.B.
course, and attainment of that standard will depend upon various factors, like the ability of the teachers to teach, ability of the teachers to make the students assimilate to what is being taught, and will depend upon the manner in which teaching is resorted to, and what kind of aids are given by the teachers for the purpose of ensuring that law is taught, and the discipline of law inculcated in the students who undertake the study of law in the LL.B.
course.
In my view, having a 50% cut-off point for graduates does not automatically ensure a high level of achievement in law.
It appears to be a mere device to ensure that so many less persons take the entrance examination.
It appears to have no other purpose.
45.
Paragraphs 8, 9 and 12 of the judgment in the case Miss Mohini Jain v. State of Karnataka ors. (supra), can be reproduced here to make clear what is right to education.
These are set out here below :  8.
The preamble promises to secure justice "social, economic and - political; for the citizens peculiar feature of the Indian Constitution is that it combines social and economic lights along with political and justiciable legal rights.
The preamble embodies the goal which the State has to achieve in order to establish social justice and to make the masses free in the positive sense.
The securing of social justice has been specifically enjoined an object of the State under Article 38 of the Constitution.
Can the objective which has been so prominently pronounced in the preamble and Article 38 of the Constitution be achieved without providing education to the large majority of citizens who are illiterate.
The objectives flowing from the preamble cannot be achieved and shall remain on paper unless the people in this country are educated.
The three pronged justice promised by the preamble is only an illusion to the teaming-million who are illiterate.
It is only the education which equips a citizen to participate in achieving the objective enshrined in the preamble.
The preamble further assures the dignity of the individual.
The Constitution seeks to achieve this object by guaranteeing fundamental rights to each individual which he can enforce through court of law if necessary.
The directive, principles in Part IV of the Constitution are also within the same objective.
The dignity of man is inviolable.
It is the duty of the State to respect and protect the same.
It is primarily the education which brings forth the dignity of a man.
The framers of the Constitution were aware that more than seventy per cent of the people, to whom they were giving the Constitution of India, were illiterate.
They were also hopeful that within a period of ten years illiteracy would be wiped out from the country.
It was with that hope that Articles 41 and 45 were brought in Chapter IV of the Constitution.
An individual cannot be assured of human dignity unless his personality is developed and the only way to do that is to educate him, This is why the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 emphasises "Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality ...." Article 41 in Chapter IV of the Constitution recognises an individual's right "to education".
It says that "the State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, made effective provision for securing the right .... to education ......".
Although a citizen cannot enforce the directive principles contained in Chapter IV of the Constitution but these were not intended to be mere pious declarations.
We may quote the words of Dr. Ambedkar in that respect :  "In enacting this part of the Constitution, the Assembly is giving certain directions to the future legislature and the future executive to show in what manner they are to exercise the legislature and the executive power they will have.
Surely it is not the intention to introduce in this Part these principles as mere pious declarations.
It is the intention of the Assembly that in future both the legislature and the executive should not merely pay service to these principles but that they should be made the basis of all legislative and executive action that they may be taking hereafter in the matter of the governance of the country.'
(C.A.D.
Vol. VII P 476)."
9.
The directive principles which are fundamental in the governance of the country cannot be isolated from the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III.
These principles have to be read into the fundamental rights.
Both are supplementary to each other.
The State is under a constitutional mandate to create conditions in which the fundamental rights guaranteed to the individuals under Part III could be enjoyed by all.
Without making "right to education" under Article 41 of the Constitution a reality the fundamental rights under Chapter III shall remain beyond the reach of large majority which is illiterate.
12.
"Right to life" is the compendious expression for all those rights which the Court must enforce because they are basic to the dignified enjoyment of life.
It extends to the full range of conduct which the individual is free to pursue.
The right to education flows directly from right to life.
The right to life under Article 21 and the dignity of an individual cannot be assured unless it is accompanied by the right to education.
The State Government is under an obligation to make endeavour to provide educational facilities at all levels to its citizens.
46.
I am in respectful agreement with the observations made by the Supreme Court in paragraphs No. 9 and 12 above, and also in respectful agreement with the observations made in paragraph 17, in which the Supreme Court said that, "we hold that every citizen has a right to education under the Constitution.
The State is under an obligation to establish educational institutions to enable - the citizens to enjoy the said right.
The State may discharge its obligation through state - owned or state - recognised educational institutions."
47.
The respondent University relied upon two judgments of this Court; one delivered by DP Wadhwa and RL Gupta, JJ in C.W.
No. 2661 of 1991, and another delivered by PN Nag and RL Gupta, JJ in C.W.
No. 2852 of 1992.
Though it must be noted that not only the counsel for the petitioners, the counsel for the University also stated that, there was no case available in reports, which covered the instant case of 50% marks in BA as an eligibility condition for an entrance examination.
It seems to me that some of the observations made by DP Wadhwa and RL Gupta, JJ have been watered down by the subsequent pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Mohini Jain's case, and in any event the Hon'ble Judges have not given reasons, as I have attempted to give herein as to why Articles 14 and 21 are attracted to the instant case.
It is to be noted that the D.B.
of this Court had denied the existence of such rights to the citizens.
48.
As regards the judgment of PN Nag, J, the same appears to have been given at a preliminary stage of the proceedings, without hearing both the sides, and the writ was dismissed in limine.
It is further to be noted that the judgment delivered by PN Nag and RL Gupta, JJ related to the examination conducted by the University for giving admission to students in MA in Economics course being open, inter alia, to the graduate Students of Economics.
The 50% cut-off point may have achieved the object of giving admission to students of Economics who had already obtained a certain standard in the study of Economics, so that in the MA course of students in Economics already resent, need not to learn.
Time need not be spent in teaching the students what they had already learent in graduate course, and that may have been a consideration for the Court to decide the way it did, to reject the petition.
49.
Admittedly none of the graduate students in the instant case has had any prior education in laws.
Therefore, the postgraduate course of Ist year in LL.B.
course has to be a new course for all those who undertake study of law after having done their graduation.
As such 50% cut-off point seems to have no rational connection with achievement of high standard in learning of laws by the students.
50.
Besides this, the petitioners rightly contend that other premier examinations held in this country for the purpose of selection of suitable persons to undergo certain courses of study before they are declared fit on merit, are certain examinations, like Indian Administrative Services, National Defence Academy.
Whereas National Defence Academy examination is available to all students who have done the Higher Secondary or Matriculation examination, without a cut-off point in either Matriculation or in Higher Secondary examination, does not make the said examination less prestigious, or less valuable, and does not attempt to prevent those who succeed on merit, attaining of high standard once they undergo the course in the National, Defence Academy.
Similarly those persons who take the Indian Administrative Services Examination, and succeed on the basis of merit, can and do obtain high standard of excellence in acquisition of skill for administration.
51.
For all the aforesaid reasons, I am of the view that prescribing a cut-off point of obtaining 50% marks in the graduate examination, does not have any reasonable nexus to the object sought to be achieved, and there can be only one object which can be sought that is to attain a high standard of legal education.
52.
For the aforesaid reasons, I would allow the writ petition, and declare that the prescription of minimum 50% marks in BA as a condition precedent to a seat in the entrance examination, and a condition precedent to compete on merits for obtaining a seat in the LL.B.
Ist year course, prescribed by the University of Delhi, is arbitrary, unreasonable, the same violates the provisions of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution and the said condition is liable to be struck down, and is hereby quashed.
The petitioners are also entitled to mandamus that they be permitted in the entrance examination test for the admission to LL.B.
course for the academic year 1992-93.
53.
With these observations, the writ petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.