Arun Kumar Mitra, J - By order dated 29th July, 2003 this Court directed the matter being WP No. 8974(W) of 1998 to be heard along with C.O.
No. 10836(W) of 1990.
It appears from record that C.O.
No. 10836(W) of 1990 stood dismissed for default by an order dated 18/06/2002 passed by Hon'ble Justice DP Kundu (As His Lordship then was,.
The petitioner is same in both the writ petitions.
In the first writ petition that is writ petition being C.O.
No. 10836(W) of 1990 the prayers were as follows :-  (a) A Rule in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to set aside cancel and rescind the charge-sheet dated 16.10.87.
Finding of the Enquiry Officer dated 1888 and final order dated 26888 which are annexure `A', `D' and `E' to this application.
(b) Writ in the nature of Certiorari calling upon the respondents to transmit the entire records of the case forming the basis of issuance of the charge-sheet, copy of the proceeding of enquiry, finding of the Enquiry Officer and the Final Order of the disciplinary authority to this Hon'ble Court and certify them and on being certified, quash the same.
2.
In the first writ petition the petitioner challenged the disciplinary proceeding initiated against him and the punishment awarded to the petitioner but the said matter stood dismissed for default ultimately, as observed above.
In that view of the matter the punishment stands.
3.
Now, the next matter that is WP No. 8974(W) of 1998 comes in.
In this matter the petitioner prays for quashing of the seniority list and to grant him promotion on the basis of fresh seniority list on fixation of seniority of the petitioner w.e.f., the date of his joining in the service as Officer-in- Charge of the Branch of the Bank on ad-hoc post on 30th August, 1983 and to pay all benefit of such posting.
BACKGROUND  4.
The respondent no. 1, Bardhaman Gramin Bank has been sponsored by UCO Bank and it has been established as per sanction of the Union of India.
An Advertisement was published in the newspaper in 1981.
The selection procedure for appointment to the post was made by the Bank and the petitioner was selected for appointment accordingly, along with other persons.
Out of the said selected persons the respondent no. 1 Bank appointed from time to time starting from 1982 onwards.
Petitioner was appointed on 4th April, 1983 in the post of Field Supervisor.
The petitioner was promoted to the post of Officer and he was posted as Manager of a Branch on ad-hoc basis sometimes on 24th August, 1983.
5.
It has been stated that on October 15, 1985 a circular being number BGH/H.O./41/85 dated 11/10/1985 was published and the seniority list of Field Supervisor as on 30th June, 1985 was there.
In preparation of the said seniority list the respondent authorities maintained the rules relating to preparation of seniority list strictly on the basis of date of appointment and date of joining.
The Xerox copy of the said seniority list has been made annexure `A' and this is impugned that is the petitioner wants cancellation of this seniority list being annexure `A'.
6.
On 3rd April, 1986 notice for promotion was given for recruitment and promotion of Officers in various categories of posts but the petitioner was not considered for the said promotion wherein the petitioner was eligible for promotion w.e.f., 30/08/1983 when the petitioner was given ad-hoc promotion.
In this context it is found that disciplinary proceeding was initiated against the petitioner and the said disciplinary proceeding and the punishment order was challenged by the petitioner in a writ proceeding being C.O.
No. 10836(W) of 1990 through the petitioner in paragraph 9 of this writ petition has stated that the said action of non-grant of promotion is the subject matter of challenge of another writ petitioner that is CR No. 10255(W) of 1990.
7.
The petitioner also filed a writ petition being C.O.
No. 10836(W) of 1990 challenging the disciplinary proceeding initiated against him and the punishment awarded on the basis of the said proceeding.
As observed earlier, this writ petition stood dismissed for default by an order passed by Hon'ble Justice DP Kundu (As His Lordship then was).
8.
The respondent authorities directed the petitioner to appear for interview for promotion to the post of Officer sometimes in 19th October, 1990 in the meantime but the respondent authorities intimated the petitioner on 28/01/1991 to the extent inter alia that the result of promotion shall be kept in a sealed cover to be opened after completion of the proceeding.
The said letter dated 28/01/1991 is annexure `B'.
9.
According to the petitioner he is eligible for promotion and his promotion was considered in the year 1991 and it was kept in a sealed cover which ought to have been released and the respondents are bound to open the sealed cover since the promotion was withheld on the ground of misconduct and such misconduct was not proceeded further.
10.
The petitioner was informed that he is not entitled or eligible for promotion in terms of the guideline given by NABARD.
The petitioner was punished for misconduct on two counts; one is stoppage of increments and his promotion and the allegation of the petitioner is that a person cannot be doubly punished for one offence.
11.
All the Field Supervisors/Officers/Managers became one post under Junior Management I as per the NIT award, therefore the petitioner became Officer by NIT award w.e.f., 01/09/1987 and the petitioner is holding the said post as an Officer of a Bank and he has been performing duty w.e.f., August, 1983.
In the seniority list punished in May, 1997 the petitioner was placed below juniors.
The petitioner was appointed in April, 1983 but he was given a place in the seniority list after the Officers who have been appointed after the petitioner in 1988.
Therefore, the seniority list which has been prepared is totally erroneous and not maintainable and the petitioner was eligible for promotion in 1986 when the promotion was given to the juniors and in 1991 the promotion of the petitioner was also refused when the petitioner even been promoted does not have got the effect of promotion.
12.
The petitioner is eligible for retrospective promotion in terms of the award of NIT and the respondents ought to have re-modelled the seniority list.
In any event the petitioner cannot be placed below 1987 alleging that the respondent authorities are going to take steps for promotion to the Junior Management Scale-II in which the petitioner is also eligible for participation.
The petitioner was placed below the appointees of August as on 29th August, 1983.
The placement of the petitioner was made after the official join after the petitioner in the year 1988 even in official cadre.
13.
The respondents without correcting the seniority list has taken steps to start promotion process from Junior Management Scale-I to Junior Management Scale-II and as such the petitioner made the prayers for setting aside or cancelling the seniority list (annexure `A') and for opening the sealed cover to fix the seniority of the petitioner and to grant him promotion accordingly.
14.
Affidavit-in-opposition has been filed in the instant case by on or behalf of the Chairman and Principal Officer as well as the Bank.
15.
In the opposition the respondent authorities denied the allegations made by the petitioner in the writ petition categorically and para-wise.
According to the respondents, the petitioner discharged his function as Field Supervisor/Officer-in-Charge and it is incorrect that he is the Branch Manager of a Branch of Bardhaman Gramin Bank.
It is the practice of banking sector to depute any eligible employee to officiate in a higher post.
A mere posting as Officer-in-Charge at a Branch cannot be treated as a case of promotion and as such consideration of the petitioner on such alleged basis for promotion could not or does not arise and all allegations have been denied in the affidavit-in-opposition.
16.
According to the respondents the petitioner filed a writ petition which is sub judice and in the said writ petition the respondents have duly filed their affidavit.
The respondents have categorically denied the allegations made in the writ petition being C.O.
No. 10836(V) of 1990 (though the said writ petition has been dismissed for default subsequently in 2000).
17.
It has also been stated in the opposition that due to some fraudulent act of the writ petitioner at the Gour Bazar Branch of the Bardhaman Gramin Bank proceedings were pending against him.
18.
According to the respondents, petitioner was deputed as Officer-in- Charge purely on ad-hoc basis and that cannot grant any entitlement to the petitioner.
19.
According to the respondents the fraudulent acts committed by the petitioner at Gour Bazar Branch is a crime and a criminal investigation is still pending in this regard.
20.
The respondents have annexed the letter dated 4th April, 1997 being annexure `R-2' and in the said letter it has been stated that since the petitioner was awarded punishment he is not entitled to promotion as per the instructions of NABARD.
Seniority list was prepared strictly in accordance with Bardhaman Gramin Bank (Staff) Service Regulations, 1981 and the subsequent circulars and/or clarifications received from NABARD.
In view thereof, the question of seniority list being erroneous and/or required cancellation cannot be a valid submission on behalf of the petitioner.
21.
The respondents have also annexed the circular issued by NABARD as annexure `R-3' to the opposition.
According to the stand taken in the affidavit-in-opposition, since there is punishment in the departmental proceeding as against the petitioner and in view of the NABARD circular the petitioner is not entitled to promotion.
22.
The summary of the connections of the petitioner in the reply is the reiteration of the stand taken in the writ petition.
According to the petitioner, for the same offence he is being penalized twice.
The petitioner prays for opening of the sealed cover and cancellation of seniority list and grant of promotion to the petitioner.
23.
The petitioner appeared in person but subsequently, one learned counsel appeared for him.
The petitioner submits that departmental proceeding was initiated against him and he was penalized and again the authority is trying to stop his promotion.
According to the petitioner, this is double punishment for a single offence.
The petitioner prays for opening of the sealed cover.
According to the petitioner, this seniority list is also bad and he was the Branch Manager or the Officer and according to the seniority juniors have been placed above him and the seniority list should be quashed and a fresh seniority list is to be prepared according to the actual seniority and in accordance with law.
24.
The petitioner also submits that insofar the criminal case is concerned a writ petition is pending and as such the authority cannot stop his promotion just now.
25.
The petitioner further submits that according to regulation 30(b) of the Bardhaman Gramin Bank (Staff) Service Regulations, 1981 "penalties can be delayed or stoppage of increments or promotion."
The petitioner submits that in view of the said provisions since stoppage of increment has already been given, promotion cannot be stopped since the word `or' is there.
This is `either or'.
On the said pretext the petitioner submits that this would be double punishment.
26.
The learned counsel for the respondents submits that the petitioner was never an Officer, he was a Field Supervisor and he was once entrusted duty to act as Branch Manager on ad-hoc basis.
27.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submits that seniority list has been prepared according to NABARD instructions and in accordance with law.
28.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submits that promotion can be stopped or delayed in view of the NABARD instruction which says that "it has been decided that as on 22.2.1991, all the Branch Managers/Officers should rank above the Field Supervisors in the combined seniority list.
On the same analogy, the Senior Clerk-cum-Cashiers will rank senior to the Junior Clerk-cum-Cashier."
The learned counsel submits that in the above view of the matter since the petitioner was Field Supervisor, he must be placed below the rank of Branch Manager.
29.
The learned counsel for the respondents further submits that a selection test for promotion was taken, the petitioner joined the selection process but he could not succeed and as, such the question of giving promotion to an unsuccessful candidate does not arise.
30.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submitted that sealed cover procedure is a fair and adopted procedure as has been observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
In the decision reported in AIR 1991 SC 2010 (Union of India v. KV Jankiraman) the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that the "sealed cover procedure" is now a well established concept in service jurisprudence.
The procedure "is adopted when an employee is due for promotion, increment etc. but disciplinary/criminal proceedings are pending against him at the relevant time and hence the findings of his entitlement to the benefit are kept in a sealed cover to be opened after the proceedings in question are over."
Here, in the instant case the disciplinary proceeding is over, the petitioner has been awarded punishment and now the petitioner cannot claim promotion since his conduct was no clean and fair.
31.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submitted that principle of double jeopardy has not applicable here.
In this context the learned counsel relied' on the same decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in AIR 1991 SC 2010 (supra) and submitted that the Hon'ble Apex Court has also observed in the same judgment in the manner as follows :-  "To qualify for promotion, the least that is expected of an employee is to have an unblemished record.
That is the minimum expected to ensure a clean and efficient administration and to protect the public interests.
An employee found guilty of misconduct cannot be placed on par with the other employees and his case has to be treated differently.
There is, therefore, no discrimination when in the matter of promotion, he is treated differently.
The least that is expected of any administration is that it does not reward an employee with promotion retrospectively from a date when for his conduct before that date he is penalized in praesenti.
When an employee is held guilty and penalized, he cannot be said to have been subjected to a further penalty on that account.
A denial of promotion, in such circumstances is not a penalty but a necessary consequence of his conduct.
In fact, while considering an employee for promotion his whole record has to be taken into consideration and if a promotion committee takes the penalties imposed upon the employee into consideration and denied him the promotion, such denial is not illegal and unjustified.
If, further, the promoting authority can take into consideration the penalty or penalties awarded to an employee in the past while considering his promotion and deny him promotion on that ground, it will be irrational to hold that it cannot take the penalty into consideration when it is imposed at a later date because of the pendency of the proceedings, although it is for conduct prior to the date the authority considers the promotion."
32.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
In my view as per NABARD instruction seniority list has rightly been prepared and there is no illegality there and the promotion is also not a matter of right and promotion is the prerogative of the management.
In the instant case the petitioner has been punished departmentally and that is one punishment and promotion can also be stopped in view of the decision of Hon'ble Apex Court referred to above and regulation 30(b) of the Bardhaman Gramin Bank (Staff) Service Regulations, 1981 does not stand in the way in the stoppage of promotion.
In this context the decision of Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 1995 Vol. (4) SCC, 486 (Madan Lal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir) can also be relied upon.
In this judgment the petitioner appeared in the interview, could not be selected and being unsuccessful he cannot turn around and challenge the selection proceeding.
In that view of the matter I find no merit in the writ petition.
33.
The writ petition therefore, fails and is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Urgent Xerox certified copy, if applied for, be given to the parties as expeditiously as possible.
Petition dismissed.