R Gururajan, J - Petitioner working as Deputy General Manager is challenging the transfer order dt. 6-5-2005 insofar as it relates to the transfer of the petitioner and Sri PK Gogi-respondent No. 3 with a further direction directing the respondents to effect transfer as against an equivalent post commensurate with the status as well as the scale of pay with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner entered service of the respondent-Corporation (as) Manager in 1980.
He was designated subsequently as Regional Manager and entrusted with additional duties and responsibilities of supervising the activities of Purbashree Emporium of Bombay and Madras in terms of an order dated 1261985.
While working as such, petitioner was promoted on a substantive basis as Manager against an existing post of Manager in the Regional Office at Guwahati with retrospective effect from 1-3-1992 and continued as Regional Manager (Emporium) by retaining that designation as being purely personal to him and continued in the Emporium at Bangalore.
Petitioner was thereafter promoted as Deputy General Manager (Marketing) and retained at Bangalore.
His duties and responsibilities are also defined by the respondent in terms of Annexure-C Later the Emporium at Chennai was taken under the jurisdiction of the petitioner conferred in terms of Annexure-C Petitioner states that exclusion of Madras was on the basis of misleading recommendations and actions.
Petitioner according to the petition averments is functioning as Deputy General Manager and is entitled to continue at Bangalore in that capacity.
Petitioner, thereafter, was not selected for higher post.
According to him he is working on substantive basis as Deputy General Manager (Marketing) in Bangalore.
Respondent has now transferred petitioner from Bangalore to Madras in terms of an order dated 6-5-2005 to a lower post which is visible from the order itself.
He is asked to take charge from Deputy Manager (Emporium) by retaining his own scale of pay as Deputy Manager.
Petitioner questions Annexure-G as violative of the well accepted principles of transfer in terms of the Apex Court judgment and also contrary to the provisions of FR-15 of the Rules.
3.
Notice was issued.
Respondents entered appearance.
They have filed statement of objections.
They say that they have clarified the impugned endorsement in terms of another order dt. 27th May, 2005.
They say that the petitioner is transferred and posted to Puruabashree Emporium, Chennai as Deputy General Manager in the same scale of pay with immediate effect.
They further say that the Bangalore Branch has no sanctioned post of Deputy General Manager.
However, he will discharge the functions at Chennai Branch Office as Deputy General Manager.
4.
A rejoinder is filed.
In the rejoinder it is stated that what is required in the matter of transfer is that an incumbent is required to be transferred to an equivalent post in the place where it exists or to a place where such a post is sanctioned by an express order.
5.
Matter is heard for final disposal.
6.
Sri.
Narayana Swamy, learned counsel with all vehemence at his command would argue that the present order of transfer runs counter to the well established principles of transfer in terms of the Apex Court judgment.
Learned counsel would say that in terms of AIR 1986 SC 1200, Vice-Chancellor, Lalit Narain Mithila University v. Dayanand Jha, that mere circumstance that the two posts are carried on the same scale of pay is not enough.
He further argued that in terms of FR 15 that a Government servant shall not be transferred to a place where he draws less pay than the post on which he holds a lien.
According to him the petitioner is entitled to be transferred to an equivalent post or a higher post as promotion but not to a lower post in terms of the impugned order.
7.
Per contra, Sri.
Vasudeva Reddy, learned senior counsel would argue that the transfer is in accordance with law.
He says that even in Bangalore, there is no post of D.G.M.
but only a post of Manager is available.
Petitioner was promoted as D.G.M.
and was retained at Bangalore.
He would further say that in terms of the subsequent order, he has been transferred to work as DGM in the same scale of pay with immediate effect and that safeguards his interest.
He would contend that there is no violation as such caused by the respondents.
8.
After hearing, I am of the view that the only point that requires consideration in the matter is as to whether transfer of the petitioner to Madras is legal and proper.
9.
To answer this question, this Court has to notice certain facts in terms of the material placed before this Court.
Sri.
Vasudeva Reddy learned counsel appearing for the respondents argues before me in terms of Organization Chart which provides for several posts at Bangalore.
They are Grade IV Salesman/Salesgirl, Store Keeper, Cashier, Assistant Manager and Manager.
There is no sanctioned post of D.G.M.
at Bangalore.
Petitioner admittedly joined in the year 1977.
He came to Bangalore in the Year 1980 as Manager.
In terms of an order in the year 1981, he was absorbed on regular basis.
He was later designated as Regional Manager (Emporium).
He was subsequently promoted as Manager as against the existing post of Manager.
It is on record that the petitioner in the cadre of Manager (Emporium) is re- designated as Regional Manager (Emporium).
He is temporarily promoted as Manager in terms of an order at Annexure-"A" dated 27th July, 1992.
He was thereafter promoted temporarily as Deputy General Manager and posted at Bangalore until further orders.
In terms of Annexure "C" he was delegated with financial powers to enable him to discharge his assigned responsibilities with speed and effectiveness.
He was to exercise the administrative duties and functions as Deputy General Manager at Bangalore.
In the year 2003 an office order was issued with regard to jurisdiction of Purubashree (Emporium), Chennai covering Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Pondicherry.
10.
The Corporation in its wisdom after noticing the continuous working of the petitioner for more than 25 years at Bangalore has chosen to transfer him to Madras in the same scale of pay with immediate effect until further orders.
He was asked to take charge from the Deputy General Manager, Chennai.
Writ Petition was filed in this Court and thereafter, the respondents have clarified in terms of the clarificatory order dt. 27th May, 2005.
In the said order, they have categorically stated that the petitioner is transferred and posted to Purubashree (Emporium), Chennai, as Deputy General Manager, in the same scale of pay with immediate effect until further orders.
Therefore, what is clear to this Court is that the petitioner was transferred by the respondent without in any way affecting his status or any other service condition.
Even in Chennai he would be working only as Deputy General Manager (Marketing) in terms of the clarificatory order.
The argument of Sri.
Narayana Swamy that there exists no post of D.G.M.
at Chennai would not appeal to me since he was in Bangalore where there existed no post of DGM Petitioner was only performing the duties attached to the post of D.G.M.
at Bangalore.
Therefore, petitioner cannot complain of any arbitrariness or unreasonableness in the matter of transfer of the petitioner to Chennai with the same designation, with the same status and with the same pay scale.
I do not find any degradation of post or degradation of status as sought to be argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the circumstances, no case is made out by the petitioner.
11.
The argument of the petitioner that he has to take charge from Deputy Manager, Chennai, does not by itself provide for an inference that he is demoted to a lower post.
It may be under certain circumstances charge is taken over from one official to another.
That by itself does not decide the status of a person when the order is clear enough to show that his transfer and posting as D.G.M.
would be sufficient in the matter of transfer.
The argument of reduction in status of the petitioner does not appeal to me.
12.
Insofar as the judgment of the Supreme Court is concerned, there can be no quarrel over the proposition in terms of FR 15 and in terms of the Apex Court ruling.
Since I have come to a conclusion on facts that petitioner is not degraded or posted to a post lower than what he has been holding, it is not necessary to go into the detail with regard to these two arguments.
No grounds.
Petition stands rejected.
Petition dismissed.