In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the impugned Memo dated 532004 (Annexure P-10) issued by the DPI (Colleges), Punjab-respondent No. 2 declining to grant approval for the appointment of the petitioner as Sr.
Laboratory Attendant.
2.
The petitioner passed the matriculation examination from the Punjab School Education Board in March, 1996 in 1st Division by securing 400 marks out of 650 marks.
He had also worked as Laboratory Attendant in a private Laboratory from August 1996 to March 2000.
The College-respondent no. 4 is affiliated with Punjabi University, Patiala.
The College is also in receipt of grant-in-aid from the State of Punjab to the extent of 95%.
One Balbir Singh who was working as Sr.
Laboratory Attendant in the respondent 4-College, retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation in the month of December, 2002.
The respondent-College issued an advertisement in different newspapers on 18.1.2003 inviting applications from eligible candidates for recruitment to the post of Sr.
Laboratory Attendant, on regular basis.
The petitioner applied in response to the advertisement.
He was duly interviewed by the Selection Committee.
The Selection Committee prepared a merit list of the candidates that appeared.
The petitioner was placed at Sr.No.
1 of the merit list.
On the basis of the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, respondent No. 4 appointed the petitioner on the post of Sr.
Laboratory Attendant in the Chemistry Department on 16.4.2004.
He was given the regular pay scale of Rs. 5000-8100.
The petitioner was placed on probation for a period of one year.
Pursuant to the appointment, the petitioner has joined on the post of Sr.
Laboratory Attendant.
On 2442003, respondent No. 4-College sought the approval of respondent no. 3 i.e. Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee which runs the College-respondent No. 4, for approval of the appointment of the petitioner.
By letter dated 1752004, respondent No. 3 has approved his appointment.
The case of the petitioner complete in all respect was sent by the College-respondent No. 4 to Punjabi University, Patiala as well as to the DPI (Colleges), Punjab-respondent No. 2 for approval of the appointment.
Punjabi University, Patiala intimated respondent No. 4-College that since the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant is not a teaching post, the approval of the University is not required.
Since DPI-respondent No. 2 had not granted the approval to the appointment of the petitioner, his period of probation was extended for a further period of one year by letter dated 1632004.
The only ground for extending the period of probation of the petitioner was the non-grant by the approval of respondent No. 2-DPI (Colleges).
By impugned letter dated 532004 (Annexure P-10), respondent No. 2 declined to grant the approval with the following remarks :-  "1) The post of S.L.A.
cannot be filled by way of direct recruitment because this post is a promotional post."
The petitioner claims that the order (Annexure P-10) passed by respondent No. 2 is wholly without jurisdiction.
There is no provision under any rules for making the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant available only to the promotees.
3.
The respondents have filed written statements.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 have admitted the case as pleaded by the petitioner.
In paragraph 14 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 3 and 4, it is stated that there are only two sanctioned posts of Senior Laboratory Attendants in the respondent No. 4-College which are aided posts.
But the DPI has not communicated any rules, on the basis of which it can be said that the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant is a promotional post.
On the other hand, the rules of Punjabi University, Patiala relating to the affiliated colleges clearly provide that the appointment of the non-teaching staff may be made by direct recruitment, promotion or transfer.
Rule 3 of the aforesaid Rules is reproduced as under :-  "3.
Mode of appointment : (i) The appointment to the non-teaching staff may be made by direct recruitment, promotion or transfer.
While considering appointment by promotion to a higher post due consideration shall be given to seniority-cum-merit and to the recommendation of Principal regarding work and conduct of employee.
(ii) The appointment, suspension and dismissal of the clerical staff shall rest with the Managing Committee of the College.
However, a temporary appointment for a period upto three months may be made by the Principal.
(iii) The appointment, suspension and dismissal of the peons, daftries, chowkidars, attendants or other employees of this cadre shall rest with the Principal of the College.
All the appointments of Class-III employees may be made through open advertisement and the concerned Principal shall submit the case of selected employees to the University for approval."
On the basis of the aforesaid Rules, it is stated that the post of Laboratory Attendant is a Class III post.
As such it was filled up by direct recruitment through open advertisement.
4.
In the written statement filed by respondents No. 1 and 2, it is  stated in the preliminary objections that the respondent-College has not adhered to the procedure laid down under the rules for appointment of Sr.
Laboratory Attendant and has appointed a person who is not having the minimum requisite qualifications prescribed for the post.
It is further stated that the person eligible for the post is required to possess 1st Division in Matric with Science subject or 2nd Division in 10+2 (Science Group) or equivalent examination or B.Sc.
or Laboratory Assistant with 3 years experience.
It is stated that since the petitioner does not possess these qualifications, he cannot be appointed as Senior Laboratory Attendant.
5.
The petitioner has filed a replication and categorically stated that the petitioner has passed the matriculation examination from Punjab School Education Board with Science in 1st Division.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
We are of the considered opinion that in view of the admitted position that the petitioner possesses the necessary qualifications, it cannot be held that the petitioner could not have been appointed on the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant.
The reason given by the DPI-respondent No. 2 in the order dated 532004 (Annexure P-10) is that the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant cannot be filled by way of direct recruitment because this is a promotional post.
The DPI has not made a reference to any rules, on the basis of which the aforesaid observations have been made.
On the other hand, respondents No. 3 and 4 have relied on Rule 3 of the Punjabi University Rules which are applicable to the affiliated colleges.
The aforesaid rule clearly envisages appointment by direct recruitment as well as by way of promotion or transfer.
The rule postulates that all appointments on Class III posts may be made through open advertisement and the concerned Principal shall submit the cases of selected candidates to the University for appointment.
The reasons given by respondents No. 1 and 2 in the preliminary objections are contrary to the reason mentioned in the impugned order (Annexure P-10).
The reasons now sought to be given in the written statement cannot be permitted to justify the impugned order which has been passed only on the ground that the post of Senior Laboratory Attendant is only a promotional post.
It is a settled proposition of law that when an order of an authority is challenged in legal proceedings, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned in the impugned order and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons enumerated in the pleadings of the parties.
This view of ours finds support from the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case of Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR 1952 SC 16.
In paragraph 9 of the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "9........We are clear that public orders publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations subsequently given by the officer making the order of what he meant, or of what was in his mind, or what he intended to do.
Public orders made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect the acting and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and must be construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself."
In the case of Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. the Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 851 the Supreme Court holding the same proposition, has observed as under:-  "8.
The second equally relevant matter is that when a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out.
We may here draw attention to the observations of Bose, J. in Gordhandas Bhanji (AIR 1952 SC 16) (at p.18)............." Both the aforesaid judgments of the Supreme Court have also been followed by this Court in the case of Smt. Jagminder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) RSJ 362.
7.
In view of the aforesaid settled proposition of law, we hold that the order dated 532004 (Annexure P-10) passed by the DPI (Colleges) is erroneous and arbitrary, and therefore, the same deserves to be quashed.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 532004 (Annexure P-10) passed by the DPI (Colleges) is hereby quashed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to issue the necessary certificate of approval for the appointment of the petitioner on the post of Sr.
Laboratory Attendant with effect from the date he was initially appointed on 1642003.
No costs.
Petition allowed.