Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - The appellant before us is the unsuccessful writ petitioner whose petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenging the order of his dismissal from service passed under Section 20 of the Army Act, 1950 (for short "the Act") has been dismissed by the learned Single Judge of this Court vide order dated 621996.
2.
Briefly, the facts of this case are that the appellant, who joined the Indian Army in October, 1975, also remained posted between March, 1984 to October, 1986 in the Zonal Recruiting Office, Jalandhar Cantonment.
Certain complaints of extortion of money and fabrication of false certificates having been received against him, the matter was got probed from the Central Bureau of Investigation.
A raid conducted at the appellant's house resulted in recovery of solved answer sheets.
Further allegations were also levelled against the appellant that he had amassed money and properties which were disproportionate to his known sources of income.
After completion of necessary formalities, the appellant was consequently dismissed from service by order dated 571991, the challenge to which by way of writ petition, as noticed already, met with failure.
3.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant before the learned Single Judge that under Section 20 of the Act, it was only the officer who was commanding a Brigade, was competent to pass an order of dismissal and, therefore, the order of appellant's dismissal dated 571991 passed by Brig.
Surender Mohan was bad in law as the said officer was not commanding the Brigade.
It was further submitted by the counsel that the appellant was entitled to the supply of the copies of the complaints etc. and in the circumstances of the case, there was clear denial of reasonable opportunity to the appellant to make his submissions.
The contentions raised on behalf of the appellant were controverted and ultimately, two prominent questions fell for consideration before the learned Single Judge, viz. (i) was the order of dismissal of the appellant without jurisdiction ?
and (ii) was the appellant given a due and reasonable opportunity ?
The submissions made on both the above issues did not find favour with the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge on examination of the submissions and the relevant rules came to the conclusion that the order of dismissal from service was not passed by an authority which did not have the jurisdiction to pass it.
It was further clearly held that there was no denial of reasonable opportunity to the appellant.
4.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the appellant made strenuous efforts to assail the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
He submitted that the appellant had not been dismissed by the competent authority as Brig.
Surender Mohan, Zonal Recruiting Officer, Jalandhar had no jurisdiction to dismiss the appellant in view of Section 20 of the Act.
He also raised a plea that the material on which reliance was placed while dismissing the appellant from service had never been supplied to the appellant and, therefore, the dismissal order was vitiated.
He relied upon the Apex Court decision in the case of State Bank of India and others v. D.C. Aggarwal and another, 1993(1) S.C.T.
225 : JT 1992(6) SCC 673, in support of his contention.
5.
Mr. Kamal Sehgal, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand very emphatically submitted that there was serious allegations of corruption against the appellant and the learned Single Judge had rightly declined the claim of the appellant.
He supported the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Section 20 of the Act reads thus :-  "20.
Dismissal, removal or reduction by the [Chief of the Army Staff] and by other officers :- (1) The Chief of the Army Staff may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act, other than an officer.
(2) The Chief of the Army Staff may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks, any warrant officer or any non-commissioned officer.
(3) An officer having power not less than a brigade or equivalent commander or any prescribed officer may dismiss or remove from the service any person serving under his command other than an officer or a junior commissioned officer.
(4) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section (3) may reduce to a lower grade or rank, any warrant officer or any non-commissioned officer under his command.
(5) A warrant officer reduced to the ranks under this section shall not, however, be required to serve in the ranks as a sepoy.
(6) The commanding officer of an acting non-commissioned officer may order him to revert to his permanent grade as a non-commissioned officer, or if he has no permanent grade above the ranks, to the ranks.
(7) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the said provisions contained in this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder".
7.
It is thus seen that under Section 20(3) of the Act, the power of dismissal, removal or reduction can be exercised by an officer having power not less than a brigade or equivalent commander or any prescribed officer.
Further, Section 8 of the Act provides that "whenever persons subject to this Act are serving under an officer commanding any military organisation, not in this section specifically named and being in the opinion of the Central Government not less than a brigade, that Government may prescribe the officer by whom the powers, which under this Act may be exercised by officers commanding armies, army corps, divisions and brigades, shall, as regards such persons, be exercised".
8.
The Government of India vide Annexure R-8 had promulgated and issued a gazette notification dated 27.5.1988 whereby the Zonal Recruiting Officer, Jalandhar had been prescribed as competent authority by the Government of India to exercise the powers of brigade or equivalent commander.
The appellant was a Dafedar (non-commissioned officer) and was governed by the provisions of the Act.
The offer of dismissal has been passed by Brigadier Surender Mohan had been working as Zonal Recruiting Officer, Jalandhar and prescribed to exercise the powers of Brigade or equivalent Commander by virtue of Annexure R-8.
Thus, it cannot be said that Brigadier Surender Mohan was not competent to pass the order of dismissal of the appellant from service.
The appellant was found to be undesirable by the competent authority and unfit to be retained in service.
The first contention is, thus, rejected.
We have carefully examined the second contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the disciplinary authority could not act on the material or documents which were neither supplied nor shown to the delinquent, but have not felt persuaded to accept the same.
Rule 17 of the Army Rules, 1954 (for short, "the Rules") reads thus :-  "17.
Dismissal or removal by Chief of the Army Staff and by other officers :- Save in the case where a person is dismissed or removed from service on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction by a criminal Court or a Court-material, no person shall be dismissed or removed under sub- section (1) of sub-section (3) of Section 20; unless he has been informed of the particulars of the cause of action against him and allowed reasonable time to state in writing any reasons he may have to urge against his dismissal or removal from the service : Provided that if in opinion of the officer competent to order the dismissal or removal, it is not expedient or reasonably practicable to comply with the provisions of this rule, he may after certifying to that effect, order the dismissal or removal without complying with the procedure set out in this rule.
All cases of dismissal or removal under this rule where the prescribed procedure has not been complied with shall be reported to the Central Government".
9.
The aforesaid rule provides that no person shall be dismissed or removed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of Section 20 unless he has been informed of the particulars of the cause of action against him and allowed reasonable time to give his reply in writing urging reasons against his dismissal or removal from service except where a person is dismissed or removed from service on the ground of conduct which led to his conviction by a criminal Court or the court material.
10.
The charge against the appellant was that he had indulged in extortion of money from potential candidates and had accumulated a large sum of money besides purchase of immovable properties which was totally disproportionate to his known source of income.
The show case notice, Annexure R-10, issued to him clearly spelt out the particulars of causes of action against the appellant.
It reads thus :-  "1.
You were posted in Zonal Recruiting Office, Jalandhar Cantt.
from 15.3.84 to 9.10.86.
While you remained posted in the said recruiting office, you indulged in extorting money from potential candidates for recruitment in the Armed Forces and accumulated large sum of money besides purchase of immovable properties which is disproportionate to your known source of income.
2.
The amount deposited by you in your saving bank account No. 8467 Punjab National Bank Charkhi Dadri far exceeds your monthly salary of about Rs. 1250/- or any known source of income.
3.
You also acquired during this short period landed property in your name as well as in the name of your wife at Charkhi Dadri, Rohtak and Bhiwani in Haryana, thus acquiring and possessing assets disproportionate to your known source of income.
4.
Some solved sheets of various BROs, i.e. Jalandhar, Patiala and Amritsar pertaining to the period from 1980 to 1984 were found in your house at Negawan, which is highly illegal".
11.
Thus, it cannot be said that the appellant had not been supplied the particulars of cause of action, on the basis of which action was sought to be taken.
Once, the respondents had issued show cause notice spelling the specific charges against the appellant, it was for the appellant to have satisfactorily replied to the same in the reply filed by him.
The appellant had failed to substantiate his pleas and had not satisfactorily explained that the assets possessed by him were not disproportionate to his known sources of income.
12.
The reliance of the appellant on State Bank of India's case (supra), does not advance his case.
The Apex Court in that case noticed that the enquiry did not show that the bank had sustained any monetary loss or there was any conclusive proof that the official in all the transactions for procurement of steel, fans etc. had misappropriated the bank funds or obtained pecuniary benefits for himself.
The Apex Court had held that the order was vitiated not because of mechanical exercise of powers or non-supply of the enquiry report but for relying and acting upon material which was not only irrelevant but even could not be relied upon.
The instant case is clearly distinguishable.
In the facts of the present case, the appellant while working as non-commissioned officer in Army, had indulged in corruption.
While issuing the show cause notice, he was apprised of the particulars of charges against him which were contained in the show cause notice and it was for him to give satisfactory explanation which he had failed to do so.
The actions of the respondents in dismissing the appellant from service was, thus, justified.
The second contention also merits rejection.
There is, thus, no merit in this appeal.
Consequently, the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.