Arvind Kumar, J - The petitioner-workman is aggrieved by the award dated 1732006 passed by respondent No. 1 vide which his claim for re-instatement and other benefits has been dismissed.
The Labour Court, while dismissing the claim of the petitioner, held that since the services of the workman were on contract basis, for a fixed period, it automatically comes to an end as per the terms of the letter of contract executed between the parties.
His discharge did not amount to retrenchment in view of exceptional clause (bb) to Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act).
Feeling dissatisfied with the same, the petitioner has filed the instant petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have perused the paper book.
3.
The counsel for the petitioner-workman has argued that the petitioner had served the respondent No. 2-management for more than 240 days in 12 preceding months from the date of his termination.
Therefore, his termination is bad due to non-compliance of provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
Moreover, the work existed with the management when the services of petitioner were terminated.
It has further been argued that the Labour Court has fallen into error of law in not considering the definition of retrenchment as contained in Section 2(oo) of the Act.
4.
The arguments have been scanned.
The issue to be examined is whether the action of the management in terminating the services of petitioner-workman, can be treated as "retrenchment from the employment" within the meaning of the provisions of the Act or the services of petitioner have come to an end by efflux of time.
Retrenchment has been defined in Section 2(oo) of the Act, which reads as under :-  "2(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or  (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or [(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non- renewal of the contract or employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or] (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health;]" 5.
A bare perusal of Clause (bb) shows that it is in the nature of exception to Section 2(oo) of the Act.
The question arises whether the case of the respondent-workman falls in the said exception or not ?
In the instant case, the employment of the petitioner-workman was initially made on 1281999 for a fixed term of six months.
The relevant extract of appointment letter (Annexure P-1) containing aforesaid condition on reproduction, reads as under :-  "....
This appointment is purely temporary for a period of six months in connection with work which is of temporary nature.
The appointment will automatically come to an end on the expiry of the said period or even earlier if considered necessary.
If these terms and acceptable to you, please signify your assent by signing the duplicate copy of this letter in token of your acceptance."
He was given further extension on 1122000 and 4102000 for a period of six months and one year respectively with the same terms and conditions.
Hence by logical corollary, the services of petitioner-workman being for a fixed term and the nature of term also contractual was within his full knowledge that he is to render services to the management on contract basis.
He admittedly had voluntarily accepted his term of said engagements.
Therefore, the question of workman taking the plea that the matter falls within the purview of Section 25-F of the Act does not arise.
It is not a case where the workman was continuously appointed with artificial gap of one day or so to say that the management was prone to unfair labour practice.
A conjoint reading of the said offer and the extensions thereof (Annexures P-1 to P-3) clearly shows that they were contractual and were for a fixed term.
In this backdrop the case of the petitioner-workman falls within the said exception of Clause (bb).
It is thus imperative to conclude that the termination of the workman did not amount to retrenchment as the same was in consequence with the terms and conditions of his appointment/extensions.
Thus, the services of petitioner have come to an end with efflux of time.
Once the conclusion logically so arrived is that the termination of the workman from the employment did not constitute retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act, in our view there is no question of application of Section 25-F of the Act.
Our this view finds support from a decision rendered by Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board v. Subhash Chand and another, 2006(2) SCT 23 (SC) : 2006(2) Law Herald (SC) 1053.
The Labour Court has rightly considered this aspect of the matter that the services of petitioner-workman were discontinued after the expiry of fixed term and it is not open to him to raise dispute under the Act by taking the plea of applicability of Section 25-F of the Act.
6.
Moreover, there is a bald plea that there had been the work with the management when the services of the petitioner were terminated.
The Labour Court has returned a categoric finding that the workman has failed to substantiate his said plea.
Furthermore, nothing has been shown to us to take a contrary view.
7.
We are satisfied that on the basis of evidence on record, the Labour Court has arrived at a correct conclusion.
In our view these findings are neither perverse nor based on no evidence.
In these circumstances, it would not be appropriate or justifiable to interfere with the award made by the Labour Court.
As a result of the discussion, the present writ fails and the same is dismissed in limine accordingly.
Petition dismissed.