HS Bedi, J - The appellant was employed as a Sanitary Beldar in the office of Director Health Services (Anti Malaria Department) Chandigarh, and on the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee, was promoted to the post of Sanitary Supervisor on ad hoc basis on 1651986.
He was reverted to the post of Sanitary Jamadar/Beldar vide order dated 1451987.
This action was challenged by the appellant through the Workers' Union as being illegal and arbitrary.
The dispute was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short "the Act").
In the written statement filed before the Labour Court an objection was taken that the department was not an "industry" within the meaning of the Act.
It was specifically pleaded on behalf of the Management that the qualifications prescribed for the post of Sanitary Supervisor was that of Matriculation with Science subjects and as the appellant had passed the Prathma Examination conducted by the Hindu Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, which had not been recognized as equivalent to Matriculation by Chandigarh Administration, he was not eligible for promotion to the post of Sanitary Supervisor.
It was also pleaded that on a complaint being received regarding the ineligibility of the appellant, the matter had been referred to the School Education of UP Board, Allahabad which had informed the Chandigarh Administration that the Prathma Examination had not been recognized by it as equivalent to the Matriculation and it was on this basis that the Chandigarh Administration had also decided not to recognize Prathma Examination as equivalent to that of Matriculation.
2.
The Labour Court on a consideration of the matter vide order dated 141991 held that the respondent-department was an industry.
It also observed that the order of the reversion of the appellant was unjustified in the light of the fact that Prathma Examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad had been recognized by some of the institutions like the Panjab University, Chandigarh and the Punjab School Education Board as equivalent to their Matriculation Examination and as such merely because the Chandigarh Administration had not recognized this qualification as being equivalent, it could not be said that the appellant was not eligible to hold the post of Sanitary Supervisor.
The Labour Court further held that while reverting the appellant to the post of Sanitary Beldar, he had not been given any notice and thus the principles of natural justice stood violated and consequently the reversion order was bad in law.
The Labour Court accordingly accepted the reference, set aside the order of reversion of the appellant with all consequential benefits.
3.
The respondent-Department challenged the award of the Labour Court by filing a writ petition which had been allowed by a learned Single Judge by order dated 20.9.1995 which has been impugned in this appeal.
4.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that merely because the Chandigarh Administration had not recognized the Prathma Examination from the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad as being equivalent to Matriculation Examination it could not be said that the appellant did not posses the requisite academic qualification and was thus not eligible for promotion to the post of Sanitary Supervisor.
It was argued that this aspect of the matter had not been appreciated by the learned Single Judge.
5.
When the matter was put for motion hearing on 21111995, the appeal was admitted and the operation of the impugned order of the learned Single Judge was stayed.
The said order was subsequently confirmed on 871996.
It may be noticed that pursuant to the said order of stay, the appellant has continued to work as a Sanitary Supervisor.
During the course of hearing today, the learned counsel for the appellant has produced on record a circular dated 1821970 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Education and Youth Services, New Delhi which has been addressed to the Education and Secretaries of all State Governments/Union Territories, which is marked as Mark `A' by us, in support of his plea that Prathma Examination of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad had been recognized as being equivalent to the Matriculation Examination.
The counsel has also pointed out that the reversion order passed by the respondent-department had in fact been passed without having regard to the fact that there was no rule or notification requiring the appellant to pass the Matriculation Examination from a particular university and thus the order of reversion of the appellant was not sustainable in law.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and have perused the record.
In the light of various documents on record which have been referred to by the Labour Court and also in the light of circular of the Government of India, Mark `A', we find merit in the argument of learned counsel for the appellant.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that order of reversion of the appellant from the post of Sanitary Supervisor to the post of Sanitary Beldar could not have been made on the ground that the qualification of Prathma Examination was not equivalent to Matriculation Standard.
It has also been pointed out by the counsel for the appellant that during the pendency of this appeal, the appellant has also cleared 10+2 Examination from the National Open School, New Delhi which had permitted him to take the examination which clearly goes to show that the examination passed by the appellant had been recognized by the National Open School, New Delhi as equivalent to Matriculation Examination.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that this appeal deserves to succeed.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed, the impugned order dated 20.9.1995 of the learned Single Judge is set aside and that of the Labour Court dated 141991 is restored.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.