JL Gupta, J - In these two writ petitions, the following question of law arises for consideration :-  "Whether the reversion of the petitioners from the higher post to which they were promoted or appointed on ad hoc basis, to their respective substantive posts, is in the nature of penalty for misconduct, and therefore invalid for not holding regular inquiry ?"
2.
The brief facts are these : The petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 962 of 1992 was a Head Draftsman.
By order dated February 2, 1990, he was promoted as Assistant Engineer on probation.
The probationary period fixed under the rules was two years.
The petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 1213 of 1992 was holding the substantive post of Pump Operator.
He was appointed on ad hoc basis to the higher post of the Junior Engineer by order dated August 20, 1990.
Orders were passed reverting both the them, to their respective substantive posts.
Order, Annexure P.2 dated September 26, 1991 in Civil Writ Petition No. 962 of 1992 reads :  "On 27.8.91, Manager Kisan Bhawan complained that Shri Bachan Singh, Assistant Engineer (Civil) and Sher Singh, Section Officer (Mechanical) were found under the influence of liquor.
To verify this the fact (?)
the Executive Engineer (Market, Executive Engineer (PMP) Shri Baldev Singh, Executive Engineer (GS) and Administrative Officer, Mandi Board reached Kisan Bhawan on the spot.
They found Bachan Singh, Assistant Engineer (C) and Shri Sher Singh Section Officer, were drunk.
Senior Medical Officer Jagjit Singh of Mandi Board medically examined both the employees and as per his medical report both were said to be under the infuence of liquor and not in their senses.
There voices were trembling.
So it is clearly proved that both the employees used intoxicant and thus their conduct is violative of the instructions of the Govt. and Board vide Government letter No. 5613-2911-74 dated 881984 which prohibits the use of intoxicants and the whosoever (?)
Government Officer/official disciplinary action against him.
Thus, instructions of the Government are violated by both the above said employees as they are liable for strict action.
The above stated facts are examined thoroughly and it is concluded that Shri Bachan Singh, Asstt.
Engineer (Civil) is liable for punishment.
This employee was promoted from Head Draftsman to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) and this promotion was for two years probation.
This fact was also brought to the notice that employee who has committed this crime during probation of period (?).
So, he himself is responsible for punishment.
Keeping in view the above facts, I, TC Gupta, IAS Secretary, Punjab Mandi Board, order for reversion of Shri Bachan Singh, Assistant Engineer to the previous post of Head Draftsman in compliance of Government instructions.
Sd/- TC Gupta, Secretary.
Chandigarh"  As can be seen from the contents of the order, both the petition were found to have been under influence of liquor on August 27, 1991, during office hours, and they were subjected to medical examination by the Senior Medical Officer, Jagjit Singh of Mandi Board who certified that both of them were under the influence of liquor and were not in their senses and their voices were trembling.
3.
Questioning the legality of the said order, the petitioners presented Civil Writ Petition No 15283 of 1991 and Civil Writ Petition No. 15261 of 1991.
As ex facie the orders impugned in those petitions indicated that reversion was in the nature of penalty for misconduct, a Division Bench of his Court quashed the order.
Thereafter, the orders impugned in these writ petitions have been passed by the respondent.
The order passed which is impugned in Civil Writ Petition No. 962 of 1992, in Annexure P4 dated January 16, 1992.
It reads :  "Shri Bachan Singh Assistant Engineer (Mechanical) (Probationer) is appointed again to his substantive post of Head Draftsman as his services as Assistant Engineer are no longer required.
Chandigarh.
Dated 1611992, Secretary."
The order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 1213 of 1992 is Annexure P.1, dated January 16, 1992.
It reads :  "Shri Sher Singh s/o Shri Manjit Singh, who was appointed as Junior Engineer (Mechanical) on ad hoc basis is appointed again to his original post of Pump Operator as his services as Junior Engineer are no long required.
Chandigarh.
Dated : 1611992  Secretary."
4.
The allegations made in the writ petitions have been denied in the written statements.
It is specifically stated that by the impugned orders, the petitioners have been, in the normal course, reverted to their substantive posts.
It is also pointed out that the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 962 of 1992 has been promoted on officiating basis and he was on probation and that the order reverting him to the substantive post is not in the nature of penalty for misconduct.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 1213 of 1992 also, the stand taken is similar.
In that it is stated that the reversion was not as a measure of penalty and that as the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis, no right of his was infringed and that it did not cast any stigma on the character and conduct of the petitioner.
5.
As may be seen from the Annexures to the petition, the order impugned in Civil Writ Petition No. 962 of 1992 says that the petitioner has been appointed to his substantive post and that the petitioner's services are no longer required in the higher post.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 1213 of 1992, petitioner who was appointed on ad hoc basis has been sent back to his substantive post.
The real purport of the orders is that the petitioners, who were appointed on probation in the higher posts on ad hoc basis have been found unsuitable for continuing in the higher post and have been reverted to the substantive post.
It is well settled proposition in service law that in respect of a person appointed on temporary or ad hoc basis or on probation, the appointing authority has the power either to impose penalty for misconduct or to pass an order of discharge or reversion of the civil servant to his substantive post if the appointing authority considers that it is necessary to do in the interest of administration.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contended that as the earlier order had been passed which penal in nature as found by the Division Bench of this Court, any subsequent order passed by the competent authority could only be as a measure of penalty and for doing so, it was obligatory for it to hold an inquiry as contemplated under Article 311(2) of the Constitution read with the relevant service rules regulating disciplinary proceedings.
We are unable to agree.
If an authority has the power to pass an order discharging a probationer or to hold a departmental inquiry against him and to remove him from service, which of the two courses should be resorted to, is left to the choice of the authority.
If on the facts and circumstances of the case, the authority considers that the charges should be inquired into and the probationer should not be allowed to go scot-free and he should be punished, it is open to the authority to impose penalty after holding enquiry.
For holding such an enquiry, Article 311(2) of the Constitution as well as the relevant service rules, regulating disciplinary inquiry applies and has to be followed.
If on the other hand, the authority, having regard to the record of service including any attitude or tendency of the civil servant concerned disclosed during the probationary period or during the period of ad hoc appointment, the attitude or tendency of the civil servant is such as would justify and is sufficient to pass an order of discharge, simpliciter it is at liberty to do so.
The clear distinction between the nature of the right of a probationer has, and permanent government servant has, as also the difference between the nature of inquiry or material which constitute the basis for imposing penalty and for passing an order of discharge simpliciter have been brought forth in the Division Bench judgment of the Karnatka High Court in L Kumara Chandra v. State of Karnataka, 1987(4) SLR 472.
Relevant portion of the judgment reads :  "14.
However, the two petitioners have stated in the petitions certain incidents, in respect of which their explanations had been called for, which constituted the basis for their discharge, and therefore the real nature of the order was penalty for misconduct.
This submission of the petitioners does require careful examination and it involves the following aspects : (i) the extent of the right of persons appointed on probation.
(ii) the scope of the power of the Appointing Authority in taking a decision regarding the suitability of a person appointed on probation, and  (iii) the question as to whether a ground other than work and performance of a probationer could constitute a basis for deciding that the probationer was not suitable for the post concerned and in this case not suitable to hold a judicial post.
15.
From a long line of decisions, it is established that Article 311(2) of the Constitution does not make any difference regarding the holding of inquiry as a condition precedent for the imposition of penalty of dismissal, or removal from service as between persons appointed on permanent basis to a civil post or as a member of a civil service and those appointed on temporary basis or on probation to such service or post and further that Article 311(2) would be attracted even if the order by which the termination of service or discharge is made, does not state that it was being made as a measure of penalty, but in truth it is so (See P.L.
Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36; Madangopal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 531; State of Orissa v. Ram Narain Dass, AIR 1961 SC 177).
It is also clearly established that the provisions of the said Article have no application to the termination of service of a temporary employee in accordance with the conditions of service applicable to him or to the discharge of a probationer on grounds of (sic) holding any inquiry limited to the purpose of ascertaining his suitability.
See : State of Punjab v. Sukhraj Bahadur, AIR 1968 SC 1089; Ranendra Chandra v. Union of India, AIR 1963 SC 1552; State of UP v. P.V.
Akbar Ali Khan, AIR 1966 SC 1842; Bishan Lal Gupta v. State of Haryana, AIR 1978 SC 363.
16.
The reason for this is, the difference in the nature of the rights of permanent civil servant and a probationer.
In the case of a permanent civil servant he would have already acquired the right to hold the post until he reaches the age of superannuation or until his tenure is determined as a measure of penalty or until he is prematurely retired, after he had put in the prescribed period of qualifying service or had crossed the prescribed age in public interest as permitted by the Rules regulating his conditions of service.
But in the case of a probationer, he has no right to the post.
The very fact that a person is appointed on probation means he is on trial and it is for the competent Appointing Authority to decide as to whether he should be admitted as a permanent member of the service, that is whether the right to hold the post should be conferred on him or not.
17.
Thus it may be seen the difference between a permanent civil servant and a probationer is :  Whereas in respect of a permanent civil servant, that is a person who has already been admitted as a permanent member of the service, the question in the context of putting an end to his tenure would be whether he should be deprived of his right, to hold the post i.e. to continue in service; Whereas in the case of consideration of the case of a probationer for confirmation, the question would be whether the right to hold a civil post should be conferred on him or not.
If this difference between the two is borne in mind, the distinction between the nature of an inquiry for the purpose of determining the right of a permanent civil servant to continue in service and the nature of the inquiry which might become necessary in a given case to decide as to whether the right to hold a civil post should be conferred on a person who is appointed on probation or not becomes clear.
In the nature of things, the two types of inquiries cannot be similar and the matter is also not res integra.
18.
In the case of former, compliance with Article 311(2) would be a condition precedent, for, putting an end to the tenure of such civil servant, in whatever form would be, per-se a penalty of dismissal or removal from service.
Whereas in the case of the latter, that is, a probationer, the question to be decided would be whether he is suitable for the confirmation or whether he is not suitable and he should be discharged.
For taking such a decision, Article 311(2) has no application.
This aspect is fully expounded by the High Court in the case of Bishan Lal Gupta, AIR 1978 SC 363, to which we shall refer to a little later.
19.
It is also necessary to bear in mind that the decision regarding the suitability or a person appointed on probation not only depends upon his work and performance during the period of probation but also upon various other factors, which might constitute relevant grounds or deciding the suitability.
This aspect has been explained by the Supreme Court in the case of TCM Pillai v. Technology Institute, AIR 1971 SC 1811.
In the said case the plea of the petitioner, who had been appointed as a probationer in the institute and who had been discharged from service, was, that this suitability for the post was not decided on the basis of his work and performance in the post concerned, but he was found unsuitable because during the period of probation he insisted for extending certain service benefits, which he considered to be just, and also because for the purpose of advancement of his prospects, he intended to apply for selection for appointment to a post in the Banaras University.
The contention of the petitioner was, such a decision based upon the conduct of the petition during probation and not on the basis of work and performance amounted to a penalty for misconduct and therefore bad.
The contention was negatived.
Relevant paragraph of the judgment reads :  "7.
It is well settled that a probationer or a temporary servant can be discharged if it is found that he is not suitable for the post which he is holding.
This can be done without complying with the provisions of Article 311(2) unless the services are terminated by way of punishment.
Suitability does not depend merely on the excellence or proficiency in work.
There are many factors which enter into consideration for confirming a person who is on probation.
A particular attitude or tendency displayed by an employee can well influence the decision of the confirming authority while judging his suitability or fitness for confirmation.
8.
In the present case the Board of Governors consisted of a number of distinguished and well known academicians and teachers.
Although there is a mention in the resolution about the confidential reports by the head of the department and the Director, they have not been placed on the record.
Even assuming that those reports were favourable so far as the academic work of the appellant was concerned the Board was entitled to take into consideration the other matters which have already been mentioned for the purpose of deciding whether he should be confirmed or whether he should be given a notice of one month as per the terms of the letter of appointment.
The Board decided to adopt the latter course.
By no stretch of reasoning can it be said that the appellant had been punished and that his services had been dispensed with as a penal measure."
From the above judgment it is clear that apart from the work and performance of a probationer, a particular attitude or tendency displayed by the employee concerned during the period of probation would itself be sufficient to adjudge the suitability or otherwise of a probationer for confirmation.
20.
In the light of the above decision, the cases of discharge of probationers which are not punitive in nature could be classified into two categories :  (i) Discharge made purely on an assessment of work and performance of a probationer during the probationary period as discernible from the confidential reports and/or performance reports, excluding from consideration any misconduct alleged against him if any in a given case; and  (ii) Discharge adjudging a probationer unsuitable on the basis of an attitude or tendency displayed during the probationary period which in the opinion of the appointing Authority is sufficient to hold him unsuitable for the post, in addition to adverse reports about his work and performance if any, or even if his work and performance was good during the period of probation, by an innocuously worded order.
21.
As far as the first category of cases is concerned, there is no difficulty.
If the order of discharge is made solely on the basis of work and performance as disclosed by any performance reports secured or the annual confidential reports, the opinion formed by the Appointing Authority would be beyond reproach.
In the second category of cases, it is necessary to hold a limited inquiry to ascertain the truth about the incident or incidents which disclose an attitude or tendency which could constitute the basis to adjudge the probationer unsuitable to hold the post.
This inquiry is separate and distinct from an inquiry which is prescribed as a condition precedent under Article 311(2) before imposing the penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
The distinction between the two types of inquiries has been clearly laid down in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Bishan Lal Gupta v. State of Haryana, AIR 1978 SC 363.
The relevant portion of the judgment reads :  "14.
These observations must we think, be meant to cover in those cases where even though the probationer may have no right to continue in service, yet, the order terminating his services casts a stigma on his name.
This means that the individual concerned must suffer a substantial loss of reputation which may affect his future prospects.
In that case, justice requires a further hearing.
If, however, after going into the particular facts and circumstances of a case, the court finds, as seems to be the position the case before us that the enquiry conducted and notices given were intended only to arrive at finding on the desirability of continuing a person in service and more serious action was contemplated, it means that no stigma was intended to be cast.
It may be that, in some cases, the mere form does not indicate the exact nature and result of the proceedings judged by its nature and its effect upon a probationer.
To some extent the courts are bound to take into account what the incontrovertible evidence disclosed.
It may conclude that even if the reputation of a probationer was to some degree affected by what took place yet, if those facts should not reasonably be disputed by him.
It provided a sufficient ground for terminating his service.
There is, in such cases, no injustice.
15.
This court would certainly not interfere under Article 136 of the Constitution on a merely technical plea that the case deserved a fuller enquiry.
It must be shown that such an enquiry could serve a useful purpose.
The facts must indicate that, if this fuller inquiry was held the Government servant will be found to be blameless.
Otherwise, further prolongation of such litigation is pointless.
16.
It is impossible to lay down propositions which are so clear cut as to cover every conceivable case.
Indeed, an attempt to do so may make the law too rigid.
It is only if patent facts disclose a serious enough infringement of law as well as indubitably damaging and underserved consequences upon a petitioner that the Court's conscience could be so moved as to induce it to interfere under Article 136 of the Constitution.
We are quite certain that this is not one of those cases.
On this ground alone this case could not be one in which we could grant special leave to appeal.
17.
There is, however, another point of view also, already indicated above, from which the case could be considered.
It is that the High Court held that this was not really a case of punishment.
On this aspect of the case, the High Court rightly seems to us to have proceeded on the view that there should be atleast some difference, as to the nature of or the depth of the inquiry to be held, as between a probationer whose services can be terminated by a notice and a confirmed Government servant who has a right to continue in service until he has reached a certain age.
It is true that neither can be "punished" without a formal charge and an inquiry.
But a less formal inquiry may be sufficient as it was here to determine whether a probationer, who has no fixed or fully formed right to continue in service (treated in the eye of law as a case of "no right" to continue in service) should be continued.
A confirmed Government servant's dismissal or removal is a more serious matter.
This difference must necessarily be reflected in the nature of the inquiries for the two different purpose."
The ratio of the above decision shows that a clear distinction exists as between a case in which the right of a civil servant to continue in services is sought to be determined and a case in which a decision has to be taken as to whether a probationer should be admitted as a member of the service and the right to hold a civil post and to continue in civil service, should be conferred on him.
In the former case, an inquiry in conformity with Article 311(2) of the Constitution and the rules regulating inquiry is necessary, whereas in the latter case, a limited inquiry to ascertain the truth of the incidents reported against the probationer is sufficient.
22.
The above position in law stands reinforced by the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. PS Bhatt, AIR 1981 SC 957.
The respondent in this case was holding a substantive post of Announcer on the establishment of the All India Radio.
He was selected by direct recruitment and appointed as Producer on probation on 771975.
During the period of probation, on 16111976, in the course of a conversation in the studio between him and another he indulged in some loose talk using filthy and abusive language about the other officers of the department.
The conversation had been tape recorded and it was forwarded to the Station Director.
A memo dated 1121976 was issued to Sri PS Bhatt which read :  "It has been brought to my notice that Shri PS Bhatt, Producer (Women and Children) has conducted himself in a manner not conductive to the discipline of the office by indulging himself in loose talk in the studios on 16111976.
A serious view is being taken of such an irresponsible lapse on his part.
He is severely warned on such misdemeanour."
Thereafter, the Station Director reported the matter to the Director General, enclosing thereto the substance of the conversation which had been tape recorded.
Thereafter, he was discharged from the post of Producer by an innocuous order dated 2511977 and he was reverted back to his substantive post of Announcer.
Thereafter, the said order was challenged before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh on the ground that though the discharge was by innocuous order, it was really in the nature of penalty imposed for misconduct, referred to in the memo dated 1121976 extracted earlier.
The Learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and his order was confirmed in appeal by a Division Bench of the High Court.
The judgments were reversed by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case.
There relevant portion of the judgment reads :-  "7.
The law in relation to termination of service of an employee on probation is well settled.
If any order terminating the service of a probationer by an order of termination simpliciter without attaching any stigma to the employee and if the said order is not an order by way of punishment, there will be no question of the provisions of Article 311 being attracted.
As the law on the question appears to be well settled, it does not become necessary to consider the various decisions which have been cited.
8.
The only question which falls for determination in the present appeal is whether the impugned order was passed by way of punishment or not.
It has not been argued that the impugned order attaches any kind of stigma to Shri Bhatt.
We have earlier notified the order and it is clear from the order that the order is an order of termination of the employment on probation simpliciter and reversion to the old post without attaching any kind of stigma.
The High Court had proceeded on the basis that the impugned order was by way of punishment.
9.
It may be true that in deciding whether an order is by way of punishment or not, the relevant facts and circumstances may have to be considered.
In the instant case, the broad facts, as established, appear to be as follows :- 1.
Shri Bhatt and Shri Prasad had indulged in loose talk and used filthy language against there Station Director and other officers of All India Radio, Vijayawada, while in office; 2.
This finding has been recorded by the Learned Single Judge;  3.
The tape recording of conversation of Shri Bhatt and Prasad has been forwarded to the Station Director;  4.
The Station Director by his memo dated 1.12.76 which we have earlier noted, had warned Mr. Bhatt;  5.
The Station Director had further reported the matter to the Director General, All India Radio for appropriate action;  6.
The impugned order terminating the period of probation of Shri Bhatt as producer and reverting him to his post of Announcedr had thereafter been passed.
On a proper consideration of these facts, in our opinion, it cannot be said that the impugned order, was passed by way of punishment; and, in our view the High Court was in error in arriving at the finding that the impugned order was by way of punishment, as the report of the Station Director had influenced the Director-General to pass the said order.
Loose talks and filthy and abusive language which had been used against the Station Director and the other officers may legitimately in the facts and circumstances of the case lead to the formation of a reasonable belief in the minds of the authorities that the person behaving in such fashion is not a suitable person to be employed as a Producer.
This undesirable conduct on the part of Shri Bhatt might have been the motive for terminating the employment on probation and for reverting him to his old post of Announcer.
Even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency may be the motive or the inducting factor which influence the authority to terminate the services of the employee on probation, such termination cannot be termed as penalty or punishment.
This principle has been clearly enunciated and reiterated in the case of Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Dr Mad.
S Iskander Ali (AIR 1980 SC 1242).
10.
From the broad facts which we have earlier recorded, it is manifest that even if the conduct of Shri Bhatt in indulging in loose talks and filthy and abusive language may be considered to be the motive or the inducing factor which influenced the authorities to pass the impugned order the said order cannot be said to be by way of punishment.
This appeal must, therefore, succeed.
The judgment and order of the High Court are set aside and ther writ petition filed by Shri Bhatt is dismissed."
The ratio of the decision is that if a decision regarding the suitability of an officer on probation is taken in the basis of an admitted or undisputed conduct or behaviour during the period of probation and the discharge is by an innocuous order, it is not open for the Court to declare that the order was in the nature of penalty and non-compliance with Article 311(2) renders it invalid.
8.
We reiterate the principle laid down as above.
The above being the correct position in law the fact that on an earlier occasion, the authority committed the mistake in not passing an order of discharge simpliciter and passed an order the wording of which disclosed that it was passed by way of punishment for misconduct and the same was set aside by this Court on the ground that the mandatory procedure of holding departmental enquiry was not obeyed before inflicting punishment, does not deprive the authority thereafter the power to pass an order of discharge revision simpliciter.
Therefore, after the above order was made by this Court, the authority had the choice of either holding inquiry and impose penalty if found guilty of the charge or to pass an order of reversion to the substantive post not as a measure of penalty, if it considered that it is appropriate to do so.
The respondent has chosen to exercise its power to revert the petitioners from the posts to which they were appointed on probation ad/hoc basis, to their substantive post and to pass an order of reversion simpliciter.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon Baldev Raj v State of Punjab, 1984(1) SLR 723 to make out that the impugned orders were penal in nature.
In that decision, there was a clear finding of fact to the effect that the order impugned in the said case was passed to circumvent the earlier order passed by the Court.
In the present case, there is no averment or allegation in the petitions that orders were passed on collateral considerations or malafide.
There is no averment or allegation to the effect that the medical certificate given by the Senior Medical Officer of Mandi Board was false or concocted.
We are, therefore, of the view that the petitioners have not been deprived of any of their rights and, therefore, there is no ground to interfere with the impugned orders.
The writ petitions are dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.