SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has been working as Assistant Lineman in the respondent-Dakshin Haryana Bilji Vitran Nigam Limited since 941991.
FIR No. 408 of 2000 was registered against the petitioner and six others under Sections 148, 302 and 307 I.P.C. By judgment dated 1182003, he was convicted of offences under Sections 148 and 307 read with Section 149 IPC The petitioner filed appeal against the order of conviction.
On 2982003, this Court suspended the sentence and admitted the appeal.
The petitioner was placed under suspension on 392003 w.e.f.
1182003 i.e. the date of his conviction.
On 31122003, respondent No. 2 passed the order terminating the services of the petitioner on the ground that petitioner had been convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid order in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
On notice of motion being issued, the respondents have filed the written statement.
The plea taken by the respondents is that services of the petitioner have been terminated as he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude.
It was not necessary to hold a departmental inquiry in view of Haryana State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as `the Regulations').
3.
Mr. BR Mahajan, appearing for the petitioner submits that the services of the petitioner could not have been terminated simply on the basis of the conviction of the petitioner even under Section 307 I.P.C.
It was necessary for the respondents to examine the conduct of the petitioner which led to his conviction.
In support of the submissions, learned counsel has relied on judgment of this Court in the case of Om Prakash v. The Director Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Deptt.)
and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1.
Learned counsel also relies on a Division Bench judgment in case of Ramesh Singh v. Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited (C.W.P.
No. 14930 of 1999), decided on 16112000.
4.
Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur appearing for the respondents submits that in view of Rule 7 of the Regulations, the respondents have validly terminated the services of the petitioner by looking into the conduct which led to his conviction.
She points out to the order of termination Annexure P-4 in which it is stated that the services of the petitioner have been terminated on account of the conduct which led to his conviction.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
We have also perused the original record which produced in the Court.
The Full Bench has clearly observed as follows :-  "For the foregoing reasons, it is held that :- (i) the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from Government service is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge; (ii) to (iv) xx xx xx xx (v) the liability to be departmentally punished for conduct which has led to the conviction of the employee does not attach to the conviction, but attaches to the original conduct (misconduct) which constituted the offence of which the official has been convicted; (vi) to (xi) xx xx xx xx (xii) an order or dismissal or removal or for compulsory retirement can be passed under Rule 19(i) (without conforming to the procedure prescribed in Rules 14 to 18) not on the basis of the conviction, but only if the competent authority finds that the relevant misconduct of the concerned Government servant renders his further retention in public service undesirable; and  (xiii) xx xx xx xx" The law has further been clarified by the Supreme Court in the Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416.
In the aforesaid case, it has been held as follows :-  "Where a disciplinary authority comes to know that a government servant has been convicted on a criminal charge, it must consider whether his conduct which has led to his conviction was such as warrants the imposition of a penalty and, if so, what that penalty should be.
For that purpose, it will have to peruse the judgment of the criminal Court and consider all the facts and circumstances of the case.
Once the disciplinary authority reaches the conclusion that the government servant's conduct was such as to require his dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank, he must decide which of these three penalties should be imposed on him.
This too it has to do by itself and without hearing the government servant concerned by reason of the exclusionary effect of the second proviso.
However, a conviction on a criminal charge does not automatically entail dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of the government servant concerned and, therefore, it is not mandatory to impose any of these major penalties."
Keeping in view the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, we have examined the record produced by the respondents.
A perusal of the record shows that the respondents have not paid any attention to the conduct which led to the conviction of the petitioner as required by law.
It was necessary for the respondents to examine the judgment of the Criminal Court and to assess the conduct of the petitioner to reach a conclusion as to whether it would be undesirable to keep him in service.
The action of the management/employer must be based on relevant considerations.
The impugned order in our opinion suffers from the vice of non-application of mind.
Consequently, we are of the opinion that the impugned order deserves to be quashed on this short ground.
6.
Petition allowed.
Impugned order dated 31122003 Annexure P-4 is hereby quashed and set aside.
The respondents shall be at liberty to pass a fresh order in accordance with law, if so advised.
In case it is ultimately decided not to impose the punishment of dismissal/termination from service on the petitioner, the respondents shall also re-examine the question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to any consequential benefits in accordance with the relevant rules for the period since he was suspended till the order of reinstatement, if any.
Petition allowed.