Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the long pendency of the departmental proceeding initiated against him by the respondent bank by issuing charge-sheet dated July 15th, 1985.
2.
Alleging defalcation of its moneys by the petitioner, while working as Branch Manager of its Sonari Branch, the bank lodged an FIR on June 27th, 1978.
On July 5th, 1978 he was placed under suspension.
Criminal cases were instituted against him before the special court.
During pendency of the criminal cases the bank initiated the departmental proceeding by issuing the charge-sheet dated July 15th, 1985.
An ex parte enquiry was held, and the departmental proceeding was concluded by imposing the punishment of removal from service.
Against the punishment order (removing him w.e.f.
June 24th, 1986) the petitioner preferred an appeal, and the appellate authority set aside the punishment order, and remitted the matter to the competent authority for holding a fresh enquiry.
Then, alleging that on same allegations the bank was proceeding departmentally during pendency of the criminal cases, he moved this court by filing a writ petition (Matter No. 4342 of 1987).
It was allowed, and the bank was restrained from proceeding departmentally till the conclusion of the criminal proceedings.
An appeal preferred by the bank, before the division bench of this court, was dismissed by judgment and order dated October 25th, 1990.
3.
The criminal cases instituted against the petitioner ended in his acquittal.
The competent criminal court passed the orders of acquittal on February 1st, 1992.
There is no dispute that the fact of the, petitioner's acquittal by the competent criminal court by orders dated February 1st, 1992 was within the knowledge of the bank.
Challenging the orders of acquittal three cases were filed before this court, they are still pending decision.
4.
On reaching the age of superannuation the petitioner was, however, to retire from service on February 28th, 2003.
From February 1st, 1992 till the month of February 2003 the bank did not take any steps whatsoever for concluding the disciplinary proceeding initiated against the petitioner on July 15th, 1985.
On February 25th, 2003 the competent authority passed an order to direct that the departmental proceeding would continue even after the petitioner's retirement, and till conclusion of the proceeding nothing would be paid him.
5.
Being aggrieved, the petitioner took out the present writ petition for challenging the departimental proceeding, and the decision dated February 25th, 2003.
He challenges the depatmental proceeding on the sole ground of delay.
6.
Learned advocate for the petitioner relies on the decision reported at AIR 1998 SC 1833,  (State of AP v. N Radhakishan).
She submits that because of the inordinate, delay on the part of the bank in concluding the departmental proceeding, it should be quashed; and the bank should be directed to release the petitioner's all terminal benefits.
7.
The following are the submissions of the learned advocate for the respondents.
Since the cases filed against the orders of acquittal remained pending, the bank did not take any steps to conclude the pending departmental proceeding.
The pending cases being the continuation of the original criminal proceedings, in view of the division bench decision dated October 25th, 1990, the bank was not in a position to proceed departmentally.
As will appear from paragraph 6(ii) of the opposition filed by the bank, in his letter dated February 5th, 1978 the petitioner had admitted his guilt, and hence there is no necessity to hold any enquiry in the departmental proceeding, and the disciplinary authority is empowered to pass the final order even at this stage without holding any enquiry.
The legal position regarding this will appear from the decision reported at AIR 1972 SC 32 (Channabasappa Basappa Happali v. The State of Mysore).
8.
After hearing the learned advocates for the parties, I am of the view that this is a fit case where the departmental proceeding should be quashed on the sole ground of gross inaction on the part of the bank in taking steps for concluding it.
9.
There is absolutely no substance in the contention that because of pendency of the cases filed for challenging the orders of acquittal the bank was not in a position to conclude the departmental proceeding.
I find no reason to accept the plea as a valid justification for the gross inaction on the part of the bank.
10.
Position of law is that during trial of a criminal case, a departmental proceeding on same allegations is not ordinarily permitted and this is so for ensuring that the employee does not become defenceless either in the departmental proceeding or in the criminal trial.
Once the trial of the criminal case is over, either in conviction or in acquittal of the employee, the employer is totally free to proceed departmentally.
The fact of pendency of an appeal or a revision, against the order of conviction or acquittal, is absolutely irrelevant for the purpose of taking a decision to proceed departmentally.
Once the criminal trial is over, there is no scope or reason for the employee to take the plea of losing defence in the departmental proceeding, if such proceeding is initiated or resumed.
11.
Nothing has been stated or disclosed to slow that after 1992 the bank ever seriously thought of concluding the pending departmental proceeding.
When there was no legal prohibition, the bank simply decided to sleep over the matter.
It is only three days before the petitioner was to reach his age of superannuation that it issued an order to say that even after his retirement the pending departmental proceeding would continue.
12.
The delay is so gross, and the incidents are so old (happened during 1974 to 1977), that if the bank is permitted to proceed now, such permission will result in grave injustice to the petitioner.
Because of sheer efflux of time it will be near impossible for him to defend the proceeding effectively.
Evidence and witnesses, it is natural, will not be available after efflux of such a long time.
In my view purpose of justice will be totally defeated, if the bank is now allowed to proceed with such an old matter.
The nature of the charges cannot overcome the near impossible situation that the bank itself has created by its total inaction for so many years.
The Supreme Court decision relied on by learned advocate for the petitioner supports her contention that for inordinate delay departmental proceeding, in a given case, can be quashed by the writ court.
I think, this is a fit case where the departmental proceeding should be quashed for the ends of justice.
13.
I also find absolutely on merit in the contention that in view of alleged admission of guilt by the petitioner in his letter dated February 5th, 1978 there was no necessity of holding an enquiry, and the charge-sheet was not required at all.
If this was the understanding of the situation by the bank, then nothing prevented it from taking action against the petitioner without holding a regular enquiry.
But facts are otherwise.
The bank decided to initiate a departmental proceeding, and it was also its decision that a regular enquiry would be held.
14.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed.
The departmental proceeding initiated against the petitioner by issuing charge- sheet dated July 15th, 1985, the charge-sheet and the impugned decision dated February 25th, 2003 are hereby quashed.
The respondents are hereby directed to pay to the petitioner all his terminal benefits; such benefits shall be paid to him within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and order by them.
15.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to make any order for costs in favour of the petitioner.
Hence there will be no order for costs in the writ petition.
16.
Learned advocate for the respondents prays for stay of operation of the order Prayer has been opposed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to stay the operation of the order.
Hence the prayer for stay is rejected.
17.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition allowed.