KA Abdul Gafoor, J - The writ petition is by the 1st respondent in the appeal filed by the insurer.
The contention raised in the appeal by the insurer is that admittedly by the parties, the death of the workman occurred due to drowning.
This cannot have any casual connection with his employment as a conductor in the bus insured with the appellant.
So the death did not occur during the course of employment and the respondents are not entitled to the compensation in terms of the Workmen's Compensation Act which shall have to be paid by the appellant on the strength of the insurance policy in force.
In support of this contention the appellant relied on the decision of the apex Court in ESI Corporation v. Francis De Costa, (1996(2) KLT 799) and a decision of the Division Bench of this court report in Travancore Titanium Products Ltd v. Jerro, 2000(2) S.C.T.
129 : 2000(1) KLT 643.
2.
It is submitted by the counsel for the first respondent who has filed writ petition No. 15973/05, that the facts proved before the workmen compensation commissioner disclosed that the bus in which the deceased was a conductor had to start its trip at 330 am in the night.
Therefore apart from himself the driver and cleaner were, for the purpose of employment, to be with the bus in the bus station during the night after the trip had terminated.
Consequently they have to meet the human needs including bathing before they commence work on the next day by 330 am It is for the purpose of bathing and meeting other humanly needs they had gone to a stream nearby and it was at that time the accident occurred resulting death of the workman who was working as a conductor of the bus.
Therefore the accident did have direct and casual connection with the employment.
In support of this contention the decision reported in Devshi Bhanji Khona v. Mary Burna & anr., (1985 KLT 78) is relied on.
3.
We have to examine the question of law raised in this appeal whether the death was as a result of the accident occurred arising out of and during the course of employment as provided in Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act in order to cast liability on the employer to compensate for the death.
The Supreme Court examining the meaning of employment injury as defined in Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 considered as follows :-  "In our judgment by using the words "arising out of.....his employment", the Legislature gave a restrictive meaning to "employment injury".
The injury must be of such an extent as can be attributed to an accident or an occupational disease arising out of his employment.
"Out of" in this context, must mean caused by employment.
Of course the phrase "out of" has an exclusive meaning also.
If a man is described to be out of his employment, it means he is without a job.
The other meaning of the phrase "out of" is influenced, inspired, or caused by; out of pity; out of respect for him".
(Webster Comprehensive Dictionary - International Edition, 1984).
In the context of Section 2(8), the words "out of" indicate that the injury must be caused by an accident which had its origin in the employment.
A mere road accident, while an employee is on his way to his place of employment cannot be said to have its origin in his employment in the factory.
The phrase "out of the employment" was construed in the case of South Maitland Railways Pty Ltd v. James, 1967 CLR 96, where contouring (construing ?)
the phrase "out of the enjoyment" Starke, held the words "out of" require that the injury had its origin in the employment."
4.
Thus the Supreme Court, referring to Maitland Railways Case found that the words "out of" require that the injury has its origin in the employment.
The Supreme Court also had kept in mind before coming to this conclusion that the employment injury shall arise in any way out of his employment.
Therefore the connection between the employment injury and the employment shall always have to be taken into consideration.
5.
Division Bench of this court of Jerro's case (2000(1) KLT 643) held that :  "The injury or the accident should be clearly relatable to duty.
This is evident from the expression "while on duty".
In other words, it means that the injury or accident occurred while the employees was performing his duty."
The meaning assigned to the words 'on duty' by the Division Bench is that duty is an assigned task.
The Division Bench made a distinction between a case where an employee is inside the factory premises in connection with duty and he being actually on duty.
That was a case where the employee came to the factory premises far earlier in spite of his duty commencing only at 2 pm and the accident occurred far earlier than the commencement of such duty.
6.
We cannot consider any case divorced from the facts situation.
In the case on hand the evidence clearly disclosed that he had been staying in the bus for the purpose of commencing its trip early morning at 330 am The bus was being parked in a petrol bunk and the accident occurred when he went to the nearby stream for the purpose of taking bath along with the driver and the conductor.
Thus it has come out in evidence that the deceased workman along with his colleagues had been there with the bus for the purpose of connecting (commencing ?)
duty early in the next morning at 330 am So there was connection between the accident that had occurred and the duty that he had to perform immediately after that.
He had gone for taking bating just before connecting (commencing ?)
duty at 330 am as he had been staying in the bus for the purpose of taking the bus at that time.
So the connection between the accident and the employment, is thus manifest.
7.
Another Division Bench of this court in Devshi Bhanji's case (1985 KLT 78) cited supra had made it clear that when there is casual connection between the employment and the death of a workman in an unexpected way, it could be certainly be considered as an accident arising out of and in the course of employment which would entitle the dependent legal heir to claim compensation.
Of course the facts situation in that case arose when a workman fell down due to heart attack which resulted because of the exertion arising out of the employment and that was the casual connection between the accident and the employment in that case.
8.
Similarly in this case also as the workman was expected to be in the bus for the purpose of commencing his duty in the early morning at 330 am He had to attend to his human needs before commencing duty as he was staying in the bus.
There was no arrangement made for that purpose.
He had to go to the nearby stream for taking bath.
It was at that time there occurred the accident resulting in loss of life of the workman.
Necessarily it shall be taken as one arising in any way out of his employment and has its origin in the employment, as held by the Supreme Court in Francis De Costa's case (1996(2) KLT 799).
Necessarily, it cannot be stated that the death had not arisen out of and in the course of employment.
The question of law raised is thus answered in negative against the appellant.
9.
Of course the appellant is well justified in contending that the Commissioner went wrong in awarding interest at the rate of 12% applying provisions in the amended Act.
The counsel for the first respondent appearing for the writ petitioner in WP(C) No. 15973/05 submits that the statutory rate of interest provided in the unamended provision is only 6% and that the accident occurred prior to the amendment to the Workmen's Compensation Act on 15-9-95.
Consequently, the pre-amended rate alone shall be applied to the case.
That part of the question of law raised by the appellant is answered in the affirmative in favour of the appellant.
Accordingly, the appeals are disposed of as follows :  The first respondent in MFA No. 33/2005, who is the petitioner in WP(C) No. 15973/2005 is entitled to the compensation as found in the impugned order but with interest at the rate of 6% and the amount to that extent in deposit can be withdrawn by him.
The balance amount in deposit shall be refunded to the appellant insurance company.
Appeal dismissed.