JS Narang, J - The petitioner being eligible and duly qualified, applied for the post of JBT teacher in response to the advertisement dated December 4, 2001 in the category of Scheduled caste (Ad-Dharmi).
The petitioner was duly selected by the Departmental Selection Committee in the month of May 2002.
His name was duly recommended for appointment to respondent No. 2 i.e. Director, Public Instructions (Elementary Education), Punjab, Chandigarh.
The petitioner waited for the letter of appointment but none was received.
A representation dated March 4, 2003, was submitted to the District Education Officer, copy Annexure P-6.
No reply thereto was received and that aggrieved of the inaction on the part of the respondents, approached the Director, Scheduled Caste and Schedule Tribe Commission, Punjab, Chandigarh, by submitting an application dated March 12, 2003.
A clarification was sought by the concerned authorities.
A report was submitted by the District Education Officer to the learned Deputy Commissioner, Nawanshahar, stating that the Director, Public Instructions Primary, Punjab, had scrutinised the record of 53 candidates and after verification, approval was accorded for issuing the appointment orders/letters.
The approval was received by the District Education Officer vide letter dated April 18, 2003.
Pursuant thereto, the letters of appointment had been issued to the said candidates but for the reasons best known, the case of the petitioner had not been forwarded.
However, the record of the petitioner was verified and checked vide letter dated May 21, 2002, the same was submitted for approval of the Director.
2.
Since no letter of appointment was forthcoming, the petitioner filed CWP No. 17731 of 2002, before this Court and that the petition was disposed of with a direction that as and when the ban is withdrawn the petitioner would make a claim for appointment accordingly.
In this regard, the District Education Officer, submitted his report to the learned Deputy Commissioner, Nawanshahar vide communication dated September 18, 2003.
3.
It has been averred that the Government of Punjab had made the recruitments to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police after the cut off date i.e. 10/1352002, meaning thereby the ban on the recruitment had been lifted.
Thus, the letter of appointment should have been issued to the petitioner in the normal course.
The petitioner served a justice demand notice dated July 23, 2003, but no response was received.
Resultantly, the present petition has been filed for the relief.
4.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated May 22, 2004.
The stand taken by the respondent-State is that the petitioner had earlier filed a petition before this Court which was decided vide order dated November 1, 2002, permitting the petitioner to withdraw the petition with liberty to make a claim as and when the ban is lifted.
It is also the plea of the government that the ban has not been lifted as yet.
So far as the plea that the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police had been filled after the cut off date i.e. 10/1352002, vide which the ban is stated to have been imposed by the Government of Punjab, it is stated that the recruitment to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police, has no relevancy to the case in hand.
It is also the plea that it does not lie in the mouth of the petitioner to file the present petition especially when such similar petition was got dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to stake his claim as and when the ban is lifted, a second petition for the same relief is not maintainable.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that this Court while disposing of CWP No. 3036 of 2003, Sarabjit Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, has categorically directed that the government should issue an order of appointment/posting to the petitioner forthwith.
In that case, the petitioner was almost similarly situated and that the plea had been taken that the Model Code of Conduct, had come into force which was subsequently withdrawn and in the meanwhile a complete ban had been imposed by the Government vide instructions dated 10/1352002.
6.
It has been further argued that 53 other persons similarly situated had been given the appointments but for the reasons best known to the Government, the case of the petitioner had not been forwarded for issuing the letter of appointment despite the recommendation having been received.
In this regard, a specific averment has been made in para 14 of the petition which has been, in all fairness, admitted by the respondents.
However, the petitioner has submitted rejoinder to the written statement by taking a categoric stand that such similarly situated persons had also approached this Court by way of CWP No. 4701 of 2003, Raj Kumari v. State of Punjab, 2005(1) S.C.T.
287, which was decided on September 23, 2004; CWP No. 15640 of 2002, Paramvir Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(3) S.C.T.
509, decided on May 29, 2003.
It has also been averred that subsequent to the instructions dated 10/1352002, the Government has appointed not only the Deputy Superintendent of Police but Junior Engineers and Computer Teachers as well.
It is obvious that there is no ban in force.
De hors this, the case of the petitioner is otherwise covered by the aforestated judgments rendered by this Court.
Thus, in view of the dicta of this Court, the case of the petitioner deserves to be allowed with a direction to the respondents to issue the letter of appointment accordingly.
7.
On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General, has argued that the ban having not been lifted and the petitioner having conceded that he shall stake his claim after the ban is lifted, the petition deserves to be dismissed.
He has also placed reliance upon the dicta of this Court in re : Gurmeet Singh v. State of Punjab, CWP No. 10344 of 2003, decided on 352005.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book as also the judgments of this Court cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner as also by the learned Additional Advocate General.
9.
We are of the considered opinion that the petition deserves to be allowed.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been duly recommended.
However, for the reasons best known to the respondents, the letter of appointment could not be issued along with 53 other candidates who had been given the letters of appointment.
Subsequently, when the case of the petitioner was sent probably the instructions in regard to the ban imposed by the Government had come into force.
In this case, the fault is obviously of the respondents.
The case of the petitioner had reached the concerned quarters for issuing the letter of appointment why the same was not sent along with other 53 candidates, no explanation whatsoever has been rendered by the State.
The fact of issuance of letters of appointment of 53 candidates has been very fairly admitted, as has been noticed hereabove.
In view of the above, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to issue the letter of appointment to the petitioner within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order from any quarters.
Petition allowed.