Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the initiation of a disciplinary proceeding against him.
It was initiated by the charge-sheet dated October 1st, 2002.
The two grounds of challenge are :- (i) There was no reason to initiate it, once he was acquitted by the competent criminal Court.
(ii) It was initiated after inordinate unexplained delay.
2.
In 1968 the petitioner joined the respondent-bank (State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur).
He was working as cash peon in its Salkia Branch.
On November 12th, 1981 he absented himself from duties without obtaining any leave.
On the same day a dacoity took place in the bank at around 1355 hours.
A sum of Rs. 12,11,225/- was taken away by the dacoits from the strong room and counter of the bank.
On November 13th, 1981 at around 220 am police recovered a sum of Rs. 1,19,485/- from his residence.
Along with his wife he was arrested and sent for trial under S. 395, S. 397 and S. 412 of the I.P.C. By judgment and order dated July 31st, 1985 while his wife was convicted under S. 395 and sentenced to 3 years RI, he was acquitted.
Out of eight accused persons three (including his wife) were convicted and sentenced.
Challenging the judgment and order the state preferred an appeal and the bank filed a revision.
In such circumstances the proceeding was initiated.
He submitted his reply to the charge-sheet on October 16th, 2002 and raised the plea of delay.
During progress of the enquiry lie took out this writ petition dated February 14th, 2003.
By order dated February 25th, 2003 it was admitted, and further proceedings of the enquiry was stayed.
3.
The first ground of challenge has been urged by the counsel for the petitioner on the strength of the decision in Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd & Anr., (1999)3 SCC 679.
Since his contention is only regarding sufficiency of reasons in the present case, I think, I cannot read the authority for any benefit of the petitioner.
Existence or absence of reasons, which I am asked to examine, is bound to emerge only from the facts of the present case, and the peculiar circumstances of the decision cited, they were described as such by their Lordships for not granting liberty to re-open the previous ex-parte enquiry, will not be any authority for the purpose.
Here, the facts and circumstances, which I shall point out presently while dealing with the second ground, do not leave me in any doubt about the existence of sufficient reasons to initiate the proceeding against the petitioner even after his acquittal at the trial Court stage of the criminal case.
4.
The second ground of challenge, however, raises a vexing problem.
It is so for the nature of the explanations given by the bank for the delay in initiation of the proceeding.
From 1985 both the petitioner and the bank simply maintained status quo,-- that is to say,--the petitioner continued to receive subsistence allowance without making any grievance, and the bank continued to pay such allowance without taking any step for initiating any departmental proceeding or revoking the order of suspension.
Except that for pendency of the cases before this Court no decision was taken by the bank for either of the purposes, in its affidavit it has not given any other explanation for not initiating the proceeding.
Similarly, the petitioner's silence is also totally unexplained.
His counsel has asked me to ignore the silence on his part, on the ground that the obligation to take steps was entirely on the bank.
5.
I am asked to quash the proceeding following the three authorities cited by the petitioner's counsel; they are :- (1) St. of M.P. v. Bani Singh & Anr., AIR 1990 SC 1308; (2) St. of AP v. N Radhakishan, AIR 1998 SC 1833; and (3) Ranajoy Banerjee v. Union of India must say that though the ground of challenge (i.e. delay) is not entirely without any merit, the relied on precedents do not resolve the issue.
6.
In State of M.P. v. Bani Singh & Anr., the tribunal's order to quash the proceeding initiated after 12 (twelve) years was not interfered with by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on the ground that there was no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge memo, and that it would be unfair to permit the disciplinary proceeding to proceed with at the date their Lordships were deciding the case.
My reading of the judgment is that, on the facts of that case, their Lordships decided not to interfere with the order of the tribunal.
In my understanding, no proposition was laid down in it that once there is a delay, the decision to quash the proceeding must, of course, follow.
7.
In State of AP v. N Radhakishan, as I understand its ratio, it was held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that question of delay in a disciplinary proceeding has to be examined on the basis of the facts and circumstances of each case; and that after balancing and weighing all relevant factors, the Court must determine if it is in the interest of clean and honest administration that the proceeding should be terminated or allowed to continue, when there is an abnormal unexplained delay in initiating or concluding it.
8.
In Ranajoy Banerjee v. Union of India & Ors. Ajoy Nath Ray, J, quashed the proceeding, once again, in my reading and understanding of the judgment, on the facts of that case, in which the proceeding was initiated after 5 (five) years on the allegation of contracting a second marriage by the employee during the lifetime of his spouse, and when after acquiring knowledge of such fact the employer granted benefits of promotion and increments to the employee on more than one occasion.
His Lordship held that the proceeding, if the employer had found the necessity of initiating, should have been initiated within a reasonable time after acquiring knowledge of the facts which were to form the foundation of the charges.
9.
Counsel for the respondent has given me the decision at AIR 1996 SC 484 (BC Chaturvedi v Union of India & Ors).
He would ask me to accept this as an authority for the proposition that when allegations are regarding financial irregularities, delay in the initiation of the disciplinary proceeding against the employee is totally irrelevant and insignificant.
I could not read the judgment to say that such a proposition was laid down in it by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
What was said is that each case is to be decided on its own facts, and that delay by itself would not result in violation of article 14 or 21 of the Constitution of India.
10.
In this case, I am sure about one thing, and it is that the petitioner was completely happy with the position that was existing from the year 1985 till the date of initiation of the proceeding.
On the facts, it will be unjust to hold that the bank was completely oblivious of the situation, though the manner in which it behaved warrants detailed investigation by the competent authorities.
The explanation given for the delay is that for pendency of the appeal and revision before this Court the proceeding was not initiated.
The reason stated for initiating it now is that the petitioner's date of superannuation is so close that the bank is unable to remain a mute and unperturbed spectator any more.
What explanation would be satisfactory explanation for delay in initiating a disciplinary proceeding must necessarily depend on the facts and in the attendant circumstances of each case.
In my view, in all these things public interest must receive the paramount consideration.
I venture to say that the purpose of a disciplinary proceeding against an employee of a nationalized bank originates chiefly from the imperative need to protect the public interest.
11.
As I have already indicated, explanations for the delay given in this case are not many; they are in fact skeletal.
Even then I do not need to spare even a moment to see the overwhelming public interest involved in the necessity of proceeding against the petitioner.
His wife was convicted and sentenced for the dacoity.
His acquittal is not such an event as should unquestionably tilt both law and equity in his favour.
The bank could have initiated the proceeding immediately after his acquittal.
It initiated it after around 17 (seventeen) years from the date of his acquittal.
I wanted to know from the petitioner's counsel what irretrievable prejudice his client would suffer for the delayed initiation of the proceeding.
I did not get any answer, I examined the statements made in the writ petition.
From them also I did not find the answer.
The case has unveiled before me a battle for survival between two competing right and interest - one is the petitioner's private right supported by articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India, and the other being the public interest, for protecting which the bank owed the duty and obligation to initiate the proceeding.
I acknowledge the force of the petitioner's right.
But, on the facts of the case, I am not minded to allow it to override the public interest.
In my opinion, if articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India are pressed into service for throttling the proceeding initiated against the petitioner, then public interest, which is of paramount consideration, shall be the first causality.
12.
For these reasons I hold that the writ petition should be dismissed; and I accordingly dismiss it.
I find no reason to make any order for costs in favour of the respondents.
So there will be no order for costs in the writ petition.
I however, made it clear that all comments and observations made by me in this judgment have shall not be put into use in any manner in the enquiry to be held against the petitioner.
13.
The disturbing aspect, as I have noted before, regarding the manner in which the bank dealt with the question of initiation of the proceeding against the petitioner, I think should be looked into by the highest authority of the bank.
It will be in the fitness of the things to refer the matter to the Central Vigilance Commission and also to the Central Bureau of Investigation for identifying the persons who slept over the matter, so that the responsibility can be properly fixed, because this is also the imperative requirement of the public interest, which, on the facts of the case, I am unable to ignore and overlook.
14.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.