Ashutosh Mohunta, J. (Oral) - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 8121982 (Annexure P-1) and the order 3081984 (Annexure P- 3) by which a penalty of reduction to lower rank of Technical Assistant Grade-I for a period of three years from the date of the order was imposed upon the petitioner and the appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that the petitioner was initially appointed as a Technical Assistant Grade-III with the Food Corporation of India on 1761968.
The petitioner was promoted from time to time to various posts and in the year 1981 when the petitioner was serving as Assistant Manager (Quality Control) with the aforesaid Corporation there were allegations against the petitioner that he had accepted sub-standard rice from various Dealers which was meant for export to Russia.
Accordingly, a charge- sheet was issued on 21.1.1981 against the petitioner.
In all, there were five charges against the petitioner.
The matter was inquired into by shri SP Duggal, Joint Manager (Eng.
), Food Corporation of India, Zonal Office (North), New Delhi, and he found that charges under paras 31(a), (c) and (d) and 32 were not established.
However, charges under para 31(b) for lack of devotion to duty was established.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the charge which was established against him, that was `lack of devotion to duty' which was dismissed vide order dated 3081984 (Annexure P-3) passed by the Manager (Vigilance), Food Corporation of India.
3.
Although the charges under paras 31(a), (c) and (d) and para 32 were not established against the petitioner, yet the Zonal Manager (North) disagreed with the report of the Enquiry Officer and imposed upon the petitioner the penalty of reversion to the lower rank of Technical Assistant Grade-I for a period of three years with immediate effect.
4.
Mr. Amit Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that while disagreeing with the report of the Enquiry Officer the Zonal Manager did not give any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
It is contended by the learned counsel that a delinquent employee has the right of hearing not only during inquiry proceedings conducted by the Enquiry Officer but also at the time when the Disciplinary Authority forms an opinion that it does not agree with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
It has been further contended by the learned counsel that Annexure P-3 is absolutely non-speaking as no reasons have been given while rejecting the appeal filed by the petitioner.
Mr. Chopra has further submitted that the petitioner has already retired about four years back.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgment in Yoginath D Bagde v. State of Maharashtra and another, 1999(4) S.C.T.
403 : 1999(7) Supreme Court Cases 739 in support of his argument.
It is submitted that on the basis the judgment in Yoginath D Bagde's case (supra) the orders Annexures P-1 and P-3 are liable to be quashed.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. Gopi Chand Bhalla, counsel for the Food Corporation of India, contends that there is a statutory remedy of review by the Board which was available to the petitioner and as the petitioner has not availed of the same, hence, the writ petition is pre-mature.
Learned counsel further contends that even if for the sake of arguments it is assumed that a notice had to be issued to the petitioner before reversing the findings of the Enquiry Officer then the respondents be given a chance to hear the petitioner before passing a fresh order.
Learned counsel relies on the judgment in Indra Bhushan Choubey v. Food Corporation of India and others, reported as 2000(2) SCT 366 wherein the findings of the Enquiry Officer were not accepted by the Punishing Authority.
However, no hearing was afforded to the petitioner in that case before taking a final decision.
The Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court had disposed of the writ petition by directing that the matter should be placed before the concerned Zonal Manager only for the purpose of referring the matter to the Punishing Authority for de novo hearing.
On the basis of the above, Mr. Bhalla contends that the matter may be referred to the Punishing Authority for a de novo hearing.
6.
After hearing the counsel for the parties in detail, it is clear that the Punishing Authority while passing the order Annexure P-1, whereby it deals with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, did not issue any show-cause notice or afford any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Yoginath D Bagde's case (supra) has held as under "-  "The delinquent employee has the right of hearing not only during the enquiry proceedings conducted by the Enquiry Officer into the charges levelled against him but also at the stage at which those findings are considered by the Disciplinary Authority and the latter, namely, the Disciplinary Authority forms a tentative opinion that it does not agree with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
If the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer are in favour of the delinquent and it has been held that the charges are not proved, it is all the more necessary to give an opportunity of hearing to the delinquent employee before reversing those findings.
Formation of opinion should be tentative and not final.
It is at this stage that the delinquent employee should be given an opportunity of hearing after he is informed of the reasons on the basis of which the Disciplinary Authority proposes to disagree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
This is in consonance with the requirement of Article 311(2).
So long as a final decision is not taken in the matter, the enquiry shall be deemed to be pending.
Mere submission of findings to the Disciplinary Authority does not bring about closure of enquiry proceedings.
The enquiry proceedings would come to an end only when the findings have been considered by the Disciplinary Authority and the charges are either held to be not proved or found to be proved and in that event punishment is inflicted upon the delinquent.
That being so, the "right to be heard" would be available to the delinquent upto the final stage.
This being a Constitutional right of the employee, cannot be taken away by any legislative enactment or service rule including rules made under Article 309 of the Constitution."
7.
In the present case also the Punishing Authority did not give any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before passing the order Annexure P- 1.
Thus, the order Annexure P-1 as far as paras 31(a) (c) and (d) and 32 are concerned, is quashed.
As far as the findings of the Zonal Manager with regard to para 31(b) i.e. for `lack of devotion to duty' are concerned, the petitioner had filed an appeal before the Manager (Vigilance) which was dismissed vide order Annexure P-1.
8.
A perusal of the impugned order Annexure P-3 shows that it is absolutely non-speaking order as no reasons whatsoever have been given as to why the appeal is dismissed.
Thus, the order Annexure P-3 cannot be sustained and the same is also quashed.
9.
Now the only question that remains is - Whether the case should be remanded back to the Punishing Authority for a de novo hearing or not ?
10.
The inquiry against the petitioner was initiated vide order dated 21.1.1981 i.e. more than 24 years ago.
During the pendency of the writ petition the petitioner has also retired from service.
Thus, no useful purpose would be served by referring the matter back to the Punishing Authority for a de novo hearing.
11.
In view of the above, the orders Annexures P-1 and P-3 are quashed and, accordingly, the petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits as if Annexures P-1 and P-3 were never passed.
The consequential benefits due to the petitioner shall be given to him within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
12.
Writ petition is allowed.
However, there shall be no order with regard to costs.
Petition allowed.