Tapen Sen, J. (Oral) - Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The writ petitioner prays for quashing of order (Annexure P-4) by which reimbursement of medical bills of the petitioner have been denied.
The petitioner makes a further prayer for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to reimburse his medical claims in relation to expenditure incurred by him on account of the treatment of his wife.
From the pleadings made, it is apparent that the petitioner was constrained to get his wife interned in the Bharat Hospital, Sonepat for delivery.
Subsequent to medical and/or tests, the doctors of the said hospital were of the opinion that the patient needed to be shifted to the General Government Hospital at Sonepat, whereupon, she was admitted in that hospital for further treatment.
Subsequently, it appears that pursuant to further examinations and/or tests conducted by the doctors of the said hospital, the petitioner's wife was referred to St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi on account of the deteriorating condition of the petitioner's wife.
Thereafter, she was admitted to the St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi, where she delivered a baby after having undergone surgery.
According to the petitioner, his wife got admitted in that hospital on 1012001 and was discharged on 2012001, and during this period she had to undergo surgery.
In the process, heavy expenses had to be incurred whereafter the petitioner filed an application before the respondent No. 3 on 22.3.2001 attaching therewith details of bills of medicines and other expenses along with other relevant documents for reimbursement of medical charges.
The petitioner asserts that his case was duly recommended by respondent Nos. 3 to 5 whereafter the case was forwarded to the respondent No. 2 but the respondent No. 2 raised certain objections and sent the file back for compliance and further submission after removal of the discrepancies vide letter dated 162001.
Upon receipt of the file back from the respondent No. 2, the petitioner removed the objections pointed out by the respondent No. 2 and resubmitted the same vide application dated 19102001.
Thereafter the same was forwarded by the respondent No. 5.
The respondent No. 3 made out a ground that the hospital, namely, St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi was not recognised by the Government of Haryana and hence the petitioner was not entitled for reimbursement of medical claims vide order as contained in Annexure P-4.
According to the petitioner, the aforementioned order is irrational and illegal.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 5, wherein they have stated that the petitioner had not taken permission from the Civil Surgeon, Sonepat or from the Director General Health Services, Haryana to shift the patient to St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi.
They have further stated that the petitioner's wife, was in fact, admitted in the Civil Hospital at Sonepat on 2122000 and on the same day, was shifted to PGI, Rohtak, but at the request of the petitioner, the patient was shifted to St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi.
They have further stated that it is wrong to say that facilities for treatment of the Petitioner's wife were not available either at the Civil Hospital at Sonepat or PGI, Rohtak, and that reference to St Stephen's Hospital, Delhi was exclusively made on the request of the petitioner.
3.
A civil miscellaneous application bearing No. 28118 of 2003 has been filed by the petitioner, wherein it has been asserted that a case similar in nature bearing Civil Writ Petition No. 423 of 2002 has been decided by a Division Bench, and that, the learned counsel submits, that the petitioner would be satisfied if directions similar in nature to those passed in that case are also made and/or applied in the facts and circumstances of this case.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for both the parties agree that the writ petition can, therefore, be disposed of.
5.
It appears that the principal objection on the basis of which medical claims were not processed, was on account of the fact that St Stephen's Hospital at Delhi was not recognised by the Government of Haryana.
This Court is of the view that such a stand of the Government cannot be said to be rational.
Falling ill or becoming a victim of medical ailment is never with the control of a human being.
Sometimes the situation may go out of hand and sometimes the situation may be such that there may not be enough time for the person suffering to undergo the rigmaroles of procedural formalities because by the time such formalities are completed, it may be too late for the patient who is actually suffering.
Under these circumstances, even if the petitioner made a request that his wife should not be treated to be such an irregularity that it can be allowed to come in the way of processing medical reimbursement which may be found otherwise to be genuine and proper.
Taking these facts and circumstances into consideration, this Court is of the opinion that the matter requires immediate reconsideration on humanitarian grounds and also with a humanitarian approach.
Consequently, the impugned order as contained in Annexure P-4 is set aside and the matter is remanded to the concerned authorities to look into the claims of the petitioner and pass an order in accordance with law within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
While doing so and while reconsideration, the authorities shall deal with the same with a humanitarian approach and shall also take into consideration the relevant rules, regulations and the law as also the judgment of this Court delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 423 of 2002 which has been brought on record as Annexure A-1 in the Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 28118 of 2003.
Order accordingly.
The writ petition stands disposed.
Petition allowed.