JS Khehar, J (Oral) - CM 16612/2004  The petitioners responded to an advertisement which invited applications for appointment to 664 posts of Art & Craft Teachers.
The petitioners were, however, not allowed to participate in the interview, on account of the fact, that they were considered ineligible.
The solitary reason for their ineligibility was that they had qualified a two-years diploma of Art & Craft from the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, which had not been recognised as equivalent to the two-years diploma in Art & Craft conducted by Industrial Training and Vocational Education Department, Haryana.
2.
The solitary issue for consideration before this Court is, whether the petitioners should be treated as eligible for consideration in connection with the advertised posts ?
In order to canvass their claim for eligibility, the petitioners have placed reliance on the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Karamjit Kaur v. The State of Haryana, 1994(2) SCT 220 (P&H) : (CWP No. 4799 of 1993, decided on 20.12.1993), wherein persons who had passed the two-years diploma course from the Department of Technical Education, Industrial Training, Punjab (which the petitioners have also qualified), were treated as eligible for appointment to the post of Art & Craft Teachers.
Additionally, learned counsel for the petitioners has relied on various judgments rendered by this Court based on the decisions to the same effect have been rendered.
3.
In order to repudiate the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners, our attention has been invited to the short written statement filed by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, which discloses that the judgment rendered in Karamjit Kaur's case (supra) was based on the policy instruction dated 1221984, which was prevalent at the time when the controversy in Karamjit Kaur's case (supra) had arisen.
The claim of the petitioners in the aforesaid judgment was based on the determination of eligibility in terms of the aforesaid 1984 instructions.
It is pointed out that the aforesaid policy instruction dated 1221984 has since been superseded on 2111999.
A copy of the letter/instructions dated 2111999 has been placed on the record along with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 as Annexure R-3/3.
It would be relevant to mention here, that the issue regarding the recognition and equivalence of the educational qualifications was adjudicated upon by the State Government consequent upon the directions issued by this Court in Ram Bhagat etc. v. State of Haryana, 1997(4) SCT 820 (P&H) : (CWP No. 16320 of 1996, decided on 1651999), and Ram Dhan v. State of Haryana (CWP No. 17850 of 1998, decided on 14121998).
On the basis of the aforesaid directions, the Education Department laid down the following criteria for recognition and equivalence of educational qualifications :  "i) That the degrees/diplomas/certificates examinations recognized by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Maharshi Dayanad University, Rohtak, Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar, Haryana Agriculture University, Hisar, NDRI, Karnal, Board of School Education Haryana, Bhiwani, State Board of Technical Education Haryana would stand recognized in the State of Haryana for admission and recruitment purposes.
ii) The Teacher Training courses recognized by the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), New Delhi would also stand recognized in the State of Haryana for the purposes.
iii) All examinations of Foreign Universities/Boards/Examinations Bodies which have been recognized by Association of Indian Universities and the University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi be recognized.
iv) The Medical qualifications of all the statutory institutes/Universities recognized by the Medical Council of India be recognized.
The LLB degree of statutory institutes/Universities recognized by the Bar Council of India be recognized.
The Diploma in Pharmacy course conducted by Board of Technical Education and Universities in India recognised by Pharmacy Council of India be recognized.
Technical degrees/diplomas recognized by All India Council for Technical Education would also be recognized, if the examination is conducted by the approved University/Board.
v) While imparting recognition/equivalence to any examination in the State of Haryana for the purposes of admissions/recruitment, the opinion of the State Universities, School Education Board or the Technical Education Board, as the case may be would be sought."
4.
It is not a matter of dispute that the petitioners cannot claim equivalence on the basis of clauses (i) and (iv), noticed herein above.
Their claim can only be considered under clause (v).
It is apparent from the aforesaid policy instructions, that unless an express recognition or for equivalence is declared under clause (v), qualification acquired from outside the State of Haryana can be treated a recognized or equivalent for purposes of admissions/recruitment.
So far as the instant diploma course is concerned, namely, two years diploma in Art & Craft Training issued by the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, the same would be acceptable only if the same is expressly recognised as equivalent under clause (v) of the aforesaid policy instruction dated 2111999.
Through a memorandum dated 19122003. two-years Art & Craft courses conducted by any other State/Department, i.e. other than the State of Haryana, has been declared to be not recognised as equivalent to the two years Art & Craft Teacher Training course conducted by the Industrial Training & Vocational Education Department, Haryana.
5.
In view of the above, it is apparent that the judgment rendered by this Court in Karmjit Kaur's case (supra) would be deemed to be enforceable in terms of the policy instructions dated 1221984 till 2111999 i.e. till the date of issuance of the subsequent policy instructions, but not thereafter.
The assessment on recognition/equivalence for qualifications acquired after 2111999 will have to be rendered de novo under the latter instructions.
The only possible conclusion on the basis of the determination recorded in the foregoing paragraph is, that all those candidates who had qualified the two years diploma course in Art & Craft Training from the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training prior to 2111999; and all such candidates who had been admitted and enrolled to the aforesaid course prior to the issuance of the policy instruction dated 2111999 alone would be eligibility for consideration against the advertised posts.
The latter conclusion draws support from the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Suresh Pal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
6.
In view of the above, the instant writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to treat all the petitioners who had either qualified the two & years diploma in Art & Craft Training from the Punjab Technical Education and Industrial Training prior to 2111999 or had been admitted to the aforesaid course prior to 2111999 as eligible.
The respondents are accordingly directed to re-evaluate the eligibility of all the petitioners in view of the determination rendered hereinabove, and all such petitioners who are found eligible shall be subjected to interview, so as to consider their claim for appointment against the advertised posts of Art and Craft Teachers.
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Order dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.