JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of writ petitions bearing Nos. 3108, 4350 and 6421 of 2004 as the point at issue is one but the facts are at little variance vis-a-vis the appointments of the petitioners and so also the dates of promotions of different ranks and so also the revision of their respective salaries.
2.
The facts are being taken from CWP No. 3108 of 2004.
The petitioner had been appointed as Constable on April 7, 1976 and that some of the constables had been appointed later than him but were being paid higher salary than the petitioner.
The respondents vide order dated February 22, 1993, brought the petitioner at par with them with effect from February 22, 1993.
3.
Subsequently, the Government of Punjab with a view to remove the anomalies in the pay scales of the senior employees, who started drawing equal pay to the junior employees on account of their pay fixation as well as application of step up proficiency rule, pursuant to the audit objection, reduced the pay of the petitioner without affording any opportunity of being heard.
It may be noticed that the petitioner earned the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector on August 13, 1987 and the thereafter the rank of Sub-Inspector on November 25, 2002.
4.
The respondents passed an order dated September 18, 2003, vide which the entire mathematical calculation has been given vis-a-vis the case of the petitioner on different ranks by giving the comparative table of the earlier pay fixed and the pay now fixed pursuant to the audit objection and after taking advice of the Controller Finance and Account, CPO.
It has been observed that the Punjab Government had issued instructions bearing No. 10/44/89- FPI/5394 dated June 21, 1990 and bearing No. 1/47/93-FPI/5394 dated November 17, 1993, are not applicable in the case of the employees whose cases were being considered.
Pursuant to the order of this Court rendered in re : ASI Tejinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab, and CWP No. 6599 of 2002, decided on May 16, 2002, the affected persons including the petitioner were given the opportunity of being heard.
The pay of the petitioner along with another has been revised accordingly.
5.
It is the stand of the petitioner that though a show-cause notice had been issued to the petitioner but no detail for the reduction of the pay and so also the recovery was mentioned.
Therefore, the said notice had been issued only to give superficial opportunity of hearing.
In fact, no effective hearing can be said to have been granted as no calculations had been shown to the petitioner.
6.
The petitioner being aggrieved of the impugned order has filed the present petition.
The impugned order, copy Annexure P-3, has been made the subject- matter of challenge inter alia on various other grounds as set out in the petition.
It is the case of the petitioner that the impugned order could not have been passed in view of the government instructions dated 21.6.1990 and 17111993.
It is also the stand that the juniors have been granted the higher pay fixation, additionally due to proficiency step up etc.
They have also been promoted and the persons like the petitioners, who are senior and have retained their seniority upon promotion, cannot be discriminated and paid less than such juniors.
They would be entitled to pay parity which had been rightly granted by the respondents.
The act of the respondents in passing the impugned order is violative of principles of natural justice and is also arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Thus, the impugned order is not sustainable and deserves to be quashed.
7.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated March 26, 2004 and the recovery from the petitioner has been stayed.
The stand of the respondents is that earlier CWP No. 6599 of 2002 had been filed and a direction had been issued to the respondents to afford personal hearing to the concerned before passing the order of refixation of the pay.
Opportunity had been granted and that the order impugned has been passed after considering the view points of the petitioner.
It is further the stand that in fact the pay of the petitioner had been wrongly fixed earlier and was not in accordance with the Government instructions dated June 21, 1990.
The case of one Mulakh Raj has been compared with the petitioner.
It has been stated that he had been appointed as Constable Messenger on April 20, 1971 and was subsequently converted to the rank of Constable/Operator in Wireless Wing on June 21, 1982.
Whereas, the petitioner was recruited as Constable in Wireless Wing in the year 1976 as a Wireless Operator.
Thus, it is obvious that the petitioner was junior to the aforestated ASI Mulakh Raj and, therefore, he was drawing more pay than the petitioner.
However, so far as the cases of Mehnga Ram, Baldev Singh and Pawan Kumar are concerned the detailed chart has been drawn in reply to para 3 of the petition.
However, it has been admitted that the aforestated persons are junior to the petitioner in the rank of ASI but they have been given higher pay due to longer length of service under the rules and also as per para 1(e) of the Government instructions dated 21.6.1990.
The petitioner's pay, in fact, had been wrongly stepped up to the level of Assistant Sub Inspector Mulakh Raj pursuant to Government instructions dated 17111993, which are not applicable to the petitioner.
However, it may be noticed that the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector in the year 1990 and 1993 which is not under challenge and/or had been challenged by any one of them.
The petitioner has been further promoted to the rank of Sub-Inspector with effect from November 25, 2002.
Such promotion has also not been challenged by any one, as no such disclosure has been made.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the point at issue in this petition had also arisen in re : Swaran Singh v. State of Punjab, CWP No. 1088 of 2004, and the same has been decided vide judgment dated June 22, 2004, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-3.
He has further contended that the case of such similarly situated persons has been considered while interpreting the policy/instructions dated June 21, 1990, which has been relied upon by the petitioner as well.
He has pointed out the relevant portion of the policy which reads as under :-  "xx xx xx (i) In case where a Government employee is promoted to a higher post without availing of the benefit of one or two proficiency step up(s) and draws a lower rate of pay in that higher post than a Government employee who is junior to him in the lower post and who has been granted proficiency step up or promoted to another identical post after availing the benefit of the said proficiency step up the pay of the Government employee who is senior shall be stepped up to an amount equal to the pay drawn by the Government employee who is junior to him or fixed for the Government employee who is junior to him in that higher post and the proficiency step up(s) as so granted in this process shall be deemed to be given notionally in the lower post which he would have otherwise drawn on completion of eight years and eighteen years regular service he had not been promoted to the higher post ............... xxx xxx xxx".
9.
Thus, the case of the petitioner is also similarly situated and the petitioner is entitled to the pay parity while interpreting the aforestated policy of the Government, which in fact had been correctly granted.
The impugned order has been passed in utter violation of the said policy.
The recovery, as has been claimed by virtue of the impugned order, is not sustainable.
Therefore, the impugned order dated September 18, 2003, deserves to be quashed.
10.
It has been further argued that in any case the excess salary paid to the petitioner is not attributable to misconduct of concealment on the part of the petitioner.
Thus, in view of the law settled in this context by the Supreme Court and this Court, no recovery is sustainable.
11.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Behl, Additional Advocate General, Punjab, had argued that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of pay revision equivalent to the persons allegedly junior to the petitioner.
The Government instructions of June 21, 1990, and so also November 17, 1993, do not give any benefit to the petitioner.
He has further argued that the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in Swaran Singh's case (supra) clearly spells out as to in what manner such persons, similarly situated as the petitioner, have to be dealt with.
The other persons who have been named in the petition, their cases have been clearly and categorically dealt with and all of them are senior to the petitioner.
It is evident from the fact that they had joined the police force much earlier to the petitioner and they had been granted pay and other benefits pursuant to the Government instructions due to their length of service.
As per the admission of the petitioner, he had joined the police force in the year 1976 and that whatever benefits were to be given to him pursuant to length of service, have been accordingly granted.
12.
However, he has not been able to substantiate any point or any argument in resect of the recovery which has been ordered by virtue of the impugned order.
It is the settled law, that if any excessive payment has been made to an employee, which is not attributable to any misconduct or concealment on the part of such employee, the recoveries shall not be claimable by the Government.
13.
It may be noticed that the stand of the Government, it that the persons who have been named by the petitioner stating them to be junior to him, in fact, have been treated senior by virtue of length of service.
The perusal of the chart shows that the said persons had been recruited as "Constable Messenger" which post/cadre does not find mention in the police rules.
Be that as it may, since this question has neither been pleaded nor challenged in any manner while computing the length of service of the said persons nor the said persons have been impleaded as respondents, we refrain ourselves from opinion in this regard.
14.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book and so also the documents appended as annexures.
We are of the considered opinion that the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the judgment rendered in Swaran Singh's case (supra) in which the dicta of the Supreme Court laid down from time to time in the case of Sahib Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC) : 1994(5) SLR 753, Shyam Babu Verma and others v. Union of India and others, 1994(2) SCT 296 (SC) : (1994)27 ATC 121, PH Reddy v.
N.T.R.D., 2002(2) SCT 987 and also K Vasudevan v. Mohan N Mali and others, 2003 SCC (L&S) 90, has been referred to and the relevant paras have also been quoted.
Apart from the above, there are various judgments of this Court which have also been referred to and relied upon.
In view of the conclusion drawn by the Division Bench in Swaran Singh's case (supra), we hold that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief in respect of fixation of his pay and that the order dated September 21, 2003, is upheld in that regard.
However, in view of the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and also of this Court with which we are in respectful agreement, the respondents are restrained from effecting recovering of the excess payments made to the petitioner.
In case, any excess recovery has been made the same shall be refunded to the petitioner within one month from today.
The petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition dismissed.