Hemant Gupta, J - The appellant is aggrieved against the judgment and decree passed by the first appellate court in a suit for declaration challenging the order dated 9.11.1978 passed by the Director, Health Services, Haryana, whereby the services of the plaintiff were dismissed.
2.
The respondent-plaintiff joined Health Department as Vaccinator in July, 1970.
On 1791973 when posted as Vaccinator in P.H.C., Assandh, he was placed under suspension.
He was served with charge-sheet dated 1861974.
He denied the allegations levelled against him.
However, an inquiry was conducted and after considering the inquiry report services of the plaintiff were dismissed.
The plaintiff has challenged the order of dismissal inter-alia on the grounds that the inquiry in the case was initiated by an authority who was not competent to take action against him and that the punishing authority has passed an order of dismissal in violation of the rules of natural justice and after taking into consideration extraneous matters.
Learned trial Court dismissed the suit holding that the order of dismissal is proper on the basis of first part of the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer wherein the plaintiff has been found guilty of accepting Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification from Baru Ram on the pretext for getting issued the Medico Legal Report.
However, the first appeal was allowed relying upon the judgment of this Court reported as Chuni Lal v. State of Haryana etc., 1978 Current Law Journal (Civil) 35, on the ground that second part of the charge was not found proved by the Inquiry Officer and the fact that no reasons of disagreement were communicated to the plaintiff, therefore, the order of punishment of dismissal of service is passed against the statutory rules.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I find that the following substantial questions of law arise for the consideration of this Court :  Whether the reasons of disagreement in respect of the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer are required to be recorded even if the first part of the charge is proved which is sufficient proof of misconduct ?
4.
The allegations as contained in the charge-sheet against the plaintiff was to the following effect :  "That Shri Roshan Lal while posted as Vaccinator in the Primary Health Centre, Assandh, District Karnal on 1791973 demanded Rs. 100/- and then accepted Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification, from Shri Baru Ram son of Shri Asa Ram, Goldsmith of village Salwan on the pretext that he would pass the said amount to Dr. Balbir Singh and Shri Om Parkash Compounder of the aforesaid Health Centre for obtaining medico-legal certificate and ensuring proper treatment of Sarvshri Dharam Pal and Hukam Chand, the two injured sons of Shri Baru Ram but actually he did not pass on the above money either to the said doctor or to the compounder got adjusted Rs. 8/- as examination fee of the two above mentioned injured person at the rate of Rs. 4/- per person, as indicated on the relevant medico-legal certificate and dishonestly retained the balance of Rs. 52/- himself."
A perusal of the above charge would show that it consists of two parts.
The first part is acceptance of Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification from Baru Ram and the second part is that out of the said amount of Rs. 60/-, Rs. 8/- were adjusted towards examination fee and remaining Rs. 52/- were retained by the plaintiff.
The Inquiry Officer found the first part of the charge proved against the plaintiff on the basis of statement of Baru Ram and his two sons Ram Bhajan and Hukam Chand, who have appeared as PW2 and PW3.
However, second part of the charge sheet was not found to be proved as it was concluded by the Inquiry Officer that an amount of Rs. 52/- has changed hands from the plaintiff.
The inquiry officer has concluded that the Government may consider desirability and necessity to initiate proceedings against the said doctor.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently relied upon the judgments of this court in Chuni Lal v. State of Haryana etc., 1978 Current Law Journal 35 and Kuldip Singh v. Haryana Board of School Education, Bhiwani, 1993(4) SCT 638 (P&H), wherein the order of punishment has been set aside on the ground that reason of disagreement has not been communicated to the delinquent official.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has vehemently argued that in view of the finding of the Inquiry Officer that the plaintiff has accepted Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification, the order of dismissal can be sustained on that ground itself.
It is argued that in Chuni Lal's case (supra) referred to by the first appellate Court, the employee was exonerated but still order of punishment was passed.
However, in the present case, the plaintiff has not been exonerated but has been found guilty of acceptance of illegal gratification.
7.
The Inquiry against the plaintiff was conducted in terms of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
Proviso to Rule 7(6) of the said Rules contemplate that if the punishing authority disagrees with any part of whole of the findings of the enquiring authority, the point, or points, of such disagreement, together with a brief statement of the grounds thereof, shall also be supplied to the Government servant.
8.
It is contended that since second part of charge-sheet was not proved against the plaintiff, therefore, the order of punishment cannot be sustained.
It is no doubt that the second part of the charge-sheet was not found to be proved by the Inquiry Officer and the same has been taken into consideration as proved by the punishing authority but the said aspect of the order is severable from other part of the order.
On the basis of the finding of guilt in respect of first part of the charge the order of punishment can be sustained against the plaintiff.
It has been found by the Inquiry Officer that the plaintiff has demanded Rs. 60/- as illegal gratification.
Such finding has been arrived at on examination of the statement of Baru Ram and his two sons who have appeared as witnesses.
On the said finding itself the order of dismissal could very well be passed.
There is no irregularity in respect of the conduct of the inquiry and the issuance of show cause notice of completion of the inquiry as well in respect of such charge.
The order of punishment has been found to be invalid only on account of the fact that there was further allegation that out of Rs. 60/- so received by the plaintiff he has retained Rs. 52/- with him and not passed on to Dr. Balbir Singh or Om Parkash compounder.
The said charge is severable part of the charge.
The effect would be only in respect of disciplinary proceedings if any initiated against Dr. Balbir Singh.
Therefore, to say of the punishing authority has disagreed that the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer is of no consequence as on one of the charge itself, the order of dismissal is not unjustified.
9.
Therefore, it is concluded that although reasons of disagreement are required to be communicated but in the facts and circumstances of the case, the first part of charge that the plaintiff has accepted illegal gratification of Rs. 60/- is sufficient to maintain the order of dismissal against the plaintiff.
10.
Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and decree passed by the learned first appellate court is set aside and that of learned trial Court is restored and the suit is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.