Rajive Bhalla, J - Prayer in the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is for the issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction setting aside the order dated April 24, 1985 (Annexure P-13) passed by the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, as illegal.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in Political Science by Guru Teg Bahadur College, Bhawanigarh-respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred to as the College) in the year 1976 and his services were regularised on September 06, 1977.
Thereafter, the College was affiliated to the Punjabi University, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as `the University'), and the entire teaching staff of the College, including the petitioner, was retained by the College subject to the approval of the University.
As the petitioner did not fulfil the requisite qualifications, as prescribed by the University, he was not allowed to continue in service.
The petitioner, thereafter, filed a representation dated February 03, 1983 (Annexure P-10) before the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab (hereinafter referred to as `the Director').
Vide order dated October 28, 1983 (Annexure P-11), passed by the Director, the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated in service.
3.
The College filed an appeal before the District Judge, Sangrur, under Section 5 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') and the Rules framed thereunder, impugning the order dated October 28, 1983 (Annexure P-11) passed by the Director.
The Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, vide order dated April 24, 1985 (Annexure P-13), accepted the appeal and set aside the order passed by the Director.
4.
The present writ petition is confined to the legality of the order passed by the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, exercising the powers of the Appellate Authority under the Act.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner has confined challenge to the order of the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, to the limited question as to whether the said Court was vested with jurisdiction to exercise powers of the Appellate Authority under the Act.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that vide Act No. 6 of 1983, namely, the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as `the Amending Act'), which came into force from January 3, 1983, the power of the District Judge to hear appeals was withdrawn and a `College Tribunal' constituted as the Appellate Authority to hear and decide the appeals etc.
In this view of the matter, the appeal filed by the respondent-College could not have been filed or decided by the Court of the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur.
6.
It is further contended that the Amending Act came into force with effect from January 3, 1983.
The Director ordered reinstatement of the petitioner vide order dated October 28, 1983 (Annexure P-11).
The respondent-College impugned the said order by way of an appeal dated November 28, 1983, filed before the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur and the said appeal was decided vide judgment dated April 24, 1985.
On the basis of these facts, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that on the date of the decision of the appeal, namely, April 24, 1985, the Act stood amended with effect from January 3, 1983 and, therefore, jurisdiction of the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, to decide the appeal stood withdrawn.
Thus, the order passed by the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, exercising the powers of the Appellate Authority under the Act was without jurisdiction and, therefore, void.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent-College does not dispute the factual position as stated by the counsel for the petitioner.
His only prayer is that the College be permitted to file an appeal before the College Tribunal and the College Tribunal be directed to take a lenient view on the question of limitation.
Counsel for the College further contends that, at no point of time, during the pendency of the appeal before the Additional District Judge, did the petitioner ever impugn the jurisdiction of the said Court or bring to the notice of the Court that its jurisdiction stood ousted by the Amending Act.
It is further argued that neither party, nor the Court, were aware of the Amending Act and, therefore, it would be highly unjust to deprive the respondent-College of its remedy to file an appeal.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties, examined the record and perused the Act as also the Amended Act.
9.
Parties are ad idem that the Court of the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, had no jurisdiction to entertain and decide the appeal.
In view of the fact that there is no difference of opinion between the parties on the afore-mentioned question, the present writ petition is allowed and the order of the Additional District Judge (II), Sangrur, dated April 24, 1985 (Annexure P-13) is set aside.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order of the Director is dated October 28, 1983.
A period of about twenty one years has elapsed and, therefore, it would be highly unjust to now turn the clock back and permit the College to re-open the matter by filing an appeal before the concerned College Tribunal.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondent-College, on the other hand, submits that both the parties laboured under an error of fact as to the jurisdiction of the Additional District Judge, Sangrur and, therefore, it would be in the interest of justice that the College be permitted to file an appeal before the College Tribunal and the matter is decided in accordance with law.
12.
I have considered the respective contentions of the counsel for the parties.
It is no doubt true that the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.
It is also true and admitted by the counsel for the petitioner that no such plea was ever raised or sought to be raised before the said Court.
It appears that neither party was aware of the amendment and, as such, the said amendment was not brought to the notice of the Court of the Additional District Judge, Sangrur.
The mere fact that the present writ petition has been pending for a long period of time, should not prevent the College from seeking adjudication as to the legality and validity of the order passed by the Director.
Mere lapse of time cannot deprive the College of its right to seek adjudication of its rights.
13.
In this view of the matter, the respondent-College would be at liberty to file an appeal before the concerned College Tribunal.
In case the appeal is filed within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order, the matter shall be decided on merits by the College Tribunal.
The question of limitation, if raised, shall be decided sympathetically taking into consideration the facts narrated above.
The present writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.