VK Bali, J (Oral) - State of Punjab takes exception to the order passed by learned Single Judge vide which, Civil Writ Petition No. 10730 of 1991 filed by BS Gill, Executive Engineer, petitioner in the original lis, challenging orders dated 2841983, Annexure P-7, by virtue of which, minor punishment was awarded to him, was allowed.
It is against this order that present Letters Patent Appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent has been filed.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner worked as Sub-Divisional Engineer from the year 1978 to 1451979 at Kharar and thereafter, he was transferred to Ludhiana.
At the place of his transfer, he was served with a memorandum proposing to take action against him under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
He submitted his reply/explanation to the statement of charge and statement of allegations etc., but no enquiry was held in the matter and a penalty of recovery of Rs. 10,481/- was imposed upon him vide order dated 2841983, Annexure P-7, which is conceded that it is a minor penalty.
This order was challenged by the petitioner only on the ground that when a person is charge-sheeted for major penalty under Rule 8 of the Rules, a minor penalty cannot be imposed upon him, unless a proper enquiry is conducted.
For holding so, learned Single Judge relied upon two judgments of learned Single Judge of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Chodhri Manphul Singh, 1986(1) SLR 484 and Ram Kumar Goel v. The State of Haryana through Collector, Rohtak and another, 1992(1) SCT 66 (P&H) : 1992(2) PLR 352, when the matter came up for adjudication.
3.
While admitting this matter to regular hearing, the Letters Patent Bench noticed the judgment of this Court in Samey Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) SCT 331 (P&H) : 1993(1) SLR 193, for taking a view contrary to the one taken by learned Single Judge, based upon the judgments of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Chodhri Manphul Singh's and Ram Kumar Goel's cases (supra).
Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, cites a Division Bench judgment of this Court, in which one of us (VK Bali, J) was a member, in Puran Chand Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1995(4) SCT 29 (P&H) Division Bench judgment in Puran Chand Sharma's case (supra), overruled the two Single Bench decisions of this Court, referred to above, which were relied upon by learned Single Judge.
4.
Mr. TS Dhindsa, Advocate, whom we had requested to address arguments on behalf of the petitioner, as no one had chosen to appear on behalf of the petitioner, brings to our notice a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Dr. KG Tiwari v. State of Haryana, 2002(2) SCT 915 (P&H), wherein, Division Bench judgment of this Court in Puran Chand Sharma's case (supra) has since specifically been over-ruled.
It is significant to mention that even the judgment referred to by the Letters Patent Bench in Samey Singh's case (supra) has also specifically been over-ruled.
It is, thus, apparent that the view of learned Single Judge taken in the impugned judgment, based upon two Single Bench judgments of this Court, has been upheld.
Ms. Nirmaljit Singh, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, however, relies upon the provisions contained in Rule 4-A, Part IV of the Rules, which reads thus :-  "4-A.
If on receipt of written statement of defence, the punishing authority is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee and for that reason the punishing authority does not consider it necessary to enquire into the articles of charges for imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5, it shall, after following the procedure specified in rule 10, make an order imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of rule 5."
5.
On the basis of Rule 4-A of the Rules, reproduced above, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, contends that it is now permissible under the said Rule to give minor punishment even though, show cause notice may pertain to major punishment without conducting enquiry.
6.
We would have gone into the contention of learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, and we may mention here that the aforesaid contention has been controverted by learned counsel representing the petitioner, but we need not do so inasmuch as, admittedly Rule 4-A, Part-II, of the Rules, was inserted vide notification dated 511993, whereas, penalty to the petitioner in this case was imposed on 2851983 and, therefore, the show cause notice to impose major penalty must have been issued far earlier to 2851983.
Amendment brought about in the Rules by inserting Rule 4-A cannot be applied to the facts of the present case.
Question raised by Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur is, however, left open to be decided in an appropriate case.
7.
In view of the discussion made above, this appeal is dismissed, upholding the judgment of learned Single Judge, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.