SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the action of the Managing Committee of respondent No. 2-College terminating the services of the petitioner by order dated 172004.
The petitioner was appointed as Lecturer on 2962002.
The appointment was subject to the rules of UGC and University regarding Colleges.
He was put on probation for a period of one year w.e.f.
1172002.
By order dated 2862003 (Annexure P-3), the probationary period was extended by one year w.e.f.
11.7.2003.
His services were ordered to be terminated on 172004 w.e.f.
2562004.
During the period of his employment, the Principal of the College has issued a certificate dated 2622004 (Annexure P-5) stating that the petitioner had been working in the College since 1172002.
His work and conduct is satisfactory.
Another certificate (Annexure P-6) was issued on the same date by the Head of Department of Computer Science and Applications.
2.
Mr. Kansal has vehemently argued that the petitioner stood confirmed w.e.f.
2562004.
On 172004, the petitioner had acquired the status of permanent employee, and therefore, his services could not have been terminated in view of Ordinance 3.01 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar.
We are unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that on 172004, the petitioner was deemed to have been confirmed.
Even according to the pleaded case of the petitioner, he was made an offer of appointment on 2962002.
By order dated 16.8.2002, (Annexure P-2), the petitioner was put on probation for one year w.e.f.
1172002.
The aforesaid period of probation was extended by order dated 2862003 for one year w.e.f.
11.7.2003.
It, therefore, becomes apparent that the petitioner would have completed the maximum period of probation on 1072004.
Therefore, the petitioner was still on probation when the order terminating his services was passed on 172004.
Mr. Kansal has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case of Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation and another v. S Manjunath, 2000(2) SCT 810 (SC) : 2000(5) Supreme Court Cases 250, in support of the submission that once the maximum period of probation had expired, the petitioner was deemed to have been confirmed.
As noticed earlier, the maximum period of probation had not expired in the case of the petitioner, and therefore, the aforesaid judgment would not be applicable in the facts and circumstance of the present case.
3.
Mr. Kansal has further argued tha the impugned order has been passed, without there being any relevant material to show that the work and conduct of the petitioner was unsatisfactory.
The order is, therefore, liable to be quashed as having been passed arbitrarily, whimsically and on extraneous considerations.
Even the order terminating the services of the probationer can be passed only on the basis of relevant material.
In support of these submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the following judgments :-  1.
The Management of Utkal Machinery Ltd v. Workman, Santi Patnaik, AIR 1966 Supreme Court 1051.
In this case, it has been held under the Industrial Disputes Act, the Industrial Tribunal can examine whether the order of termination has been effected in bona fide exercise of the power of the employer conferred on it by the contract of employment.
If the order has been passed in bona fide exercise of its power, the Industrial Tribunal will not interfere with it.
2.
Syed Azam Hussaini v. The Andhra Bank Ltd, 1995(2) SCT 347 (SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 37, Para 12.
In this case, the Supreme Court was dealing with a case of victiminsation, which has been established before the "Authority" under the Andhra Pradesh Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1966.
Respondent-Bank did not adduce any evidence to justify that the termination was for reasonable cause.
The order was held to be illegal as one month's wages in lieu of one month's notice had not been paid.
It was also held that since the workman had worked for 240 days continuously, there was non- compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
No reinstatement was ordered, but compensation was granted to the workman.
3.
Hans Raj v Presiding Officer, 1996(4) SCT 697 (P&H), para 18.
In this case, again this Court was considering a matter under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The services of the petitioner therein had been terminated during the period of probation.
The relief had been denied to the petitioner by the Labour Court on the ground that the services of the petitioner had been terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract of employment.
The Labour Court also held that the provisions contained in the Punjab Printing and Stationery Department Services Rules, 1964 and the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 are special provisions and they would prevail over the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and, therefore, he was not entitled to relief of reinstatement.
The Division Bench also considered the question whether the services of a probationer can be terminated on the basis of allegations of misconduct, without holding an enquiry in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The Division Bench has, inter-alia, held that a person appointed on probation can ordinarily be removed from service in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract of employment on the ground of unsatisfactory performance or failure to give satisfaction during the period of probation.
The employer cannot take shelter under the terms and conditions of employment in case the services of a probationer are terminated on the basis of allegations of misconduct.
4.
Managing Committee of MN College Shahabad Markanda v. SN Pasricha, 1999(2) SCT 64 (P&H), paras 7 and 8.
In this case, the Division Bench has held that during the period of probation, the employee is on trial.
His work and conduct are watched.
If he is unable to perform the duties of the post, his services can be terminated.
The Management has a right to form an opinion on the basis of the performance of the employee.
However, the formation of the opinion cannot be arbitrary.
It must be based on some material on the record.
If on the basis of the material on record the competent authority forms an opinion, it may not be possible for the Court to substitute its own opinion for that of the employer.
4.
We are of the considered opinion that the law laid down in any of the judgments noticed above is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
5.
As noticed earlier, the petitioner has placed strong reliance on the two certificates (Annexures P-5 and P-6).
A perusal of the aforesaid two certificates would show that the same had been issued at the instance of the petitioner.
In both the certificate, the Principal and the Head of Department had mentioned as follows :-  "I wish him all the success in life."
The certificates are in the nature of recommendations for any future applications that the petitioner may make for employment.
Apart from this, there is no material on the record to show that the respondents have acted on any extraneous consideration in passing the order of termination.
The services of the petitioner have neither been terminated on account of victimisation nor on the basis of any alleged misconduct.
The respondents have merely terminated the services of the petitioner by passing an innocuous order during the period of probation.
6.
Mr. Kansal has also argued that even if the petitioner was a probationer, it was necessary for the respondents to comply with Sections 3 and 4 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of the Employees) Act, 1974.
We are unable to accept the aforesaid submission.
These provisions would apply only when employee is sought to be dismissed or removed.
Termination of services during period of probation cannot be equated with an order of dismissal or removal.
Even otherwise, we find the argument of the learned counsel to be wholly fallacious.
Rule 6 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1978 specifically provides that provisions of Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the aforesaid Act shall not apply to the termination of service of any employee appointed on probation during or at the end of period of probation, on account of his work or conduct being unsatisfactory.
It is undoubtedly true that the order of termination passed on 172004 has been made effective from 2562004.
We are of the opinion that retrospective part of the order cannot be sustained.
The order of termination would come into effect on 172004.
This change in the date, however, would be of no benefit to the petitioner, as the maximum period of probation would expire on 1072004.
Therefore, at the time of passing of the order of termination, the petitioner was still on probation.
Having considered the entire matter, we are of the opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioner.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.