Surya Kant, J - Through this writ petition, the petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to keep on paying special pay to them as was being allegedly paid in the past.
2.
Brief facts, as pleaded by the petitioners, are that they were originally enrolled as executive police subordinates in different ranks, namely, Inspectors, Sub-Inspectors, Assistant Sub-Inspectors, Head Constables and Constables and were meant to perform the general duties in relation to the maintenance of law and order.
The petitioners, however, were asked to perform duties in the executive clerical wing of the Police Department vide various orders passed from time to time, the details of which are mentioned in a tabulated form in Annexure P-16 which also contains their other service particulars including the original police ranks.
According to the petitioners, prior to June 15, 1990 when rule 11 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the PPR) was amended by the Government of Punjab, constituting the uniformed executive clerical cadre, the executive clerical wing was also a part and parcel of the cadre of general police districts.
The service conditions of the petitioners, even while performing duties in the executive clerical wing, were governed by the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Part V of Chapter X of Vol. 1 of the PPR prescribes "Pay and allowances" admissible to all ranks and grades in the police department.
Rule 1063 thereof provides the rates of pay including the allowances sanctioned for certain posts either as special pay or compensatory allowances other than conveyance and grain compensation allowances.
The petitioners have further averred that according to Appendix under Rule 1063 (table B, Serial No. 42) attached to the afore- mentioned Chapter, the enrolled police officials who are employed as clerical staff in the English Offices of Superintendent of Police and who perform duties in different ranks like Head Clerk, Accountant, Assistant Clerk, Typist, Bill Clerk, Assistant Accountant Clerk, Typist, Head Proficient/Finger Prints and Clerks, etc. are entitled for payment of special pay at the rates prescribed therein.
It is the positively pleaded case of the petitioners that they, having been posted in the executive clerical cadre through various orders, details of which are mentioned in Annexure P-16, have been regularly and uninterruptedly performing the duties as are specified in Rule 111 of Chapter XI of Vol. 1 PPR and for this precise reason, have been regularly paid the special allowances in terms of Rule 1063 read with Appendix thereof (Table B) of Vol. 1 PPR till it was arbitrarily stopped with effect from March, 1980.
The petitioners represented several times that so long as they are working in the executive clerical wing, they are entitled to be paid special pay in accordance with their entitlement under the Statutory Rules.
The grievance of the petitioners was duly acknowledged by the Director General of Police and other senior functionaries of the department in a meeting held for Redressal of Grievances and Welfare of Police at PAP Campus, Jalandhar Cantonment on July 19, 1986 (Annexure P-14/A) where it was resolved that the "special pay should be got restored immediately as the present conditions were unfair to the concerned staff."
However, instead of implementing the afore-said decision, Rule 11 of PPR Vol. 1 was amended by the State Govt. vide notification dated June 15, 1990 (Annexure P-15) whereby proviso to Rule 11 was added, inter alia, providing that Telecommunication Branch, Finger Prints Bureau, Women Police Wing, Band Staff, Mounted Police, Armourers and executive clerical wing i.e. uniformed clerical functionaries posted in various subordinate offices shall form its separate cadre; the petitioners, as they say, have absolutely no grievance against constitution of a separate cadre, however, neither they have been given option to switch over to the newly constituted cadre nor the special pay, admissible to them under the PPR, is being paid to them.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioners have sought a writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to allow them to continue to draw the special pay from March, 1980 onwards.
3.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
The fact that the petitioners were originally enrolled in the general police cadre in different ranks like Inspectors, Sub-Inspectors, Assistant Sub-Inspectors, Head Constable or Constables have not been disputed.
It has also been admitted that they were taken to the executive clerical wing to perform clerical duties as prescribed in Rule 111 of the Chapter XI of PPR Vol. 1.
It is also not disputed that "special pay" was allowed to be drawn to all those petitioners who were taken to the executive clerical wing prior to February, 1980.
The respondents, however, have taken a stand that the "special pay" has been disallowed to the petitioners in view of the letter dated October 18, 1979 (Annexure R-2) issued by the Finance Department (Finance Regulations), Government of Punjab whereby revised pay scales for the posts in the police department were sanctioned and according to which the executive police officers working against ministerial/clerical posts have been allowed special pay with their revised scales of pay upto their repatriation to the executive police cadre or till 29th February, 1980 whichever is earlier and, thus, it was clear from this letter that the "executive clerical staff" is not entitled to "special pay" after 29th February, 1980.
4.
I have heard Shri Munish Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners and Smt. Rupinder Wasu, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and have perused the record.
5.
Before adverting to the rival submissions, it will be appropriate to reproduce Rules 11 (as amended on June 15, 1990), 1063, 111 read with Table-B (relevant part thereof) of PPR Vol. 1 and the same read as under :-  "11.
Constitution.
- For the purposes of Section 3 of the Police Act (V of 1861) the Punjab is divided into "General Police Districts".
(a) the provincial Police District, (b) the Railway Police District, All ranks of police employed in the province are appointed or enrolled under Section 2 of the Act.
"Provided that each of the Telecommunications Branch, Finger Prints Bureau, Women Police Wing, Bank Staff, Mounted Police, Armourers and Executive Clerical Wings, that is uniformed clerical functionaries in various subordinate offices shall form its uniformed cadre.
Explanation.
- The expression "subordinate offices" means the offices of the District Senior Superintendent of Police, Director, Finger Prints Bureau, Phillaur and Superintendent of Police, Incharge Recruits Training Centres."
1063.
Schedules of pay and allowances.
- The rates of pay sanctioned for all ranks and grades in the police department are shown in Appendix 1063, Table A, and the allowances sanctioned for certain posts, either as special pay or an compensatory allowances other than conveyance and grain compensation allowance are given in rules 1075 and 10178, and rates of travelling allowance as shown in Part VII of this chapter."
Appendix 1063 (Table-B) Designation of Post Special Pay Remarks 42.
For enrolled police officers employed on clerical staff in the English offices of Superintendent of Police:- Head Clerk 30 Accountant 30 Assistant Clerk 20 Typist 20 Bill Clerk 10 Assistant Accountant 10 Head Proficient, Finger Prints 10 111.
Office staff of Superintendent.
- The English and Vernacular office staff of each Superintendent consists of the following enrolled officers :-  1 2 3 4 Division of duties Designation Rank Remarks English Office Branch Head Clerk Inspector or Sub-Inspector This officer is in-charge of the English office and is responsible for the punctual disposal or correspondence, submission of periodical reports and returns, the maintenance of character rolls and service books and, when no senior officer is available may sign necessary letters, etc., for the Superintendent of Police.
He shall also supervise for the correctness of the accounts.
He will be assisted by as many assistant clerks as may from time to time be sanctioned.
Accounts Accountant Sub-Inspector His duties and responsibilities are detailed in branch Chapter X Police Rules.
He will be assisted by as many head constables as may from time to time be sanctioned.
Vernacular Bill Clerk Head Constable He shall prepare travelling allowance bills and be a general assistant to the Accountant.
Office Reader to Supdt.
of Police Assistant Sub-Inspector This officer shall exercise supervision over his branch Assistant readers (head- constables) of whom there will be as many as three are gazetted officers.
He shall also maintain the standing order book and the district order book.
Record Keeper Head This officer shall be in-charge of the vernacular Constable record and will be assisted by one or more constables according to the requirement of the district.
Return-writer Head Constable Shall maintain the general crime register and despatch register of conviction slips and shall be responsible for all prescribed returns from the vernacular office.
Diarist Copyist and Despatcher Head Constable or Constable With as many assistants as may be sanctioned shall deal with the receipt, registration, distribution, copying and despatch of vernacular correspondence according to rules.
Provided that every police officer shall at all times render such general assistance as may be required of him in the exigencies of the service."
6.
On a reading of the above-reproduced provisions of the Rules, there remains hardly any doubt that the executive police officers, even while posted against ministerial/clerical posts, continued to be part and parcel of the general police force (before amendment of Rule 11) and their service conditions were governed by the provisions of the PPR.
Rule 1063 provides the rates of pay sanctioned for all ranks and grades in the police department as also the allowances sanctioned for certain posts either as special pay or other compensatory allowances.
On a bare perusal of Table-B, one finds in unequivocal terms that allowances shown in column 2 thereof have been made admissible to such members of the executive Police cadre who are holders of the posts shown in column 1 and at Serial Number 42, the police officers working as Head Clerks, Accountant, Assistant Clerk, Typist, Bill Clerk, Assistant Accountant, and Head Proficient/Finger Prints have been made entitled for payment of "special pay" as shown in column 2 of the Table.
It could hardly be disputed by the respondents that the special pay has been made admissible to the executive police officers while working against ministerial/clerical posts due to the special nature of duties as envisaged under Rule 111 of the PPR.
During the course of hearing, Mrs. Rupinder Wasu, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab could not dispute that no amendment has been made in Rule 1063 and Table B thereof and, thus, provision regarding entitlement of "special pay" in lieu of the duties provided in Rule 111 still exist on the statute book.
7.
Coming to the sole stand taken by the respondents, namely, based upon the letter dated October 18, 1979 (Annexure R-2) of the Finance Department, which, according to the respondents, has disentitled the executive police officers working against ministerial/clerical posts from payment of special allowances, Shri Munish Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that the afore-mentioned executive instructions cannot supplant the Statutory Rules and the same, being inconsistent with the provisions of the rules, are liable to be struck down.
8.
With a view to appreciate the afore-mentioned submission, it may be mentioned here that the circular dated October 18, 1979 (Annexure R-2) conveys sanction of the Governor of Punjab to the revision of scales of pay to the various categories of posts in the Department of Police with effect from July 1, 1978, as per the details given in the Schedule enclosed to the circular (Annexure R-2).
The pay in the revised scales was required to be fixed under the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979.
The afore-mentioned circular, however, also contains as under :-  "..........Some of the ministerial posts in the Department of Police in various levels in the field are, by and large manned by uniformed police functionaries of various ranks ranging from Police Constables to Police Inspectors.
The Police Commission in 1961-62 had recommended that these posts should be manned by normal staff of ministerial categories in the normal pay scale and the uniformed executive staff should handle the executive duties.
Accordingly, the executive police officers working against ministerial clerical posts have been allowed special pay indicated in Annexure-A with revised scales of pay upto the date they are transferred back to Executive Cadre or till the 29th February, 1980 whichever is earlier......." In my view, the circular (Annexure R-2) neither deprives the members of executive police officers from claiming "special pay" while working against the ministerial/clerical posts, nor it obviously runs contrary to the provisions of the Statutory Service Rules, namely, the PPR.
What the circular has merely provided is that the ministerial/clerical posts in the police department are largely manned by uniformed police officers, who, in terms of these instructions, have been granted the revised pay scales along with the "special pay" indicated in Annexure-A of the circular.
It, however, recommended to the police department that the "special pay" will be allowed to be paid to them till they are either transferred back to the executive police cadre or upto 29th February, 1980, whichever is earlier.
However, if such members of the executive police cadre were still keen to continue to work in the executive clerical wing, they could continue to work without payment of any special pay.
It was, thus, imperative upon the authorities in the police department to inform to those members of the executive police cadre who were performing duties against ministerial/clerical posts that they would be entitled for special pay only upto 29th February, 1980 and if they were not wiling to work against such posts without the special pay, then they were liable to be reverted back to their original executive police cadre posts.
If no such notice-cum-option was given to the members of the executive police cadre and they were asked to continue to perform duties against ministerial/clerical posts without their request for such postings, then the right to claim special pay having accrued in their favour under the provisions of the PPR Vol. 1 could neither be taken away by the instructions dated October 18, 1979 (Annexure R-2) nor the afore-said circular intended to take away the same.
To be more explicit, the "special pay" under the police rules is attached to the nature of duties.
So long as a member of the executive police cadre performed the duties laid down in Rule 111, he was entitled for "special pay" under Rule 1063 read with Table-B thereof except where he himself requested for such posting after February 29, 1980.
Once the aforesaid circular dated 18101979 (Annexure R-2) recommended to the police department to transfer members of the executive police cadre from ministerial/clerical posts to their original cadre posts, it obviously recommended not to compel them to perform the specialised duties specified in Rule 111 which, once they perform, would make them entitled to claim "special pay" under Rule 1063 read with Table B thereof.
I am, therefore, of the considered view that so long as a member of the executive police cadre has been asked to perform duties in the executive clerical wing, namely, against the ministerial/clerical posts (except at his own request), he cannot be denied the benefit of "special pay" admissible to him under Rule 1063 read with Table B thereof.
9.
As regards the argument that the instructions dated October 18, 1979 (Annexure R-2) run contrary to the provisions of the PPR, I have already held that there is no inconsistency between these instructions and Statutory Rules.
In the event of any inconsistency, the law is well settled by plethora of judgments holding that the executive instructions can supplement the Statutory Rules but cannot supplant them.
The Apex Court, in the case of Dr. Rajinder Singh v. State of Punjab and Others, (2001) 5 Supreme Court Cases 482, while dealing with the validity of a notification issued by the Finance Department of the Government of Punjab which was pressed into service to suggest that as if it had amended the statutory service rules known as the Punjab Civil Medical State Service (Class-I) Rules, 1972, held as under :-  "7.
The settled position of law is that no government order, notification or circular can be a substitute of the statutory rules framed with the authority of law.
Following any other course would be disastrous inasmuch as it would deprive the security of tenure and right of equality conferred upon the civil servants under the constitutional scheme.
It would be negating the so far accepted service jurisprudence.
We are of the firm view that the High Court was not justified in observing that even without the amendment of the Rules, Class II of the service can be treated as Class I only by way of notification.
Following such a course in effect amounts to amending the rules by a government order and ignoring the mandate of Article 309 of the Constitution."
In view of what has been stated above, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondent-authorities to find out as to whether the petitioners or other similarly situated members of the executive police cadre, on revision of their pay scales pursuant to the circular dated 18101979 (Annexure R-2), were given notice-cum-option to the effect as to "whether or not they would like to continue to perform duties against ministerial/clerical posts even without payment of special pay after 29th February, 1980 ?"
If such an option was given and some members of the executive police cadre still wanted to continue against the ministerial/clerical posts in the executive clerical wing, they shall not be entitled for payment of any "special pay" with effect from March 1, 1980 onwards.
However, if neither any such notice- cum-option was given to them nor they were transferred to their executive police cadre posts despite recommendations of the Finance Department contained in the afore-mentioned circular, the respondents, in that event, are directed to pay "special pay" to the petitioners and other similarly situated person with effect from March 1, 1980 till they continue to perform such duties.
Needful shall be done within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.