MM Kumar, J - The question which arises for consideration in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is whether the order of dismissal dated 2321988 (Annexure P-12) could have been passed by the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India or it was required to be passed by the Zonal Manager.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Technical Assistant Grade III in the Food Corporation of India (for brevity, `FCI') on 27.10.1971.
He was further promoted on 1541976 to the post of Technical Assistant Grade II.
The order promoting the petitioner along with others to the post of Technical Assistant Grade II was passed by the Zonal Manager (North).
The name of the petitioner figures at serial No. 43 in this order.
It is appropriate to mention that the pay scale of the post of Technical Assistant Grade II is Rs. 150-10-350/-.
He was still further promoted on 281983 to the post of Technical Assistant Grade I in the pay scale of Rs. 450-15-555-20-675-25-850/-.
This order was also passed by the Zonal Manager (North).
The petitioner was reverted to the post of Technical Assistant Grade II on 1261985.
His services were subsequently terminated on 171985 by the Zonal Manager - respondent No. 2 under Regulation 19(1) of the Staff Regulations, 1971 (for brevity, `the Regulations') which regulate the service conditions of the employees of FCI.
However, the order of his termination was quashed by this Court and the petitioner was reinstated in service on 27101986.
3.
However, he was charged sheeted on 14111986 vide Annexure P-9 wherein numerous allegations regarding mis-appropriation and doubting the integrity of the petitioner were levelled.
The petitioner filed his reply to the charge sheet and denied all the allegations (Annexure P-10).
The Enquiry Officer vide his enquiry report dated 19121987 found the petitioner guilty of certain charges.
On the basis of the enquiry report, the Senior Regional Manager imposed the penalty of dismissal of the petitioner from service vide order dated 2321988 (Annexure P-12).
Against the order of dismissal, the petitioner filed appeal in the form of Annexures P-13 and P-14 which was also dismissed vide order dated 731989.
The instant petition has been filed challenging the order dated 2321988 (Annexure P-12) and the appellate order dated 731989 (Annexure P-15).
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a solitary contention that the order of dismissal could not have been passed by an authority subordinate to the authority that has appointed the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Assistant Grade II (Technical) by the Zonal Manager (North) and the Senior Regional Manager is not the authority who ordered his promotion.
The learned counsel maintains that the order dismissing the petitioner from service could have only been passed by the Zonal Manager.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has placed reliance on Regulations 54 and 56 and Appendix II of the Regulations.
He has also placed reliance on a judgment of Allahabad High Court in the case of Makhan Singh v. Food Corporation of India, 1997(2) SCT 272 (Allahabad) and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Rajinder Kumar Chopra v. The Food Corporation of India and others, 1998(3) RSJ 246.
5.
I have thoughtfully considered the sole contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner and am of the view that the same is liable to be rejected because a perusal of Regulations 54 and 56 read with Appendix I and II of the Regulations makes it abundantly clear that the post of Assistant Grade II (Technical) falls in category III posts.
According to Appendix II, the punishing authority of category III posts is Senior Regional Manager.
As per the amendment, for category III posts i.e. the employees posted in District/Regional/Port offices, the appointing authority is Senior Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Joint Manager.
The Senior Regional Manager has been clothed with all the powers of inflicting minor/major penalties.
The aforementioned provisions are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "54.
Penalties : Notwithstanding anything contained in any other regulation, and without prejudice to such action to which an employee may become liable under any other regulation or law for the time being in force, the following penalties may for good and sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided be imposed on any employee of the Corporation -  Minor Penalties : (i) censure; (ii) withholding of his promotion; (iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Corporation by negligence or breach of orders;  (iv) withholding of increments of pay.
Major Penalties : (v) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the employee of the Corporation will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay; (vi) reduction to a lower time-scale of pay or post from which he was reduced, with or without further directions regarding conditions of restoration to the post from which the employee of the Corporation was reduced and his seniority and pay on such restoration to that post; (vii) compulsory retirement; (viii) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future employment under the Corporation; (ix) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment under the Corporation."
56.
Disciplinary Authorities : The Board or the authority specified in Appendix 2 in this behalf or any other authority (higher than the authority specified in Appendix (2) empowered in this behalf by a general or special order of the Board, may impose any of the penalties specified in Regulation 54 on any employee."
See Table  STATEMENT SHOWING THE VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF POSTS, SCALES OF PAY, MODE OF RECRUITMENT ETC., IN THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA,  Appendix I  PART IV TECHNICAL CADRE  Promotion + Direct Recruitment + + Sl.
No.
Description of Post Scale of Pay (Rs.) Mode of Recruit-ment Selection/ non-selection Exper-ience Qualifica-tions and experience, if any.
Age limit Corres-ponding categories of posts in the Directorate General of Food Remarks (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) CATEGORY-III POSTS : + + 5.
Assistant Gr-I (Tech.)
225-10-235-15-430-20-550 Promotion 100% Non-selection 3 years as Asstt.
Gr-II (Tech.)
- - Tech.
Assistants/ -
Analysers/ Quality
Inspector + 6.
Assistant Grade-II (Tech.)
150-10-300 Promotion 100% failing which direct recruitment Non-selection 3 years as Asstt.
Grade-III (Tech.)
Degree in Science preferably in Agri-culture with 3 years' experience in the field.
25 years Assistant Analysers/ - + 7.
Assistant Gr-III (Tech.)
120-10-240 Direct 100% - - Degree in Science preferably in Agri-culture.
-do- Laboratory Assistants - DISCIPLINE AND APPEAL REGULATIONS  Before Amendment,  Appendix 2  Statement showing competent authorities  Sl.
No. Posts Appointing Authority - Authority competent to impose penalties and penalties it may impose + Appellate Authority Authority Penalties + 1 2 3 5 6 7 2.
CATEGORY-III : + Regional/Port Office Regional Manager/Joint Manager Deputy Manager/Deputy Regional Manager/Regional Joint Manager All Regional Manager/Joint Manager/Zonal Manager.
Zonal Office Deputy Zonal Manager Deputy Zonal Manager All Zonal Manager Head Office Joint Manager Joint Manager All Personnel Manager AFTER AMENDMENT DECISIONDATE-987 + + + + + 2.
CATEGORY-III + District/Regional/Port Office.
Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Joint Manager.
District/Deputy Regional Manager/Deputy Manager Minor Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager/Zonal Manager.
Sr.
Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager.
All A careful persual of Appendix I would show that the post of Assistant Grade II (Technical) falls under category III posts and the appointing authority according to Appendix II as amended on 16101987 (supra) is the Senior Regional Manager.
The officers working in the District cadre belonging to category III posts are to be appointed by the Senior Regional Manager and all penalties like reduction in rank or dismissal from service could be ordered by him.
6.
In the present case, the appointing authority of the petitioner is the Senior Regional Manager and order Annexure P-12 has also been passed by the Senior Regional Manager.
On appeal, Zonal Manager (North) has upheld the order of Senior Regional Manager.
Therefore, no legal infirmity could be found in the order Annexure P-12 on the ground that the Senior Regional Manager is an authority subordinate to the appointing authority.
7.
The argument of the learned counsel that the promotion order Annexure P-1 dated 1541976 granting promotion to the petitioner was passed by the Zonal Manager would not require any detailed consideration in view of the fact that according to the Regulations, the appointing authority of the petitioner is Senior Regional Manager.
The passing of the promotion order by the Zonal Manager would not make him the appointing authority of the petitioner resulting into the assertion of claim by the petitioner that Senior Regional Manager does not have disciplinary jurisdiction of inflicting the major penalty on him.
8.
It is well settled that the principles laid down in Article 311(1) of the Constitution are applicable to persons in civil employment only.
The employees of the Corporations are not governed by Article 311(1) of the Constitution as a statutory Corporation is not the department of the Government for that purpose and they do not hold a civil post.
This principle has been affirmed by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. SL Agarwal v. The General Manager, Hindustan Steel Ltd, 1970 SLR 351.
Similar principle has been reiterated in the case of Satinder Singh Arora v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 224.
Therefore, the argument that the petitioner could not have been dismissed by an authority subordinate to the one who has appointed the petitioner cannot be accepted merely because the Zonal Manager happen to order his promotion, whereas the Regulation provides that Senior Regional Manager is his appointing authority.
There is no legal infirmity in the impugned order dated 2321988 (Annexure P-12) and the appellate order dated 731989 (Annexure P-15).
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.