Ashutosh Mohunta, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed to challenge the judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below, whereby order dated 2071998 stopping four annual grade increments with future effect passed by the Secretary, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala (for short 'the Board') had been upheld and the suit filed by the appellant was dismissed.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that during the tenure of working as Executive Engineer, the plaintiff-appellant was served with a charge-sheet dated 16101985 and four charges were levelled against him.
Shri Manmohan Singh, PCS, Deputy Secretary, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer.
According to the Enquiry Report submitted by him, only Charge Nos. 1 and 2 were established against the appellant.
As the competent authority found that there was some deficiency in Charge No. 1, the Enquiry Officer was asked to clarify the deficiencies.
In the meantime Shri Manmohan Singh was transferred and the enquiry was entrusted to Shri Suresh Gupta, the then Superintending Engineer, and he was asked to hold enquiry with regard to Charge No. 1.
Er.
Suresh Gupta exonerated the appellant of charge No. 1.
Resultantly, only charge No. 2 was proved against the appellant.
In the meantime, the appellant was promoted as Superintending Engineer.
After his promotion as Superintending Engineer, four annual grade increments of the appellant were stopped as a consequence of the Enquiry Report submitted by Shri Manmohan Singh, PCS The appellant filed representation to challenge the stoppage of four annual grade increments with future effect before the Disciplinary Authority.
The representation was rejected.
The appeal filed by him was also dismissed.
As the appeal was dismissed by passing a non-speaking order, the appellant filed a writ petition before this Court.
The said writ petition was allowed and a direction was given to the Appellate Authority to pass the order after hearing the appellant and by passing a speaking order.
Consequent upon the direction given by the High Court, the Appellate Authority passed the impugned order on 2071998.
The appellant filed a suit to challenge the order of punishment dated 1231993 as well as the order dated 2071998 passed by the appellate authority rejecting his appeal.
The suit was dismissed by the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Patiala, vide judgment and decree dated 1042000.
The appeal filed by the appellant was also dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala, vide judgment and decree dated 2872001.
Now the appellant has filed the present regular second appeal to challenge the judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the case file.
3.
Two points have been raised by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior Advocate.
The first point raised by him is that the appellant was not supplied a copy of the enquiry report submitted by the Enquiry Officer before imposing penalty of stoppage of four annual grade increments upon him.
The second point of attack is that the default for which the appellant has been punished does not find mention in the charge-sheet supplied to him.
Thus, according to the learned senior counsel, the enquiry against the appellant was vitiated and the principles of natural justice have not been observed before penalising him.
4.
Mr. JS Virk, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-Board, has controverted the contentions raised by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram.
It has been contended by him that the appellant was supplied the charge-sheet and the other documents regarding which prayer was made by him.
5.
The following substantial question of law arises for determination by this Court in the present appeal :  Whether an employee cannot be penalised without supplying him a copy of the enquiry report ?
6.
It is the admitted position that the appellant was not supplied a copy of the final Enquiry Report conducted by Er.
Suresh Kumar, who had succeeded Shri Manmohan Singh, the then Enquiry Secretary.
Even in the order of punishment dated 2071998 it stands impliedly admitted from the side of the Board that the appellant was not supplied a copy of the Enquiry Report, wherein it has been stated that the appellant was "supplied with the statement of allegations and articles of charges."
It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : 1993(5) Services Law Reporter 532, that report of "Inquiry Officer must be supplied before the disciplinary authority arrives at the conclusion with regard to the guilt of the employee."
It has further been held that the right to receive a copy of inquiry report is an integral part of departmental inquiry."
Still further it has been held that the "delinquent employee is entitled to a copy of the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject."
Thus, it shows that it was incumbent upon the Board to have supplied a copy of the enquiry report to the appellant before passing the impugned order of punishment upon him.
7.
Still further, charge No. 2, for the default of which, the appellant has been punished, is to the following effect :-  "2.
That he, allowed payments to M/s Continental Construction Co Ltd, for the material supplied by the said firm was not according to specifications.
He, thus, did not perform his duty diligently and honestly and caused financial loss to the Board."
However, in the order of punishment dated 1231993 passed by the disciplinary authority, it has been stated that charge No. 2 stood proved on the ground that "M/s Continental Construction Co Pvt Ltd. was assigned the job of excavation of soft rock by manual labour and hard rock with the help of blast.
However, the firm also excavated the soft rock with the help of blast to save labour charges and charged amount on the basis of manual labour.
This was proved in the sample submitted by XEN/Shanan to the Resident Geologist Incharge, Geological Survey of India, Sundernagar.
Thus, the charge of causing financial loss to the Board has been proved."
A perusal of the charge framed against the appellant shows that he has not been punished for the guilt which found mention in the chargesheet.
Rather he has been punished for the charge which was never mentioned in the charge-sheet supplied to the plaintiff- appellant.
8.
As a result of above discussion, I allow the present appeal and set aside the judgments and decrees passed by both the Courts below.
The order dated 1231993 passed by the disciplinary authority as well as the order dated 2071998 passed by the appellate authority are quashed.
The appellant is granted the four annual grade increments with retrospective effect.
The consequential arrears of pay and other pensionary benefits be released to the appellant within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.