Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Nobody was present on behalf of the petitioner even on 26th February, 2004.
In the interest of justice, we deferred the order and directed that the matter be listed for hearing today.
Today again nobody is present.
Under these circumstances, we are left with no option but to proceed to decide this matter on merit.
2.
We have heard counsel for the High Court.
3.
The petitioner in this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, prays for issuance of an appropriate direction to the respondents requiring the said respondents to pay to the petitioner three increments due from 1982, 1983 and 1984 and also fix the salary of the petitioner for the period 2591982 to 20111984.
Consequently, the petitioner prays for revision of his basic pay obviously on the basis that for the afore-stated period when the petitioner was suspended he was entitled to get full salary.
4.
The petitioner joined the High Court as Clerk on 5111952.
He was promoted as Assistant on 731964 and thereafter as a Superintendent Grade II with effect from 151981.
During the course of his service, petitioner was served with a charge-sheet and after conclusion of the departmental inquiry, penalty dismissing him from service was imposed with effect from 20th November, 1984.
This order of punishment was challenged by the petitioner in appeal under the High Court Establishment (Appointment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1973.
While arguing the appeal, the petitioner conceded that he does not challenge the impugned order on merit, but only prays for variation of quantum of punishment as the punishment was excessive.
On his statement, appellate authority, while disposing of the appeal directed as under :-  "....The appellant has given his statement stating that he does not press the appeal on merits, but prays that as the punishment is excessive, the same may be reduced.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx As the appellant has given a statement that he does not contest the findings on merits and taking into consideration the nature of the charges, the length of service put in by the appellant and the loss suffered by the Department, we are of the view that the punishment awarded to the appellant is excessive.
The dismissal from service is certainly disproportionate to the charges proved against the appellant.
Consequently, we set aside the order of the Acting Chief Justice dated November 20, 1984, conveyed to the appellant on November 22, 1984 dismissing him from service and direct that he will be deemed to have compulsorily retired w.e.f.
November 20, 1984 and as a result of this order, he shall be entitled to all the pensionary benefits, including provident fund, gratuity, leave encashment etc. as admissible on his retirement.
He is compulsorily retired from service w.e.f.
November 20, 1984".
The said order of the appellate authority attained finality and the petitioner was compulsorily retired with effect from 20th November, 1984, the date on which he was dismissed from service.
5.
The bare reading of the writ petition shows that the petitioner does not challenge the said order.
However, his period of suspension afore-stated, has to be treated as service period and, therefore, increments for the said period have to be added and his salary computed accordingly.
6.
Learned counsel appearing for the High Court during the course of hearing produced record before us which shows that the Competent Authority had passed order dated 26th April, 1991, vide which it was held that the period of suspension of the petitioner may be treated as duty for the limited purpose of computing pension without paying anything beyond subsistence allowance already paid to him during the period of suspension.
This order probably was not communicated to the petitioner and there is admittedly no challenge to the said order.
We may also notice that the petitioner had made a representation before the Competent authority on 23121993, which was rejected by the High Court on 20th January, 1994.
The petitioner had prayed for counting of the increment for the relevant period.
7.
We are unable to see any error of law in the order rejecting the representation of the petitioner, though there is no challenge even to the said order of rejection.
The petitioner, in fact, would be deemed to have abandoned his relief in relation to challenge to the order of rejection dated 20th January, 1994, Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
The claim of the petitioner, according to the High Court, was rightly rejected.
8.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that the petitioner can claim increment in pay for the relevant period only if he had challenged the order dated 29th April, 1991.
This order is the very foundation of the basis for which the claim of the petitioner has been rejected.
The initiation of departmental inquiry and order of punishment consequently passed thereupon again has not been questioned by the petitioner on merit.
Thus, it cannot be said that the order of suspension was unlawful and vitiated for any circumstances or grounds mentioned in the writ petition.
We would expect the High Court to communicate to the petitioner copy of the order dated 29th April, 1991, if not already communicated.
Obviously, the petitioner would be at liberty to challenge the same in accordance with law and if now permissible.
9.
For the reasons aforestated, we find no merit in this petition.
The same is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.