HS Bedi, J - The petitioner, Harbans Lal, was working as a Pump Operator with M/s Doaba Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Nawanshahar, respondent No. 3 when his services were terminated w.e.f.
October, 1978.
As his efforts to get reinstatement proved futile, he raised an industrial dispute claiming reinstatement and the matter was referred to the Labour Court, Jalandhar.
The Labour Court vide its award, Annexure P-1, dated 5111985 ordered the reinstatement of the petitioner but directed that as he had been convicted in an excise case, he was not entitled to any back wages or any other benefits on his reinstatement.
It is against this portion of the award that the present petition has been filed.
2.
In the reply filed by the respondents, it has been pleaded that as a matter of fact the petitioner himself had abandoned his employment and his services had not been terminated.
It has also been pleaded that as he had not made any effort to get re-employment after his services had been terminated, he was not entitled to any back wages.
3.
Mr. Ravinder Seth, the learned counsel for the petitioner, passed away a long time ago.
This petition has been pending in this Court for the last seventeen years.
In this view of the matter, instead of issuing actual date notice to the petitioner, I propose to dispose of the writ petition.
4.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner has not been given back wages despite the fact that as per the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1979 PLR 720, the award of the wages is the rule and their refusal is an exception.
5.
It is to be noticed that the petitioner had been convicted under the Excise Act but the Labour Court, had nevertheless ignored this fact by holding that a mere conviction per se could not be a ground for dismissal from service and it is on that account that the petitioner's reinstatement had been ordered.
It sounds strange, therefore, that this very reason had been taken into account while denying back wages to the petitioner.
In the written statement a new ground has been taken viz that as the petitioner had made no effort to secure employment after his services had been terminated, he was not entitled to back wages.
To my mind, even this ground is untenable in view of the Hari Palace's case (supra).
This petition is accordingly allowed, the award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioner will have his back wages from the date that his service had been terminated to the date of his reinstatement.
The arrears shall be paid to the petitioner or his representatives within six months by respondent No. 3.
A copy of the judgment be sent to the petitioner under registered cover free of cost.
Petition allowed.