Viney Mittal, J - The appellant having remained concurrently unsuccessful before the learned courts below has approached this court through the present regular second appeal.
The challenge is to the judgment and decree of the learned courts below whereby the suit for declaration filed by the plaintiff- appellant has been dismissed.
2.
As per the averments made in the plaint, the plaintiff was appointed on the post of Sewadar in the office of District Election Officer-cum-Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar vide order dated April 7, 1989.
He continued on the aforesaid post till March 20, 1990 when his services were ordered to be terminated.
The aforesaid termination order has been challenged by the plaintiff on various grounds.
It is claimed by him that he had completed 244 days of service without any break and, therefore, his services could not have been terminated.
It has further been stated that in fact before passing the aforesaid order no opportunity of hearing was ever provided to him.
A further claim has been made that persons junior to him were still serving and as such his termination order was bade.
3.
Upon a notice of the suit being issued to the defendants, they put in appearance.
A written statement was filed by them.
The claim of the plaintiff was contested.
It was stated by the defendants that the plaintiff was appointed on purely temporary basis vide order dated April 7, 1989 upto February 28, 1990.
As per the aforesaid appointment letter, his services could be terminated without giving any notice.
Thus, on the basis of the aforesaid terms and conditions in the appointment letter, his services were terminated by the competent authority, as the same were no longer required.
It was also maintained by the defendants that the services of the plaintiff were terminated on the orders of the Joint Chief Electoral Officer, Punjab, Chandigarh but were merely conveyed by defendant No. 3.
The defendants, however, admitted that one Angrej Singh, Peon who was junior to the plaintiff was retained by them and it was maintained that the services of the plaintiff were terminated on the administrative ground but the aforesaid Angrej Singh was retained because his services were found to be satisfactory.
On these premises, the said order of termination was defended by the defendants.
4.
The learned trial court after examining the evidence led by the parties, dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
An appeal was filed by him before the learned first appellate court.
The learned first appellate court also dismissed the aforesaid appeal and upheld the judgment of the learned trial court.
The plaintiff has now approached this court through the present regular second appeal.
5.
I have heard Shri Munishwar Puri, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant and with his assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
The appointment letter of the plaintiff is as Ex.D1 on the record.
A perusal of the aforesaid document Ex. D1 shows that the plaintiff was appointed on temporary basis on April 7, 1989.
His appointment was merely upto February 28, 1990.
It was clearly stipulated in the appointment letter that his services could be terminated without giving him any notice and without assigning any reason to him.
The termination order dated March 20, 1990 is Ex. D2 on the record.
A perusal of the aforesaid termination order shows that it is merely stated therein that the services of the plaintiff were no longer required.
According the plaintiff was relieved from duty with effect from March 20, 1990.
6.
Shri Munishwar Puri, the learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that prior to the termination of the services of the plaintiff an opportunity of hearing should have been provided to him.
According to the learned counsel since no opportunity of hearing was ever granted by the defendants to the plaintiff nor any enquiry in the matter was conducted, therefore, the termination order was liable to be set aside.
This contention, raised by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant is totally without any basis and contrary to the record.
A perusal of the termination order does not show that it casts any stigma upon the plaintiff.
As a matter of fact the termination order was clearly in consonance with the order of appointment.
7.
It is not in dispute that the plaintiff was not a confirmed employee.
He being a temporary employee had no right to the post.
His services could have been terminated in terms of the appointment letter itself.
With regard to the fact that Angrej Singh junior to the plaintiff had been retained, it may be pertinent to notice that the defendants have maintained that the work and conduct of Angrez Singh was satisfactory and it was because of the said fact that he was retained.
8.
Shri Munishwar Puri has placed reliance upon two Division Bench judgments of this Court, namely, Malwinder Singh Mali v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 2000(1) SCT 651 (P&H) : 2000(1) PLR 468 and Ved Parkash v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat and another in support of the claim of the plaintiff.
I have gone through the aforesaid rulings and in my considered opinion the said authorities are not applicable to the facts of the present case at all.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any merit in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.