NK Sud J - Petitioner was a Driver with the respondents.
His services were terminated vide order dated 21-7-1982.
He challenged his termination and raised an industrial dispute.
On reference, the Labour Court upheld his claim saying that the termination order was illegal.
Accordingly, he was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service.
However, his claim for back wages was declined.
The petitioner has approached this Court in the present writ petition claiming that the Labour Court has wrongly rejected his claim for back wages without assigning any reason.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the findings of the Labour Court on issue No. 4 which read as under :-  "It is ordered that the workman shall be reinstated with continuity of service and he shall not be paid back wages.
He shall report for duty within ten days of the enforcement of the award."
2.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents states the petitioner has succeeded merely on a technical ground otherwise his conduct shows that he had wilfully absented himself from duty.
He states that it is the admitted position that his leave application was declined and he had refused to receive the letter rejecting his leave application.
Thereafter, he had to be informed telegraphically.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
It has been correctly pointed out that the Labour Court has given no reason whatsoever to reject the claim of the petitioner for back wages.
Thus, this finding cannot be sustained.
Normally, the matter should go back to the Labour Court for fresh adjudication.
However, since the case is about 20 years old, learned counsel for the petitioner states that he would be satisfied if his claim is allowed to the extent of 50%.
4.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, I feel that the prayer now made is reasonable.
Accordingly, the order of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioner shall be entitled to 50% back wages from the date of demand notice to the date of reinstatement.
Respondents are directed to calculate the amount due to the petitioner and pay the same within 3 months from the date a certified copy of the order is made available to them.
This petition is disposed of in the above terms.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.