Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner KC Rana who is working as Assistant in the office of District Primary Education, Panipat has approached this Court through the present writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
He is aggrieved against the stipulation contained in the order dated January 3, 2001 passed by the Director of Secondary Education Haryana, Chandigarh respondent No. 2 whereby he has been ordered to be promoted with effect from February 1, 1999 ie the date his junior was promoted but has not been held entitled to arrears on account of the aforesaid promotion.
2.
Relevant facts :  On September 9, 1994 when the petitioner was working in Government High School, Assadpur Nandnor, District Sonepat, an FIR against him as well as eight other persons was registered under Sections 415, 467, 468, 471, 420 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
In view of the registration of the aforesaid FIR, the petitioner was placed under suspension on October 10, 1994.
A copy of the order of the suspension has been appended as Annexure P.1.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
A departmental inquiry was ordered to be held.
The said inquiry was conducted by the District Education Officer, Sonepat.
A report was submitted on August 16, 2000.
The petitioner was exonerated of the charges against him.
A copy of the aforesaid report has been appended as Annexure P2.
3.
However, criminal proceedings were continued, in pursuance to the aforesaid FIR.
The petitioner pleaded that he was not guilty and that he had no role to play in procuring the false and forged certificates of the students as mentioned in the FIR.
The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Gurgaon vide order dated November 30, 2000 discharged the petitioner as well as other accused from the criminal offences.
A copy of the aforesaid discharge order passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate has been appended as Annexure P.3.
4.
After having been exonerated in the departmental proceedings as well as in the criminal proceedings, the petitioner moved a representation to the Director Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh requesting therein that his suspension period be treated as duty period and he be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
He further claimed that he be also promoted from the date his junior was promoted.
A copy of the aforesaid representation has been appended as Annexure P4 with the petition.
The request made by the petitioner was accepted by respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was ordered to be reinstated.
His suspension period was ordered to be treated as on duty.
The aforesaid order of reinstatement of the petitioner passed by respondent No. 2 dated December 22, 2000 has been appended as Annexure P.5.
5.
In the meantime, a person junior to the petitioner had been promoted as Assistant.
Consequently, vide order dated January 3, 2001, the petitioner was also ordered to be promoted as Assistant in the grade of Rs. 5300-7050/- with effect from February 1, 1999 ie the date his junior was promoted.
As such, he was ordered to be posted in the office of District Primary Education Officer, Panipat against a vacant post of Deputy Superintendent.
However, it was stipulated that the petitioner will not be paid arrears on account of this promotion.
The aforesaid order dated January 3, 2001 has been appended as Annexure P6.
6.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the stipulation contained in the order Annexure P6 whereby it was directed that the petitioner was not to be paid arrears on account of the retrospective promotion and has approached this Court through the present petition.
7.
On notice of the present petition, the respondents have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
The stand of the respondents taken in the written statement is as follows :  "That the petitioner was promoted as Assistant vide Directorate order 2/6-98 Me(3) dated 312001 (Annexure P6) with retrospective effect i.e. w.e.f.
1299 the date from which his junior was promoted.
While promoting the petitioner as assistant, it was mentioned in the order of promotion Annexure P6 that the will not be paid any arrears on account of this promotion.
He accepted this promotion order and joined as Assistant without any protest.
Thus he is not entitled to claim the benefit of arrear at this stage.
The name of the petitioner could not be considered for promotion due to the reason that a Departmental proceeding was pending against him.
His name was not deliberately ignored but he was not entitled for promotion as per Government Instructions.
When the petitioner was exonerated from the Departmental proceedings under rule-7 of CSR (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1987, he was promoted as Assistant from the date his junior was promoted as an Assistant.
Since he has not actually worked on the post of Assistant, so he cannot claim arrear for the period he had not worked as an Assistant."
8.
We have heard Shri DV Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record.
9.
Shri DV Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that since the case of the petitioner from the very beginning was that he had been implicated in a false and frivolous case and had no connection with the falsification of certificate by the students, therefore, his suspension and registration of criminal case against him are without any basis.
It is further maintained by Shri Gupta that the stand of the petitioner stands fully vindicated by the inquiry report dated August 16, 2000 Annexure P2.
Even the criminal Court discharged the petitioner when the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate passed order dated November 30, 2000 Annexure P.3.
It was only on complete exoneration of the petitioner from the departmental proceedings as well as criminal proceedings that the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated and also subsequently promoted from the date his junior was promoted.
In these circumstances, it is submitted by Shri Gupta that the petitioner was rightly held entitled to his promotion from the retrospective date i.e. February 1, 1999 and, therefore, on that retrospective promotion was also fully entitled to the arrears of his pay on the promoted post.
10.
On the other hand, Shri Amol Rattan, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that the petitioner had already accepted the promotion order annexure P6 and had joined on the promoted post.
Since he had joined the promoted post and accepted the promotion order wherein it was stipulated that he was not entitled to his arrears on the promoted post, therefore, at this stage, his claim for the afore-said arrears could not be entertained.
It is further maintained by Shri Amol Rattan that the petitioner was not entitled to the aforesaid arrears because of the reason that he had not actually worked as Assistant during that period.
11.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and in our opinion the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
12.
The claim of the petitioner right from the very beginning was that he was falsely implicated in the criminal case and also that he had no role to play in the falsification of certificates by the students.
His stand was fully vindicated when he was exonerated by the Inquiry Officer vide report dated August 16, 2000 and also when he was discharged from the Criminal Court vide order dated November 30, 2000.
It was only as a consequence thereof that even the department accepted the innocence of the petitioner and reinstated him and his suspension period was ordered to be treated as a duty period.
Even the claim of the petitioner for promotion from the date his junior was promoted i.e. with effect from February 1, 1999 was accepted by the department.
In these circumstances, there is absolutely no justification to deny him the arrears of pay on the promoted post with effect from the date he has actually been ordered to be promoted i.e. w.e.f.
February 1, 1999.
13.
Consequently, the present petition is allowed and the stipulation contained in Annexure P6 that the petitioner was not to be paid arrears on account of the promotion is held to be without any basis and is set aside.
The petitioner is held entitled to the arrears on the promoted post from the date he has been ordered to be promoted i.e. w.e.f.
February 1, 1999.
The respondents are further directed to implement the directions in the writ petition and make necessary payment of the petitioner within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by them.
No costs.
Petition allowed.