Viney Mittal, J - The petitioners have filed the present Civil Writ Petition under section (Article ?)
226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus for issuing a direction to the respondents to fill up the posts of Assistants which had fallen vacant on July 18, 2000 in accordance with rules applicable at that time.
Further prayer has been made for the issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the conditions imposed in the orders dated November 18, 1998 and December 13, 1999 (appended as Annexures P/1 and P/2 to the petition) whereby petitioner No. 1 has been given the current duty charge of the pose of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) in his own pay scale of Assistant i.e. Rs. 5000 - Rs. 7850/- and petitioner No. 2 has been posted as Assistant Superintendent (R&R) on a vacant post in his own pay scale.
Certain facts may be noticed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that whereas petitioner No. 1 was appointed as a Clerk on May 15, 1973 and his services were regularised as such on February 8, 1977, he was promoted as an Assistant in the month of June, 1994 and even was appointed as Assistant Superintendent (R&R) on November 19, 1998.
Petitioner No. 1 joined the aforesaid post on November 22, 1998 and is continuing as such without any interruption.
Similarly petitioner No. 2 was appointed as a Clerk by way of direct recruitment on the recommendations of Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana on November 18, 1971 and was promoted as Assistant on July 11, 1990 and he was appointed as Assistant Superintendent (R&R) in his own pay scale on December 13, 1999 and is continuing thereupon without any interruption since then.
The service conditions for the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) in the Deputy Commissioner's Office, where the petitioners are working, are governed by the statutory rules called the Haryana Revenue Department, District Subordinate (Group-C) Service Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules").
It is the case of the petitioner that in accordance with the aforesaid statutory rules, the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) was required to be filled up by way of promotion from Assistants on the basis of their seniority from amongst themselves working in the Deputy Commissioner's office.
On August 18, 2000 and August 22, 2000 certain amendments/additions were made in the Rules.
Whereas under the original rules the promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) were to be made from amongst the Assistants working in the Deputy Commissioner's office, now under the amended rules the aforesaid promotions were to be made from amongst the Assistants in Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioners' offices of a Division.
3.
The petitioners state that one post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) fell vacant on April 30, 1998 due to the retirement of Shri Khushi Ram, Assistant Superintendent (R&R) and the other post fell vacant on May 7, 1999 due to the death of Shri Arjun Singh, Assistant Superintendent (R&R).
4.
The petitioners further state that their case for promotion as Assistant Superintendent (R&R) against the aforesaid vacant posts was not being considered although they were duly eligible and were the senior-most Assistants in the seniority list and had even been appointed as Assistant Superintendents (R&R) in their own pay scale.
Therefore, they made representations to respondent No. 2 on various occasions and ultimately even a notice of demand was also made.
A copy of the aforesaid demand notice has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the petition.
Therefore, the petitioners approached this court through C.W.P.
No. 13539 of 2000.
However, vide an order dated October 4, 2000 a Division Bench of this Court refused to entertain the petition since even the two months period for which the legal notice had been served had not expired till then.
Making a grievance that the process for filling up of the aforesaid vacant posts of Assistant Superintendents (R&R) had not been initiated by the respondents, though on the basis of the seniority list the petitioners were the senior-most persons for appointment, the petitioners have again approached this court by way of filing the present writ petition.
5.
On a notice issued to the respondents, a written statement has been filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 contesting the claim made by the petitioners.
The stand taken by the respondent is that since the rules were amended on August 18, 2000, therefore, as per amended rules it was the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, Rohtak who was competent to promote the petitioners as per seniority list of Assistants/Stenographers of Deputy Commissioners' office of the Rohtak Division and that of the office of Commissioner.
It is further stated by the respondents that even before the case of the petitioners for promotion could be considered, in the meanwhile the promotion rules were amended and it was as per the amended rules that the promotions were now to be made.
6.
We have heard Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Amol Rattan learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents.
7.
Shri Malik has submitted that since the posts of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) were to be filled up by promotion alone from amongst the Assistants, therefore, as per the settled law the rules which were prevalent at the time of accruing of the vacancy were required to be followed and any subsequent rules could not be taken into consideration for making promotions.
8.
Shri Malik has placed reliance upon the decisions of the Supreme Court of India in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
798, Jagdish Chander and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) SCT 29 (P&H) : 1994(5) S.L.R.
98 and a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Ran Singh and others v. State of Haryana and another, C.W.P.
No. 128 of 1998 decided on September 20, 2000 to support his contention.
On the other hand Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General has submitted that the petitioners had no right to be appointed to the posts of Assistant Superintendent but had merely a right to be considered for promotion in accordance with rules/instructions.
Shri Amol Rattan has submitted that in fact even before the case of the petitioners for promotion could be processed, then at that stage there was an amendment in the rules on August 18, 2000 and since as per amended rules it was the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, Rohtak who was competent to promote an Assistant as per the seniority list of Assistants working in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners in Rohtak Division, therefore, the petitioners could not make any claim under the old rules.
9.
As this stage it may be relevant to notice rules 6, 7 and 9 of the Rules (prior to the amendment) as under :  "6.
Appointing Authority - Appointment to the posts in the Services shall be made by the - (i) Commissioner in case of Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent or  (ii) in case of other than (i) the Deputy Commissioner concerned.
7.
Qualifications :- No person shall be appointed to the services, unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 4 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of appointment otherwise than direct recruitment.
9.
Method of Recruitment - (1) Recruitment to any post in the Service shall be made - (b) In the case of Assistant Superintendent (Revenue and Records) :- By promotion from amongst the Assistants in Deputy Commissioner's officer.
Provided that not more than 20% of the posts of Clerks shall be filled by this manner i.e. on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Unless otherwise provided all appointments by promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to promotion on the basis of seniority alone as a matter of right.
APPENDIX-B Sr.No.
Name of Post Academic qualification and exp.
if any for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
2.
Assistant Superintendent (Revenue and Record) Five years experience as Asstt.
in Deputy Commissioner's officer, or five years experience as District Revenue Accountant.
Vide notifications dated August 18, 2000 and August 22, 2000 Rule 6 of the Rules was amended as follows :  "6.
Appointment authority - Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made by the Deputy Commission concerned."
The relevant portion of the amended rule 9 of the Rules is as follow :  "(a) In the case of Assistant Superintendent .
By promotion from amongst the Assistant/Stenographers working in the Commissioner's / Deputy Commissioners' office of a Division.
10.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and feel that the present petition deserves to succeed.
It is not in dispute that the petitioners were holding the post of Assistants in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak and as per the Rules prior to the amendment the petitioners were entitled to be considered for promotion.
Nothing has been shown to us that the amendment in the rules which came into force with effect from August 18, 2000 is in any manner retrospective in its operation.
In these circumstances the amendment in the rules of the year 1988 (old Rules) cannot in any manner take away the right of promotion of persons like the petitioners and, therefore, it must be held that the vacancies which had occurred prior to the amended rules would continue to be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
In fact the amended rules would be applicable to the vacancies which arose after the amendment.
11.
The Supreme Court in the case of YV Rangaiah and others (supra) held as follow :  "Having heard the counsel for the parties, we find no force in either of the two contentions.
Under the old rules a panel had to be prepared every year in September.
Accordingly, a panel should have been prepared in the year 1976 and transfer or promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade II should have been made out of that panel.
In that event the petitioners in the representation petition who ranked higher than the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 would not have been deprived of their right of being considered for promotion.
The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub- Registrar Grade II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and not on the State-wide basis and therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
We have not the slightest doubt that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules."
12.
In the case of Jagdish Chander and others v. State of Haryana and others (supra) this court following the judgment in YV Rangaiah and others' case (supra) has also taken the view that when there was a change in the eligibility condition through amendment of Rules, then the vacancies for promotion arising prior to the amendment of the Rules were required to be filled in accordance with the provisions of the Rules as existing on the date when the vacancies arose.
Similarly in the case of Ran Singh and others v. State of Haryana and another (supra) a Division Bench of this court followed the same dictum and held that the amendment in the rules which takes away the right of promotion of those eligible for promotion under the existing rules is to apply to the vacancies subsequent to the new rules and the vacancies which had occurred before the amended rules, are to be dealt with in accordance with the old rules.
13.
The next grievance of Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners is that although the petitioners were the senior-most Assistants working in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Rewari and were eligible for promotion as per the unamended rules but whereas petitioner No. 1 was given current duty charge of the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R), petitioner No. 2 was posted as Assistant Superintendent (R&R) against the vacant post.
However, both the petitioners were so appointed in their own pay scales.
The grievance made is that since the petitioners were required to perform the job of the Assistant Superintendent which carried additional responsibility also, therefore, the petitioners were also entitled to, in law, to get the higher pay i.e. the pay scale of Assistant Superintendent.
We find that there is merit in this contention of Shri Malik also.
Undisputedly, the petitioners were the senior-most Assistants working in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Rewari and as per the old rules being the senior-most persons were duly eligible for promotion to the posts of Assistant Superintendent (R&R).
The posts were also vacant when the orders Annexure P/1 and P/2 were passed.
The respondents by not making the regular promotions of the petitioners and by merely giving them the current duty charge/temporary posting have deprived them of their higher pay scales of Assistant Superintendent, although they were performing the job and responsibilities of Assistant Superintendent (R&R).
Thus we allow this claim of the petitioners also and hold them entitled to receive higher pay i.e. that of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) with effect from the day they were appointed as such vide orders Annexures P/1 and P/2 respectively.
14.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to fill up the vacancies of Assistant Superintendents which arose prior to the amendment of the rules i.e. August 18, 2000 in accordance with the amended rules with reference to the eligibility and qualification provided therein (in the unamended rules) and consider the case of the petitioners for promotion in accordance with the aforesaid Rules.
The petitioners would also be entitled to receive the higher pay i.e. that of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) from the date they were posted as such vide orders Annexures P/1 and P/2 respectively.
The respondents are further directed to complete the entire process and pay the arrears of salary to the petitioners within a period of three months from a date a certified copy of this order is received by them.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.