Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Probationary Assistant Sub Inspector on April 1, 1941.
He was involved in a case under Section 323 IPC He was convicted by the trial Court.
The conviction was affirmed by the Sessions Judge.
A reference was also made for enhancement of sentence.
The sentence was enhanced by the Punjab High Court at Shimla on March 26, 1949.
The petitioner was dismissed from service.
2.
The petitioner approached the departmental authorities for re-employment.
Vide order dated March 9, 1950, the Inspector General of Police informed him that the Government had permitted his re-employment.
Thus, the petitioner re-joinded duty on March 19, 1950.
He retired on March 16, 1977.
After retirement, the petitioner represented that the period of his service from April 1, 1941 to March 26, 1949, should be counted for the purposes of fixation of his pension.
The claim was rejected vide order dated April 17, 1998.
He submitted another representation dated January 28, 1999.
It was pending when he filed the present writ petition with the prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to count his service from April 1, 1941 to March 26, 1949 for the purposes of computing the retiral benefits.
He also prays that the order dated April 17, 1998 by which his claim was rejected, be quashed.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner had been dismissed from service in 1949.
He was re-employed on March 19, 1950.
Thus, he is not entitled to the benefit of the service rendered by him from April 1, 1941 to March 26, 1949.
4.
Mr. Kaushal, learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that for the purposes of computing the pension, even the service rendered on work charge establishment has to be counted.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he had served on regular basis.
Therefore, the benefit of service rendered by him from April 1, 1941 to March 26, 1949 has to be given to him.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned Counsel for the respondents.
5.
The matter is governed by the provisions of Rule 317(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Volume II).
This rule inter alia provides that all service counts as qualifying service for the purposes of fixation of pension.
However, in Clause (IX), a specific provision has been made that "removal from public service for misconduct, insolvency.... will entail forfeiture of past service".
This provision is clear and categoric.
It has been laid down that removal from service on account of misconduct shall entail complete forfeiture of the past service.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had been accused of a criminal offence which was punishable under Section 323 IPC He was actually found guilty by the court and was convicted.
Thereafter the Department had considered the matter and dismissed the petitioner from service.
It was removal from service for proved misconduct.
Thus, the period of service rendered by the petitioner from April 1, 1941 to March 26, 1949 stood forfeited.
That being so, the period cannot count for the purposes of computing pensionary benefits.
6.
Mr. Kaushal submits that the offence under Section 323 IPC does not entail any moral turpitude.
Thus, the petitioner's conviction or dismissal on that account should not lead to an adverse consequence.
This contention is misconceived.
The Department had dismissed the petitioner after his conviction by the Court.
The order of dismissal was admittedly passed on the allegation that the petitioner was guilty of misconduct.
It has not been shown that the order was ever set aside.
At this stage, the petitioner cannot be permitted to say that it was not removal or misconduct.
Even otherwise, the rule does not specifically require that the misconduct should involve moral turpitude.
Still further, it cannot be said that the criminal offence under Section 323 IPC is a highly moral act or that it does not involve any kind of moral turpitude.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.