Amar Dutt, J - Nirvel Singh, petitioner, had joined the Indian Army on 31.1.1988 after he was found to be fit and had been placed in medical category AYE.
On 27th of March, 1994, the Invalidating Medical Board placed him in medical category "EEE".
According to the Medical Board, he was suffering from 60 per cent disability for life.
Despite this, he was not granted disability pension on the ground that the disability suffered by him was not attributable to military service.
The appeal filed by him was rejected, whereupon, he had served legal notice dated 29th of March, 1996 upon the respondents.
When this notice did not evoke any response, the petitioner moved his Court for setting aside the view taken by the Medical Board by filing C.W.P.
No. 756 of 1997, which was allowed by this Court on 14th July, 1999, with the following directions :-  "This petition is, accordingly, allowed, the orders annexures P-1 and P-4 are quashed and it is directed that a fresh Medical Board be held at the Command Hospital, Chandimandir, Chandigarh to redetermine the matter with regard to the attributability factor in the light of the case law cited above.
It is further directed that a decision will be taken by the respondents with a period of four months from the date, that a certified copy of this order is supplied to them and in case, it is found that the petitioner was entitled to the grant of disability pension, the same shall be paid to him with effect from the date of his discharge, within a period of four months thereafter.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order."
Thereafter, a Medical board was held on 30th of October, 1999, at the Command Hospital, Chandimandir, Chandigarh, to redetermine the matter with regard to the attributability in the light of the case law cited before this court.
The Government of India - respondent No. 1 - after taking into consideration the report of the Re-survey Medical Board, which had found the petitioner to be suffering from Borderline personality, again rejected the plea for grant of disability pension.
The present writ petitioner seeks to challenge this order.
2.
In the written statement, though a preliminary objection was raised regarding the territorial jurisdiction, the same pales into insignificance in view of the fact that the claim of the parties having already been adjudicated upon in earlier C.W.P.
No. 756 of 1997, the bar of territorial jurisdiction cannot be raised by the respondents.
On facts, the respondents admitted that the disability of the petitioner remains 20 per cent for life but assert that the same is neither attributed to nor aggravated by military service.
The respondents seek to rely upon the statement made by the petitioner during the proceedings of the Medical Board initially that he had, in November 1993, been involved in a scooter accident and on reaching the house he had started vomiting and since then he had headache (frontal right side) which is dull and constant.
The respondents admit that this Court had, while deciding C.W.P.
No. 756 of 1997 ordered re-examination of the petitioner and submit that the same having been done, the Medical Board was still of the opinion that the invaliding disease from which the petitioner suffers is constitutional in nature and not attributable to military service and, therefore, have rejected the claim of the petitioner.
The writ petition consequently, in view of the respondents, was devoid of merit and had to be dismissed.
3.
I have heard Mr. JS Bhatti, on behalf of the petitioner and Mr. MS Guglani, Additional Central Government Standing Counsel, on behalf of the respondents and have gone through the record of the case.
4.
The sole point for determination of this Court is as to which diseases are constitutional in nature and whether these diseases are such which can be aggravated by the conditions with which the persons serving in the armed forces have to protect.
5.
Annexure III to Appendix II of Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 (in short "the 1961 Regulations") contains the list of diseases classified according to their attributability.
The diseases such as Psychosis and Psychoneurosis, suicide, Neurosis and psychosomatic disorders are mentioned therein.
This list, even according to the counsel for the respondents, is merely illustrative and not exhaustive but it certainly contains some diseases which can be traced to aberrations, that the human mind may develop on account of various circumstances through which a particular individual may have to pass.
6.
Whether the Borderline personality which the petitioner suffers from, can be said to be a disease of the same genus, as the above mentioned diseases and whether from the study of service graph of the petitioner, the doctor examining him could rule out the possibility of this aberration being attributable to the conditions of service, which the petitioner had to go through, were questions which the Re-survey Medical Board should have addressed itself too when it re-examined the petitioner.
If that was not the case, the team of doctors constituting the Medical Board ought to have examined the case of the petitioner with a view to find out the reason why the disease called Borderline personality emerged in the petitioner during the six odd years for which he had been living in the various military cantonments in India for the medical examination of the petitioner at the time of his induction into Army does not indicate any possibility of the disease being present in a nascent condition in the petitioner in which case too, by no stretch of imagination, could the Service wash its hands off the responsibility for having aggravated the same or by providing necessary environment for the petitioner developing such a disease during the course of his employment.
7.
The members of the Medical Board have not at all drawn attention upon their knowledge of Medical sciences while examining these two possibilities, which this Court had in mind while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 756 of 1997 on the basis of the decisions in Bhag Singh v. Union of India and others, 1998(4) R.S.J.
55, Harjit Singh v. Union of India, 1998(4) SCT 88 and Union of India and others v. Ex-Sepoy Satwinder Singh through his wife Smt. Kulwant Kaur and another, 1998(4) R.S.J.
467.
The result of the examination conducted by the Medical Board has been tabulated in a mechanical manner which does not facilitate judicial scrutiny.
While doing so, the members of the Medical Board, despite a clear but direction, have carefully avoided the responsibility cast upon them by the order passed by this Court on 14.7.1999, which cannot be appreciated by any Court of law.
It is quite possible that this was on account of the fact that the Medical Officers examining the petitioner felt that the list provided in Appendix II of the 1961 Regulations was exhaustive and they were debarred from assessing any disease that may be suffered by the petitioner in any other manner.
On account of this, I feel that the Medical Board should be requested to examine the petitioner afresh bearing in mind the fact that the list of the diseases incorporated in Appendix II is not exhaustive and the members of the Board are not debarred from giving relief to Army Personnel in the cases of other diseases that may have existed in dormant stage at the time of his induction only to be aggravated by the conditions of service or have developed owing to the conditions of his employment over the period of years for which he has been serving in the Indian Army.
The Re-survey Medical Board which would be re- constituted in pursuance of this order would take steps to re-examine the petitioner and submit its report to the competent authority for fixation of disability pension of the petitioner, in case the facts and circumstances so warrant.
This exercise shall be completed expeditiously within a period of three months.
Disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.