SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have perused the case file.
2.
Learned counsel for the appellants has vehemently argued that both the courts below have erred in treating the respondent-employee as a confirmed employee.
It is not disputed that the respondent-employee came into the service of the appellants on 1751984.
He was on probation for a period of one year which expired on 1651985.
Under the relevant rule, this period of probation could be extended for one more year i.e. till 1651986.
It is also not disputed that the respondent-employee proceeded on sanctioned leave on 2641987 till 1091987.
Thereafter, he did not join duty and allegedly remained unauthorisedly absent till the impugned order terminating his services was passed on 24111987.
Ms. Dayal appearing for the appellants has vehemently argued that respondent-employees being a probationer could be discharged by passing a simple order.
This is what has been done by the appellants.
In support of this submission, learned counsel has relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of The Chief General Manager, State Bank of India and another v. Bijoy Kumar Mishra, 1997(4) SCT 383 (SC) : AIR 1997 Supreme Court 3981.
She has also relied on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dharmarathmakara Raibahadur Arcot Ramaswamy Mudaliar Educational Institution v. The Educational Appellate Tribunal, 1999(4) SCT 198 and submitted that since respondent-employee was unauthorisedly absent, there was no need to hold any departmental enquiry, before passing the order of discharge.
According to the learned counsel rules of natural justice were sufficiently complied with as the respondent-employee had been given an opportunity to explain his absence.
Both the courts below have given concurrent findings of fact, after due appreciation of evidence.
It has been held that respondent-employee was deemed to be confirmed with effect from 1651986.
I am of the considered opinion that the aforesaid finding is correct on facts as well as in law.
The maximum period of probation having expired on 1651986, the respondent-employee could no longer be treated as a probationer.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of the Chief General Manager, State Bank of India (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case as in that case, the employee remained unauthorisedly absent during the period of probation.
He was absent when the maximum period of probation expired and thereafter for about five years.
Therefore, it was held that the employee could not be deemed to have been confirmed.
It is also not possible to accept the submission of the learned counsel that it was not necessary to comply with the rules of natural justice as the employee had been on unauthorised leave.
It is a settled proposition of law that rules of natural justice must be observed before passing an order terminating the services of an employee on the basis of misconduct.
Unauthorised absence from duty would normally constitute misconduct.
Learned counsel has further submitted that the Civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit as alternative remedy was available under the provisions of Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
I am wholly unimpressed with the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel.
When the authorities act arbitrarily and in total negation of the rule of law, it is the bounden duty of the civil court to correct the wrong committed.
It has been rightly held by both the courts below that the Civil court had the jurisdiction to entertain the suit, as illegal termination of services would not constitute a dispute touching the business or management of the Society as envisaged under Section 55(i)(b) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
I am also unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel that since Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India does not apply to the employees of the Cooperative Societies, it was not necessary to hold an enquiry before passing the order of termination.
Again, it is settled proposition or law that even in cases of employee who are not covered by Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, the authorities are bound to comply with the rule of natural justice before passing an order of punishment.
It is to be remembered that Article 311(2) in fact is an embodiment of the rules of natural justice in the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel also submitted that the employees should not have been reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
I find this submission also to be wholly devoid of any merit.
Once the order of the punishment has been found to be illegal, void and noest, it is, but natural, that the employee be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
In view of the above, the findings of fact recorded by the courts below cannot be said to be either perverse or based on no evidence.
No substantial question of law arises.
Order accordingly.