Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The additional affidavit and the document Annexure P-7 are taken on record.
2.
The petitioner is a member of the establishment of the Subordinate Courts in Sangrur.
Prior to the year 1991 he was posted as an Ahlmad in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Sangrur.
A judicial file relating to the case of Amarjit Singh etc. v. Kapur Singh etc. was found missing.
A preliminary inquiry was held by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Sangrur.
Vide report dated November 26, 1997 it was prima facie found that the petitioner had to explain the loss of the file.
He was charge-sheeted.
A regular inquiry was held.
The charge of the file having not been consigned to the record room and its not being handed over to the successor was found to have been proved.
The petitioner was given a show cause notice.
His reply was considered.
Vide order dated June 10, 2000, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, the learned District Judge accepted the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
The pleas raised by the petitioner were considered and rejected.
Ultimately, a penalty of reduction to the lower stage of pay viz. Rs. 4580/- in the time scale of Rs. 5000-8100 was awarded for a period of two years with a further direction that the official will not earn the increment of pay during the period of such reduction and on the expiry of period of reduction, it will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of pay.....".
3.
The petitioner fell aggrieved by the order of the learned District Judge.
He filed an appeal.
It was posted before an Hon'ble Judge of this Court.
Vide order dated May 8, 2001, the appeal was dismissed.
Hence this petition.
4.
The two-fold submission made by Mr. Pawan Kumar, learned Counsel for the petitioner, is that the impugned order amounts to the imposition of a double penalty.
He contends that the authorities have not only awarded the penalty of reduction in pay but have also ordered the stoppage of increments.
He further contends that the entire proceedings are vitiated as the matter had been prejudged by the District Judge before even the issue of the charge- sheet.
Learned Counsel has placed reliance in the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Hans Raj Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SCT 258 (P&H).
5.
The procedure for imposition of penalties has been laid down in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Rule 5 enumerates the various penalties which can be awarded to a civil servant.
Withholding of increments of pay is one of the minor penalties.
Reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay is one of the major penalties.
The two clauses read as under :-  "5.
Penalties - The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Government employees, namely :- Minor Penalties (iv) withholding of increments of pay; Major Penalties (v) Reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay."
6.
A perusal of the above provision shows that simply awarding the penalty of withholding the increments of pay is one of the minor penalties.
The Rule authorities the Disciplinary Authority to award the penalty of reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay.
Such an order has to be "for a specified period".
The Authority is further required to give a direction "as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction.....".
Still further, the Authority has also to specifically direct as to whether or not "the reduction will...... have the effect of postponing the future increments of pay" on the expiry of the specified period.
In other words, Clause 5 embodies not only the reduction of pay but also a direction with regard to the increments which accrue during the period.
7.
What is the position in the present case ?
8.
As already noticed, the petitioner's pay was reduced for a period of 2 years.
It was further provided that the increments shall not be released during that period of 2 years.
Still further, the Punishing Authority had directed that "on the expiry of period of reduction, it will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of pay....".
This order was passed under Rule 5(v) of the 1970 Rules.
The action is apparently in strict conformity with the plain language of the Rule.
The plea of double jeopardy as sought to be raised on behalf of the petitioner is untenable and is consequently rejected.
9.
Mr. Pawan Kumar contends that the matter had been prejudged.
Thus, the entire proceedings are vitiated.
10.
Leaving aside the fact that such an argument was not raised before the Appellate Authority, we have examined the matter.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
The portion of the Articles of charge to which objection has been raised reads as under :-  "That Mrs. Harreet Kaur, Civil Judge (Jr. Division) Sangrur, has held you responsible for the loss of above said file, vide her enquiry report dated 26111997."
At the end of the Articles of charge it was observed that you are "prima facie guilty for the misplacement of file....".
11.
The Punishing Authority had apparently placed reliance on the fact finding inquiry conducted by a Judicial Officer.
The petitioner was informed of the factum of the inquiry as well as the finding.
On this basis, the Punishing Authority had given an opportunity to the petitioner as it was prima facie of the view that he was guilty of having misplaced a file.
On a perusal, we are satisfied that it does not amount to pre-judging the matter.
12.
Mr. Pawan Kumar has placed reliance on the decision in Hans Raj Gupta's case (supra).
We have examined the judgment.
In this case it was found that in the charge-sheet it had been observed that the delinquent officer had proved to be "a careless and irresponsible officer".
Still further, it was also stated that "thus, it is proved that while you recommended for issuance of license of coal after site inspection, that act on your part was wrong".
It was on a perusal of these two observations that the learned Judge had taken the view that the matter had been prejudged.
Nothing of the sort has happened in the present case.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find that the petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.