Vikaramajit Singh, J - CWP 1637/2000  For a detailed discussion on the law and procedure envisaged under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as 'the ID Act') reference is directed to C.W.P.
3651 of 2000 entitled Delhi Transport Corporation v. Shri Sardar Singh Ex.
Conductor & Another decided on December 21, 2001.
A distillation of the judgment is that in disposing of an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act (the 'Approval application') the Industrial Authority must not act as an Appellate body.
It is expected to peruse the material placed before it along with the Approval application so as to ascertain whether an enquiry, mandated under Para 15(2) of the DRTA (Conditions of Appointment & Service) Regulations, 1952 read with Delhi Transport Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Standing Orders') has been held and if so whether it was conducted in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
Thereafter the Industrial Authority must ascertain whether a prima facie case for dismissal has been made out.
It must ensure that no victimisation, mala fides and unfair labour practice has been pursued by the Management.
The said Authority must keep in perspective that the Management is not expected to make out a case to the hilt, at this stage of consideration.
That would be the requirement if and when an Industrial Dispute is raised by the workman.
It would, therefore, be wholly inappropriate for the Tribunal to insist that evidence should be led at the threshold.
This may be necessary only if the Tribunal finds it necessary that the material/records produced before it should be formally proved.
This would depend on the response of the workman concerned.
Thereafter, if it can neither approve nor disapprove the termination Order, it should call upon the Management to lead evidence, but this situation would rarely occur.
2.
In the analysis contained in C.W.P.
3651/2000 it has also been found that merely recording the phrase 'LWP' (leave without pay) would not tantamount to having granted leave.
There must be a positive and affirmative decision taken by the Management to grant leave, and use of the letters 'LWP' cannot lead to such a conclusion.
It has also been found that the law of the land is contained in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Harihar Gopal (SC), 1969 SLR 274 and that State of Punjab and Others v. Bakshish Singh, (1998)8 SCC 222 is reconcilable with the former, since the Court had arrived at the conclusion as a matter of fact, that leave had been sanctioned.
3.
In the present case a Charge Sheet dated 12121991 was issued to the Respondent Workman, drawing his attention to the fact that on a perusal of his service record for the period January 1991 to October 1991 it had been found that he had availed of 92 days leave without pay and that this disclosed that he was careless/negligent towards his duties and was not taking interest in the Corporation's work amounting to violation of paras 19(h) and (m) of the Standing Orders of the Corporation.
The Respondent's reply is contained in his letter dated 1611992 in which he stated that he was compelled to take leave due to his son's illness which caused him to be mentally disturbed and tense.
He had stated that in future he would perform his duties properly and requested that the Management should take pity on him.
It appears that he did not report for duty and instead had informed the Management by letter dated 26.3.1992 that his son had expired and he would resume duty.
Inquiry Proceedings commenced on 2551992 on which the Respondent was asked that he wanted to avail of the assistance of his co-workmen.
In reply he admitted that he had availed of leave and that in future he will perform his duty properly.
It was in these circumstances, that the Inquiry was closed.
4.
Mr. Shankar, Learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner has relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Channabassappa Basappa Happali v. The State of Mysore, AIR 1972 Supreme Court 32, in which it was held that once the delinquent employee had admitted the charges/facts and did not cross-examine any witness or lead evidence on his own behalf, he could not challenge the legal propriety of the Departmental Inquiry or be heard to complain that it was either one-sided or not fair.
Reliance is also been placed on similar observations contained in Dharmarathmakara Raibahadur Arcot Ramaswarny Mudaliar Educational Institution v. Educational Appellate Tribunal, and another, 1999(4) SCT 198 (SC) : (1999) 7 SCC 332.
In this case it was opined that where the allegations and charges were admitted and no possible defence was presented, the holding of an inquiry would be wholly superfluous.
These observations are relied upon by Mr. Shankar to further his contention that no fault can now be found with the inquiry proceedings.
5.
It has further been shown that the past record of the Respondent was taken into consideration and when no reply was received to the Management's Show Cause Notice pertaining to the proposed action to be initiated against him, the Respondent was removed from service under Clauses 15(2)(vi), CRTA (Condition of Appointment and Service Regulations) 1952.
On behalf of the Workman it has been contended by Mr. Mittal that the reasons for the Respondent's absence were genuine inasmuch as the son's illness culminated in the latter's sad demise.
It has further been argued that it was specious for the Management to treat the Respondent's absence from work as habitual even though the admitted period was of over three months.
It is his contention that since the Respondent's absence must be viewed as single absence albeit for a period in excess of three months.
I am unable to accept this argument since every employee is expected to report for duty on each working day.
It will be seen from the narration above that the Respondent had not even apprised the Management of the reason for his illness and his explanation followed only after his having received a said notice from the Management.
Despite making a request for being excused for his absence without permission, he did not keep to his promise to report back for duty.
Where an employee is absent for months together, his conduct must be viewed as lack of constancy in duty or in other words, habitual absence without permission.
6.
In these circumstances, it cannot be appreciated why the Management's approval application had not been allowed.
No principle of natural justice had been violated.
A prima facie case certainly existed.
Use of the nomenclature 'leave without pay' has already been held not to exonerate the delinquent employee for his habitual absence from duty.
Even if a doubt is entertained on this question, a sufficiently good case has been established for taking action pursuant to Clause 9(h) and (m).
The requirements set down in Lord Krishna Textile Mills v. its Workmen, AIR 1961 SC 860 had been met.
7.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the approval is accorded to the Petitioner under Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act to Respondent's removal from service.
C.M.
2725/2000  8.
In view of the above Judgment no further orders are called for.
9.
Application is disposed of accordingly.
C.M.
6599/2000  10.
In view of the above Judgment I decline to grant relief to the Workman under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Dismissed.
11.
The above observations, being essentially prima facie in character, will not be taken into consideration by the appropriate Court if and when an industrial dispute is raised by the workman concerned,  C.W.P.
1019/2000  12.
In the present case the Charge-sheet dated 251994, required the Respondent to furnish an explanation as to why he had been absenting himself from duty unauthorizedly without any intimation and permission of competent officer since 12101993.
The Respondent Workman was cautioned that the Management had taken the view that he did not have interest in the work of the Corporation and it amounted to misconduct in terms of Para 4(2) Section 19(h) and (m) of the Standing Orders of Delhi Transport Corporation.
He was also notified that his previous record would be taken into consideration.
In his Reply dated 1851994 the Respondent-Workman had submitted that he had fallen ill from 12101993 to 31.12.1993 and a medical certificate had been forwarded for this period.
He also submitted that his grand-mother had expired and being "responsible member in the family I had to devote time at home".
An Enquiry was conducted on 571994 at which the Respondent Workman declined the offer of assistance from a co-worker and reiterated his explanation that his absence was due to illness and family compulsion.
On the same day the Management's witness had deposed facts pertaining to the Respondent's absence from duty; this witness was not cross-examined, The Respondent did not lead any evidence and the Enquiry Officer gave a Report to the effect that the Respondent was guilty.
13.
The Industrial Tribunal seized with the application under Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act, in the Order dated 24.8.1999 the Industrial Tribunal, has observed that the Petitioner treated the Respondent's absence from duty for 315 days as, period of leave, out of which 17 days had been treated as leave with pay and the rest of the period had been treated as period of leave without pay.
On the foundation of this finding Mr. DN Vohra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent Workman had sought to contend that no misconduct would possibly be found against the Respondent.
The use of the nomenclature 'leave without pay' has been dealt in Sardar Singh's case (supra).
I do not propose to reiterate the findings.
My conclusion was similar to that of my learned brother Dr. MK Sharma, J that this was only a completion of the records and could not be construed as grant of leave.
It was, therefore, not legally correct for the Industrial Tribunal to have found no misconduct for the absence of 298 days for which the Respondent-Workman had not even applied for leave.
14.
It was strongly contended by Mr. Vohra that since the Management had led evidence before the Industrial Tribunal, the latter was entitled to come to a conclusion of its own.
Reliance was placed on Workmen of Motipur Sugar Factory (P) Ltd v. Motipur Sugar Factory, AIR 1965 SC 1803.
This decision has been duly considered in Sardar Singh's case (supra).
No advantage would be served by repeating the findings herein.
Suffice it to emphasise that in that case Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act was not attracted.
The scope of consideration in proceedings under Sections 10 and 33(1) on the one hand, and 33(2) of the ID Act on the other has been clearly demarcated in Sardar Singh's case (supra) as also in Lord Krishna Textiles Mills v. Its Workmen, AIR 1961 SC 860.
The submission of Mr. Vohra is, therefore, rejected.
15.
On a perusal of the facts of the case, I am satisfied that the requirements adumbrated in Lord Krishna's case (supra) are fully met in the present case.
An Enquiry was held in which the Workman participated.
The rules of natural justice were duly honoured.
The Management had considered the explanation given by the Workman for his absence, and after perusing his service record had concluded that the Respondent-Workman ought to be removed from service.
Keeping in view the prima facie nature of the proceedings under Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act I shall refrain from making any observations which may detrimentally affect the determination of an industrial dispute if and when raised by the Respondent-Workman.
I am, however, fully satisfied that a prima facie case had been established for warranting the grant of approval under Section 33(2)(b) of the IDAct.
16.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the approval is accorded to the Petitioner under Section 33(2)(b) of the IDAct to Respondent's removal from service.
C.M.
1614/2000.
17.
In view of the above judgment no further orders are called for.
Application is disposed of accordingly.
18.
The above observations, being essentially prima facie in character, will not be taken into consideration by the appropriate Court if and when an industrial dispute is raised by the workman concerned.
C.W.P.
73/2001  19.
The facts in this writ petition are very similar to those in the foregoing writ petition.
A Charge-sheet dated 1421992 was served on the Respondent- Workman charging him with being absent from duty for 294 days during the period 1331991 to 1.1.1992 without any prior information/permission, thereby showing lack of interest in the work of the Corporation which resulted in obstruction in the out-shedding and caused financial loss to the Corporation.
An Enquiry was eventually held on 2421992 in the course of which the Respondent admitted to the charges.
His only explanation was that his unauthorised absence was due to his illness.
The Enquiry was accordingly concluded forthwith.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his Report to the effect that the charges levelled against the Respondent-Workman stood established.
Thereupon a Memorandum dated 13.5.1992 was issued to the Respondent conveying to him that provisional opinion favoured his removal from service.
His past leave record having been considered he was thereafter removed from service.
20.
The Industrial Tribunal II has held that the Respondent-Workman was not afforded an opportunity to lead evidence.
In the first place it should be noted that no such request had been made since there had been an unqualified admission recorded by the Respondent Workman.
Reference may be made to the decision rendered in the cases of Channabasappa and Dharmarathmakara (supra) in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that where an admission has been made, it would be superfluous to hold an enquiry and that whatever be the nature of the proceedings before the Enquiry, the principles of natural justice could not be seen to have been violated.
The conclusion of the Industrial Tribunal in the impugned order that "this case can be said to be a case of no enquiry at all" is not correct.
Keeping in view the past service record of the Respondent-Workman it is neither extraordinary nor unreasonable for the Management to arrive at the decision of removal of the Respondent Workman from service.
21.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the approval is accorded to the Petitioner under Section 33(2)(b) of the ID Act to Respondent's removal from service.
C.M.
149/2001  22.
In view of the above judgment no further orders are called for.
Application is disposed of accordingly.
23.
It is again clarified that this is only a prima facie view and, therefore, would not be relevant if and when an Industrial Dispute is raised.
Unfortunately, as brought to the notice of the Court, the Respondent died on 2372001.
Order accordingly.