VK Bali, J (Oral) - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab challenging the judgment and decree dated 20.3.1989 passed by the trial Court which in appeal has since been confirmed by the first appellate court vide order dated 19.5.1992.
2.
The only question on which Om Parkash plaintiff succeeded was that even though his seniority was at serial No. 123, the persons juniors to him were retained whereas he was shown the exit door.
On the aforesaid circular issue the learned appellate court observed thus:  "The Govt. pleader appearing for the defendants-appellants has challenged the findings recorded by the trial court on issues No. 2, 6 and 8 what really is to be determined is as to whether the appellants maintained any seniority list, the service of Om Parkash plaintiff respondent were terminated as per seniority list and if not whether he is entitled to the alternative relief claimed in the amended plaint.
Om Parkash was admittedly working as Beldar.
The suit was filed on 621986.
Om Parkash plaintiff-respondent admitted (as PW1) that his services were terminated on 941986 and that his dues was paid to him.
In the plaint originally filed the relief was claimed, that the defendants-appellants be restrained from terminating the services of the plaintiffs without preparing and following the seniority list and in the alternative the plaintiffs are ordered to be absorbed in the SYL project.
Then amendment was sought in the plaint.
Amended plaint was filed.
Further relief was added that in the alternative the defendants-appellants be directed to reinstate the plaintiffs with retrospective effect in case their services had been terminated.
The argument of the govt. pleader is not tenable that the lower court granted the relief which was not even asked by the plaintiff- respondent.
Gurbhajan Singh, SDO Anandpur Sahib Hydel project appeared as DW1.
He brought the seniority list maintained by the defendant-appellants.
He proved that there were 2043 Beldars were retrenched in 1986-1970.
Beldars were retrenched on 941986.
127 Beldars was retained on rolls on the basis of seniority.
Seniority list of 127 Beldars were produced by him.
Name of Om Parkash plaintiff-respondent figured at Sr. No. 123 in this seniority list.
DW Gurbhajan Singh, SDO admitted that workers whose names figured at the Sr No. 124 to 127 in this list were retained in service.
One more worker Sarwan Kumar were retained in service whose name was added in the seniority list later on without assigning any seniority number.
DW Gurbhajan Singh further admitted that some of the workers whose names figure in seniority list D4 were appointed subsequent to Om Parkash plaintiff respondent.
It was thus clear that seniority list was not followed while making retrenchment of the workers of Anandpur Sahib Hydel project.
The principle of last come first go was not adhered to.
It was thus a violation of the principles of natural justice.
3.
The findings of the learned first appellate court as extracted above, could not be even remotely challenged during the course of arguments before this court.
That being so, the appellate court was justified in recording that the procedure adopted by the State was against the principles of natural justice as in the case of retrenchment the last person ought to have been asked to quit whereas in the present case juniors were retained whereas the plaintiff who was senior to them was asked to quit.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.