SS Nijjar, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
2.
It has been proved on the record that the appellant was absent from duty from 4101990 till 10121991.
The lower Appellate Court has found that the department proceedings have been conducted in accordance with the rules.
It has also been found that continuous absence of the respondent, who was a member of disciplined force, amounts to grave violation of police discipline.
Consequently, the order of dismissal has to be up-held.
3.
Mr. Bhandari, has vehemently argued that the order of dismissal was liable to be set aside on the ground that a perusal of the same does not indicate that the claim of the appellant for pension had been considered.
In support of this submission, learned counsel has relied on the judgment of this Court in State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh, 2002(1) SCT 404.
4.
A perusal of the aforesaid judgment shows that the judgment does not support the case put forward by Mr. Bhandari.
Rather, it supports the case of the department.
In paragraphs 9 and 10 of the judgment, it has been observed as follows :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the case law cited, I am of the view that no interference is called for with the order of dismissal preceded by departmental inquiry wherein misconduct of absence from duty was fully proved.
In the context of the Punjab Police Rules, absence from duty could be treated as gravest act of misconduct as held by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Singh's case (supra), and no doubt, it is expected and is desirable that the punishing authority expressly records a finding of this nature and also consider the past record, and also record reasons for depriving an employee of pension and reasons for imposing punishment even where the past record may be clean, the order passed by the punishing authority is not open to interference unless it can be held that the charge was not proved or the order was vitiated by mala fides or arbitrariness.
The observations in the order about treating the period of absence to be leave cannot be taken to be condoning the absence but only with a view to maintain correct record.
Even absence of express mention of consideration of the past record and reasons for depriving the employee of pension will not always vitiate the order nor warrant substitution of lesser punishment such as, compulsory retirement etc. by the civil court, the scope of interference by the civil court being to see that the order of punishment was not passed in the denial of the reasonable opportunity, was not without evidence and was not mala fide or arbitrary.
Where the charge was fully proved, as in the present case, order of dismissal was justified as per the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Singh's case (supra), there was no scope for interference.
This being the position answer to the questions arising in this appeal have to be in favour of the appellant-State, and interference by the courts below with the order of dismissal cannot be held to be legal and valid.
10.
In Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1992(3) R.S.J.
502 : 1994(3) SCT 335 (SC), it was observed that since the punishment of forfeiture of the pension and other benefits has not been inflicted, such benefits ought to be given to the concerned employee.
Following the said judgment, a Single Bench of this Court in Krishan Lal v. State of Punjab, 1997(1) R.S.J.
535 observed that claim of the appellant in that case deserved to be considered sympathetically.
I find that the observations made in the said case apply to the present case also."
A perusal of the aforesaid observations clearly shows that even absence of express mention of consideration of the past record and reasons for depriving the employee of pension will not always vitiate the order, nor warrant substitution of lesser punishment, such as, compulsory retirement by the Civil Court had observed that the claim of the appellant can be considered sympathetically.
I find that in the facts and circumstances of this case, no such direction is required.
No substantial question of law arises.
Dismissed.
.