NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Professor on 2221992 on adhoc basis in the Department of Paediatric Surgery in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as PGI).
By advertisement issued in April, 1993 the PGI invited applications amongst others for one post of Assistant Professor in the Department of Paediatric Surgery against a leave vacancy in the pay scale of Rs. 3500-4500/-.
Petitioner and some others including one Dr. Subhasis Roy Choudhary applied for the post.
A Selection Committee was constituted which after interviewing the candidates recommended the name of the petitioner.
By the time the selection was made a regular post of Assistant Professor in the Department of Paediatric Surgery had become available and therefore, the petitioner was appointed against that post though the same had never been advertised.
The appointment order was issued on 3091993 and the petitioner claims to have joined the post on 1101993.
This appointment was challenged by Dr. Subhasis Roy Choudhary who filed civil writ petition No. 15436 of 1994 in this court and the primary ground of attack was that the post had never been advertised and that the petitioner therein had not been afforded an opportunity to compete for the same.
This plea was upheld by a Division Bench of this court and the writ petition was allowed on 1251995.
It was held that the petitioner could not have been appointed permanently against the post without advertising the same and that a permanent appointment could be made only after affording a reasonable opportunity to all concerned to compete for the post.
The order of appointment was, thus, quashed.
On a plea made by the PGI that the patients care in the Department would suffer with the appointment being quashed, the learned Judges keeping in view the larger interest of the PGI and of the patients directed that the PGI could allow the petitioner to continue on the post on adhoc basis for a period of two months only during which period it could take appropriate steps to advertise the post and fill the same in accordance with law.
In pursuance to the observations made by this court in the aforesaid writ petition, a fresh advertisement was issued inviting applications for the post on regular basis.
Petitioner alongwith several others applied for the same and after following the regular procedure the petitioner was selected and a fresh order of appointment was issued to him on 28.11.1995.
He has been working on the post since then.
In December, 1998 the petitioner made a representation that he be given seniority on the post of Assistant Professor with effect from the date of his initial appointment in February, 1992 when he was appointed on adhoc basis.
He claims that he has been working continuously on the post since then and later he was selected by a regularity constituted selection committee against a regular vacancy and, therefore, his seniority should count from the date of his initial appointment.
This representation was considered by the PGI and the same was rejected on the ground that his appointment on regular basis made on 3091993 was quashed by this court as the same was held to be illegal and, therefore, the period from 3091993 till 1251995 when the writ petition was allowed could not be counted towards his service.
In the meantime, he was promoted to the post of Associate Professor with effect from 172000 the date when he completed four years of service as Assistant Professor.
It may be mentioned that New Assessment Promotion Scheme is applicable to the faculty members in the PGI whereunder 100 per cent Assistant Professors with four years of service are considered for promotion as Associate Professor each year without linkage to the vacancies in the cadre of Associate Professors.
Petitioner claims that since he completed four years of service as Assistant Professor in the year 1996 he should be promoted to the post of Associate Professor with effect from the date.
As already observed, this claim has been rejected by the PGI and it is against this action that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
We have heard counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Professor on regular basis on 3091993 and that appointment was quashed by this court on 1251995 as the same was illegal.
He was given fresh appointment on 28.11.1995 and he is working thereon since then.
While quashing his appointment which was made on 3091993 the petitioner was allowed to work on the post for another two months on adhoc basis keeping in view the larger interest of the PGI and the patients.
Even though the petitioner worked on the post the service rendered by him from 3091993 till 28.11.1995 when he was given fresh appointment cannot be counted for any purpose as that appointment was illegal.
If that service were to be counted the effect of the judgment of this court in civil writ petition No. 15436 of 1994 would be nullified which cannot be allowed to be done.
No fault can, thus, be found with the action of the PGI in rejection the representation made by the petitioner.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same stands dismissed.
Petition dismissed.