Amar Dutt, J - Dr BC Bansal, who retired from Government service as Professor of Medicine and Head of the Neurology Division, Medical College, Rohtak on 2111989 has moved this Court for grant of interest on the delayed payment of his retiral benefits.
2.
According to the petitioner, the amounts due were paid to him only after 841992 i.e. the pension was paid on 841992; while the commuted pension was deposited in his bank account on 2241992.
The amount of Rs. 99,000/- payable towards gratuity was not released until 10.8.1992 on which date he was paid a sum of Rs. 87,000/- after deducting Rs. 12,000/- on account of penal/market rent of Rs. 11,73375 chargeable from him for overstaying in the premises allotted to him by the respondents.
He submits that he is entitled to receive penal interest on the delayed payment of his retiral benefits, as per the law settled by judicial precedents.
3.
In the reply filed by the respondents, the delay in the payment of Gratuity was justified on account of the failure of the petitioner to produce a No Due Certificate within time.
According to the respondents, the petitioner vide letter dated 12111989 had requested for sanction and payment of the provisional pension and gratuity by due date and he had been informed that the same can only be sanctioned after final report from the office of the Accountant General, Haryana and in the absence of final No Due Certificate, these benefits could not be released.
4.
I have heard Shri Amrit Paul, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri SK Vashisth, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana on behalf of the respondents.
5.
The petitioner had retired from service on 2111989 pursuant to the acceptance of his request for voluntary retirement.
His pension was not finalised till 841992 nor was he paid commuted pension till 2241992.
According to the observations of the Supreme Court in State of Kerala and others v. M Padmanabhan Nair, A.I.R. 1985 SC 356, the pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but have become valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment.
6.
As per the directions of the Apex Court, the respondents were obliged to finalise the retiral benefits well before the date of retirement and ensure that disbursement is made immediately within reasonable time.
In the present case, the petitioner has been denied pension and commuted pension for a period which comes to about 2-1/2 years and since the respondent were already withholding the Gratuity which would cover liability incurred by the petitioner on account of overstay in the official accommodation, there was no justification for delaying the payment of the aforesaid benefits.
In these circumstances, while the petitioner would not be entitled to any interest on the delayed payment of Gratuity on account of his failure to produce the No Due Certificate or indicate that the amount due from him may be adjusted against the amount payable on account of with holding of Gratuity, in view of the Full Bench decision of this Court in AJ Randhawa, Supdg.
Engineer (Retd.)
v. State of Punjab, 1998(1) SCT 343 (P&H) (FB) : 1997(7) S.L.R.
8. the petitioner would definitely be entitled to receive interest on the amounts of pension and commuted pension which have been released only on 841992 and 2241992 respectively.
This interest would be payable on the aforesaid amount at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
7.
Before parting with the judgment, I would like to refer to the observations contained in para 18 of the judgment in AJ Randhawa's case (supra), which reads as under :-  "Before concluding, we are constrained to observe that it has been noticed that invariably in the matter of payment of pension and other retiral benefits to a retiring employee there have been delays and sometimes to an extent that is shocking.
It must be realied by the concerned functionaries of the State at all levels that for a government servant, the only source of his subsistence after retirement is his pension and other retiral benefits and if they are not made available to him on time, he and his family are put under great mental tension making it difficult for them even to survive.
Those dealing with the preparation of pension cases at different stages and with disbursement of retiral benefits must not forget that they too have to retire one day and will be looking up for the payment of those benefits and how will they feel it they are driven from pillar to post to get their dues and if hurdles are put and delay is caused in payment thereof.
It is to save this harassment to the retired that the Rules require that the procedure to compute pension and reitral benefits should commence two years before the date of superannuation so that whatever be the apathy or the inefficiency of the concerned officials in working out that amounts, they will be able to complete the cases atleast in two years and pay the dues to the retirees.
If in spite of these safeguards as provided in the Rules the working of the administrative officers at different levels high or low is so indifferent in the performance of their duties as enjoined on them it is but fair that those responsible for causing delays in the matter of payment of retiral benefits should be made personally liable for the payment of interest that may have to be paid to the retiring employee.
The loss caused to the State exchequer by avoidable payment of interest must, therefore, be replenished by recovering the same from the erring officers/employees, the extent and proportion of which will be determined, in each case by the Chief Secretary of the State."
In view of the above observations, it would be desirable to reiterate and direct that loss caused to the State on account of avoidable payment of interest must be replenished by recovering the same from the erring officer/employee to the extent and proportion which will be determined by the Chief Secretary of the State.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds and the respondents are directed to calculate and pay the interest on pension and commutation of pension at the rate of 12 per cent per annum within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.