Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - The respondent-plaintiff was constable and was dismissed from service on 24519732, against which the appeal and revision of the respondent plaintiff were dismissed on 911974 and 781974.
He filed the suit challenging the order of dismissal alleging that he had been recruited on 261948 and a complaint was made against him on 2081972 alleging that he had consumed liquor.
After inquiry, it was held that the misconduct alleged against the plaintiff was duly proved.
The defendants contested the suit.
2.
The trial court held that the enquiry had been duly held against the plaintiff and the order of punishment was rightly passed.
The lower appellate court reversed the decree of the trial court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
It was held that the order of the District Magistrate, declining the grant of sanction for prosecution and ordering the departmental enquiry was not valid and was contrary to provisions of Rule 1638(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
The said order is as under :  "I have cone through the preliminary enquiry report of the Enquiry officer and other relevant papers placed before me.
Keeping in view the facts collected so far, it will not be advisable to launch judicial prosecution against the defaulter.
However, to meet the ends of justice, I order under P.P.R.
16.38(2) that departmental proceedings be initiated against constable Raghbir Singh No.
880."
The Rule in question is as under :-  "16.38(2).
When investigation of which a complaint establishes a prima-facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follow : the matter shall be disposed of departmentally only, if the District Magistrate so orders for reasons to be recorded.
When it is decided to proceed departmentally, the procedure prescribed in rule 1624 shall be followed.
An officer found guilty on a charge of the nature referred to in this rule shall ordinarily be dismissed."
3.
The appellate Court held that on a proper interpretation of the rule in question, the normal rule was prosecution of a person and reasons were required to be recorded if person was to be proceeded against departmentally.
It was held that since in the impugned order reasons were not recorded the order of holding departmental enquiry was illegal.
4.
Though none appeared on behalf of the appellant, I have perused the record of the case and heard learned counsel for the respondent.
5.
I am of the view that the lower appellate Court has committed an error in holding that departmental enquiry could not be ordered without reasons.
Proper interpretation of the rule is that a person, who has committed an offence, should be prosecuted and the object of recording reasons for not prosecuting an employee, is to strictly enforce the provisions requiring prosecution.
This provision cannot be read to mean that a departmental enquiry cannot he held.
If there is any defect in the order, the action of departmental enquiry will not be vitiated.
The order of departmental enquiry, in my view, is therefore perfectly valid.
6.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the respondent-employee was a very poor person and even after winning in the lower appellate Court, nothing has been paid to him.
He also submitted that the order of punishment was harsh.
7.
I allow this appeal and set aside the decree of the lower appellate Court and direct the departmental authorities to decide the entitlement of the respondent to pension, in view of the law laid in State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh, 2002(1) SCT 404 (P&H).
R.S.A.
No. 2356 of 1996, decided on 18102001, within three months from today.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal allowed.