Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we will dispose of two writ petitions being CWP Nos. 4946 of 2002 and 1212 of 2002, as common question of law based on somewhat similar facts arise for consideration of the Court in these two cases.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Beldar on daily wages in January, 1989.
The petitioner is continuing to work in that post even till date.
The State of Haryana issued policy for regularising the services of the daily wagers on 731986, which was modified by instructions of 1831996.
According to the petitioner he made request to the respondents that his services be regularised particularly when the services of similarly situated employees, namely, Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh were regularised.
The services of these two persons were regularised on 1411998.
The petitioner made a representation on 26.3.1999.
The said representation was forwarded by the Superintending Engineer, but still the services of the petitioner were not regularised.
The reason given for not regularising the services of the petitioner was that he was not present from 121994 to 3131994.
According to the petitioner he was seriously ill during this period and, therefore, could not join his employment.
The medical certificates had been submitted by him to the authorities concerned.
The other two persons as afore-noticed were also not present for more than 30 days but their services were regularised in similar circumstances.
The petitioner, thus, claims that he has been discriminated by the respondents in the matter of regularisation of his service.
Thus, the action of the respondents is violative of his constitutional protection.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed written statement in which it was stated that the claim of the petitioner for regularisation has to be rejected as he does not satisfy the conditions of regularisation as stated in the policy.
Paragraph No. 5 of the written statement reads as under:-  "5.
The contents of para No. 5 of petition are wrong and denied.
The petitioner does not fulfil two of the three conditions of regularisation as stated in para-3.
i) The petitioner has not completed 240 days continuous service during the year 1994. ii) The petitioner has more than one month break in the year 1993 and 1994, as such the petitioner did not fulfil the condition for regularisation as per instructions of this Court.
It is amply clear from Annexure P-VI that only the condition of break in service of more than one month has been condoned in the case of Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh.
They fulfilled the other two conditions of regularisation.
Therefore, the case of the petitioner is not similar to the case of Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh.
The Annexure P-6 attached with petition is not disputed.
However, it is clarified that the Govt. of Haryana issued directions to the Department to consider the cases of regularisation of Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh if they fulfil the other conditions.
The Executive Engineer, Provincial Division No. 1, P.W.D.
B&R Branch, Karnal has clearly recommended that Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh fulfil the conditions No. (i) & (ii) and recommended for condonation of condition No. (iii) only on medical grounds whereas in case of petitioner, the only condition fulfilled is of being on rolls on 31.01.1996.
The petitioner does not fulfil the other two conditions.
Since the petitioner did not fulfil the other conditions as per instructions of the Govt. in the case of Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh issued vide No. 4/5/97-6 B&R(W) dated 09/12/1997 (attached as Annexure R-III) his case was considered and rejected by the competent authority.
The case of Netra Parshad and Fateh Singh being different from the case of petitioner, there is no discrimination and violation of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India."
The petitioner has filed rejoinder and reaffirmed the statement made in the petition.
4.
The respondents have certainly acted with an element of discrimination as far as the petitioner is concerned.
The petitioner has submitted the medical certificate showing that his absence during the afore-referred period was for reasons beyond his control.
Not a whisper has been made in the written statement that the medical certificates furnished by the petitioner were baseless, were procured one or were not genuine.
If that be so, it was obligation of the employer to fairly concede the case of the petitioner for regularisation in view of the principles enunciated by a Full Bench of this Court in the cases of Tek Chand and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(1) SCT 308 (P&H)(FB) : 2001(3) R.S.J.
604 and Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(3) SCT 28 (P&H) : (1998-2) P.L.R.
43 referred to hereinafter.
The two objections raised in paragraph No. 5 of the written statement have already been repelled by different Benches of this Court.
5.
In the case of Vidya Dhar v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 1761 of 2001, of even date, a Division Bench of this Court considered at length the above judgments and held as under:-  "A Full Bench of this Court in the case of Tek Chand and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2001(3) Recent Services Judgments 604 formulated the following questions:- 1.
Can the competent authority refuse to regularise the services of a daily wager merely because there was a break of more than a month even when the employer had caused the interruption in services?
2.
Can the employer refuse to regularise the services of an employee who had remained absent from duty for a continuous period of more than a month for reasons entirely beyond his control ?
3.
Does the absence of the employee on Jan 31, 1996 disentitle him to claim regularisation in service despite the fact that he had remained in service prior to and after that date ?
4.
Can this court not go into these matters in proceedings under Art. 226 of the Constitution ?
which was answered in the following manner:- (i) The condition that the break in service should not be more than one month at a time is reasonable.
However, the benefit of regularisation can be denied only in a case where the break is attributable to the employee and not in a case where the employer has caused the break.
(ii) The instructions do not require that the employee should have attended to the duties on January 31, 1996.
The only requirement is that his services should not have been terminated and that he should be in service on that day.
(iii) While hearing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, the court can adopt such procedure as it considers reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
It can even record evidence.
The two main objections taken by the respondents for declining the relief to the petitioner that the petitioner was not present on 31st March, 1993 and that there was a break in service of four months disentitling the petitioner from claiming regularisation of his services, thus, are answered by the Full Bench against the State."
6.
For the reasons afore-stated we find no merit in the stand taken by the State.
The petition is, thus, allowed.
The respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner with effect from 1996, but all consequential benefits of pay shall be paid to the petitioner only from the date of institution of this writ petition i.e. 2222000 as the petitioner himself raised no protest right from 1996 till 2000.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.