RL Anand, J - Reply not filed.
Adjournment requested which is declined in view of the order Annexure P-1.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
3.
The petitioner is seeking directions of this Court against the respondents to pay him the arrears of pay and bonus with effect from 3111996, the date from which his services have been regularised.
4.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was engaged as Peon on DC rates in the year 1983.
He was not allowed to work after 681988.
He raised the industrial dispute which was decided in his favour.
The respondents challenged the award of the Labour Court through civil writ petition which was dismissed.
Then the petitioner filed CWP No. 16611 of 1998 making prayer to the High Court that directions be issued to the respondents to regularise his services with effect from the date the services of junior to him were regularised and as per the policies of the Haryana Government.
That writ petition was disposed of on 4122000 with the direction to the respondents to consider the request of the petitioner for regularisation and if Mahavir Singh is junior to him and if his services have already been regularised, the same benefits may be given to the petitioner especially in view of the Govt. instructions which have been adopted by the respondents.
The Court also gave the direction to the respondents to pass the speaking order.
Thereafter the services of the petitioner were regularised on 22.3.2001 with effect from 3111996.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that once the petitioners services have been regularised with effect from 3111996, he is entitled to regular pay scale and arrears of pay w.e.f.
such date.
There is merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The reading of the order Annexure P-1 would show that the services of the petitioner were regularised w.e.f.
3111996 in the regular pay scale and in these circumstances he is entitled to the regular pay scale and consequential benefits in pursuance thereof.
The regular pay scale has already been granted to the petitioner but the arrears w.e.f.
3111996 have not been given.
Therefore, I allow this writ petition and give directions to the respondents to clear the arrears, if any, of the petitioner w.e.f.
3111996 in the pay scale enjoyed by him, within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
No order as to costs.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.