Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
It is contended that plea of the management that workman had abandoned the work has not been dealt with in the award.
3.
This argument is mis-conceived inasmuch as the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, while making the award in favour of the workman on 2772001 has held as under :-  "In this case the workman has alleged as WW-2 that he has worked for more than 240 days and as per Ex. W-1 the list of working days are given.
Whereas the management has taken the plea that the workman has worked for 188 days in Karnal Division and for 59 days in Panipat division and both the Divisions are separate therefore working days of both the Divisions can not be clubbed with each.
Now the workman has also taken the plea in his demand notice that junior to him are still working with the management and in sub para (ii) of para 2 of the demand notice he has also mentioned the name of the junior persons.
The witness of the management MW-1 NK Sahani has not specifically denied that junior persons to the workman are not working with the management when he has admitted that the workman is still continuing with the management.
Therefore, under these circumstances it was the duty of the management to produce the record that the junior persons to the workman are not working with the management and therefore, adverse inference is hereby drawn against the management and in view of the observations made by our Hon'ble High Court in C.W.P.
No. 2375 of 1997 (supra) the management has violated the provision of Section 25-G of the Act even if the workman has not completed 240 days in the last 12 months preceding the day of the termination of his service.
In view of my above discussion I am of the opinion that termination of the services of workman is in violation of Section 25-G of the Act and is illegal.
I therefore set aside the termination order of the workman and order for his reinstatement with continuity of service but without back wages.
The issue is accordingly decided in favour of the workman and against the management."
4.
The above finding of facts are based on proper appreciation of evidence.
It is not even disputed before us that the management did not produce the record before the labour Court.
The onus to prove issue or abandonment as well plea that the workman had not completed 240 days or that the person junior to him had not been retained in service was on the management.
In the face of the affirmative evidence led by the workman, we see no reason to interfere in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.