Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was recruited as a constable in the Punjab Police on February 7, 1992.
On November 13, 1992, a criminal case was registered against him vide FIR No. 169.
It was alleged that the petitioner was guilty of offence punishable under Sections 382 and 294 IPC.
The petitioner was discharged from service by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jagraon vide order dated November 14, 1992.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P. 1 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ludhiana Range, Ludhiana.
It does not bear any date.
However, it was stated at the time of hearing that this representation had been submitted on January 20, 1995.
It was dismissed vide order dated July 17, 1995 (Annexure P.3) with the writ petition).
A copy of this order was forwarded to the petitioner by the Senior Superintendent of Police vide endorsement dated July 29, 1995.
A representation was submitted by the petitioner.
This too was rejected and the decision was communicated by the Director General of the Police, Punjab to the Deputy Inspector General.
A copy of the communication has been produced as Annexure P.5.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Home Secretary, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6.
2.
The petitioner alleges that he was acquitted in the criminal case by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Jagraon vide order dated September 20, 1994.
A copy of the judgment has been produced as Annexure P.7.
The petitioner prays that orders dated November 14, 1992, July 20, 1995 and July 17, 1995, P.3 and P.5 be quashed.
He further prays that a writ of mandamus be issued directing respondent No. 1 to decide his representation/appeal.
3.
The case was posted before a Bench of this Court on August 7, 1997.
A direction for the issue of notice of motion was given.
Thereafter, the case was posted for hearing on November 26, 1997.
Counsel for the petitioner was not present.
The Bench had passed the following order :-  "Mr. Berry prays for time to enable him to file the written statement.
Adjourned to 2111998.
The petitioner had been discharged from the police force vide order dated 14.11.1992.
A copy of this order has been produced as annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
The order was passed in exercise of powers under Rule 1221.
The writ petition was filed in this court in August, 1997.
Learned counsel for the petitioner is directed to explain the delay.
The office is directed to inform the learned counsel for the petitioner".
4.
On January 21, 1998, counsel for the petitioner did not appear.
The petition was dismissed by the Bench with the followed order :-  "The case was listed for hearing on November 26, 1997.
No one had appeared for the petitioner.
It was adjourned for today.
The office reports that the counsel was informed about the date of hearing.
The petitioner was discharged from Police force vide order dated November 14, 1992.
The writ petition was filed in this court in August 1997.
While adjourning the case on November 26, 1997, it was directed that the counsel for the petitioner shall explain the delay.
No affidavit has been filed.
Dismissed in default".
5.
The petitioner has now filed CM No. 27136 of 2001 with the prayer that the order dated January 21, 1998 be recalled and that the matter may be heard on merits.
He has explained the circumstances regarding his giving engaged the counsel in December 1996 and the filing of the writ petition on March 28, 1997.
6.
For the reasons mentioned in the application, we are satisfied that the petitioner was not to blame.
Thus, we have heared him on merits.
He has submitted that after his exoneration in the criminal case, he had filed the appeal for his reinstatement.
The appeal having been dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, he had represented to the Director General of Police, Punjab.
Thereafter, he had approached the State Government before filing the writ petition.
On these premises, the petitioner claims that there was no delay in approaching the court.
On merits, he submitted that his discharge from the service was wholly unwarranted.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner was recruited as a Constable in February 1992.
He was discharged from service vide order dated November 14, 1992.
The first representation was filed by the petitioner on January 20, 1995.
In the order dated July 17/20, 1995, there is reference to an order of January 12, 1995 passed by the Deputy Inspector General.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that according to the petitioner himself, the first representation was filed after a lapse of more than two years.
Still, further, the petitioner did not approach the court immediately after the rejection of his representation.
He chose to submit another representation to the Director General and then to the State Government.
He approached the court only in March 1997.
There was a long delay.
In any case a triable issue of limitation was involved.
Thus, vide order dated November 26, 1997, which has been reproduced above, it was directed that the delay shall be explained.
No explanation was given.
8.
Mr. Puran Singh submitted that he had represented only after the decision of the case by the Sub Divisional Magistrate.
Why ?
In case, the petitioner was aggrieved by the order of his discharge, which had been passed on November 14, 1992, he should have moved the court within a reasonable time.
He had failed to do so.
Thus, there is delay in the filing of the writ petition.
9.
Mr. Puran Singh pointed out that he had been pursuing the matter with the authorities.
This is undoubtedly a relevant circumstances.
However, a perusal of the order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police shows that he had acted under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
This rule specifically provides that "there shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule".
In view of this specific provision in the rule, a delay of more than four years in approaching the court cannot be over-looked.
If the petitioner's explanation for condonation of delay is accepted, the purpose of the rule shall be defeated.
It would set up a wrong precedent and make the working of the Department difficult.
Thus, we are of the view that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay.
10.
Even otherwise, on merits, we do not find any ground to interfere.
A copy of the order of discharge has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
It reads as under :-  "Constable Puran Singh No. 610/JGN of this district is unlikely to prove an efficient Police Officer.
He is, therefore, discharged from the police force w.e.f.
13111992 under PPR 1221.
Book the order.
Sd/-  Sr Superintendent of Police, Jagraon".
11.
A perusal of the above order shows that the petitioner has been discharged from service under Rule 1221.
There is no stigma.
The order is totally innocuous.
It has been passed within the period of three years as laid down in the rule.
The authority has not punished the petitioner for any alleged lapse.
The order is, thus, in complete conformity with the rule.
12.
Mr. Puran Singh submitted that he had been discharged from service as a criminal case had been registered against him.
13.
It is undoubtedly true that a case had been registered.
A perusal of the judgment delivered by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Jagraon, shows that the VCR and the television which had been allegedly removed by the petitioner alongwith two others were recovered from their possession.
However, the complainant had not supported the case of the prosecution at the time of the trial.
Thus, the petitioner was discharged.
Even if it is assumed that the allegations as made in the criminal case were the motive for the petitioner's discharge from service, there is nothing to show that these formed the foundation of the case.
Rule 1221 provides as under :-  1221.
"Discharge or Inefficient - A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule".
14.
A perusal of the above provision would show that a constable is virtually on probation for a period of three years.
During this period, he can be discharged from service if the Senior Superintendent of Police finds that he is unlikely to make a good police officer.
In the present case, the petitioner had got involved in a criminal case soon after his recruitment.
The authority could have formed an opinion that the petitioner was not likely to make a good police officer.
It could have proceeded to order his discharge.
in doing so, it was only exercising the power conferred by the rule.
There is nothing to indicate that there was an intention to punish him.
It may be observed that there is not even a suggestion of any extraneous consideration or malafides.
It is clear that the authority formed a bonafide opinion and passed the order.
It committed no error in doing so.
It may be noticed that no body would normally get rid of a good employee.
It is only when the authority feels that the petitioner is not likely to do well in service that an order of discharge is passed.
Such seems to be the situation even in the present case.
15.
After hearing the petitioner, we had announced the order in the morning.
We have now recorded reasons for our order.
In view of the above we find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed on the ground of delay as well as merits.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.