Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner and give him all consequential benefits as per the policy instructions of the Government dated 2751993 Annexure P/2 to the petition.
2.
The said policy was promulgated by the State for regularising the services of work charged, casual daily rated employees.
The petitioner was engaged as daily wages sweeper with the respondent-State against vacant post on 2531985.
On 31.9.1987 the services of the petitioner were terminated.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was ultimately answered in favour of the workman vide award dated 1661993 and the petitioner was reinstated with back wages and continuity of service.
The petitioner was permitted to join his duties in April, 1999 and in the meanwhile the afore- noticed policy was declared by the State.
As per the policy, the persons, who had completed three years of service as on 3111996 were entitled to regularisation in terms of the policy.
The petitioner requested the respondents to regularise his services, but of no avail.
The petitioner brought to the notice of the respondents some judgments where similarly situated employees were regularised after the orders of the Court and even services of the part-time employees, junior to the petitioner, were also regularised.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
The facts as averred in the petition are not in dispute.
The main plank of submission on behalf of the respondents is that the petitioner was not in service when according to the policy i.e. 3131993 the services could be regularised.
As the petitioner was not in service on 3131993, his case for regularisation was considered in view of the policy of 1996 and his services were regularised with effect from 131997.
According to the respondents the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
As we have already noticed, the basic facts are not in dispute.
The only question that falls for determination in this writ petition is whether the petitioner was in service on 3131993 or not.
Admittedly, the services of the petitioner were terminated on 31.9.1987 and the award in favour of the workman was published in the Haryana State Gazette on 1661993, the date by which the award became enforceable.
The award in fact was pronounced on 2841993, but was published on 1661993.
The award between the parties attained finality and it was for the management to permit the petitioner- workman to join the duty.
However, this was not done and the petitioner was permitted to join the duties only in April, 1994.
The award granted to the workman reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
In other words, the petitioner for all purposes and intents would be deemed to have continued in service for the entire period in question by a legal fiction.
Such assumption in favour of the workman is inevitable.
5.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dalip Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(1) RSJ 722 : 1999(3) SCT 385 (P&H)(DB), held as under :-  "The award passed by the Labour Court which must be treated as statutory in character by virtue of Section 18 of the 1947 Act, has the effect of conferring a right upon the petitioners to be treated as continuing in service for the entire period between the date on which the respondents discontinued their engagement and the date on which they were allowed to rejoin duties in compliance of the award dated 1061996.
Therefore, it is not possible to treat the intervening period differently for the purpose of considering the petitioners for regularisation of their services in accordance with the policy framed by the government."
6.
We may also usefully refer to a judgment of another Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 14165 of 2001, titled as Deep Chand v. State of Haryana, decided on 1022002, where while dealing with somewhat (identical) situation, the Bench held as under :-  "It is a deemed fiction of law that the period in face of such award would have to be treated as a period actually spent on duty.
Initially, the services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated by the respondent-State and subsequently the State compelled him to remain out of service for no fault of the workman.
Even after the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was not permitted to join the duty.
In other words, the petitioner was not physically present at the work as a result of action of the respondents and no fault was attributable to the petitioner on any ground whatsoever.
The physical absence of the petitioner from duty was result of compulsion of the petitioner and not his choice.
In these circumstances we are unable to sustain the reasons given in the impugned letter that the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation because he did not physically work during the period in question.
The learned counsel for the State was unable to support his argument by any precedent or documents to show that the petitioner was called upon to join his duties.
Once the Court finds it as a matter of fact that services of the employee were wrongly terminated, who in the eyes of law, would be deemed to be in service, cannot be even deprived of his back wages or arrears of salary subject to just exceptions and the law of limitation.
The consequences of setting aside an order of dismissal or termination given rise to a consequential relief of reinstatement and payment of back wages as a necessary corollary to the setting aside of such order.
As a logical consequence of this declaration (award), it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefits or reliefs which was natural results of such relief.
(In this regard reference can be made to a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) SLR 151 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharashtra, 1977(2) SCC 288.)
The above admitted facts support the case of the petitioner and are indicative of the fact that the respondent-State has taken this objection only to deny a benefit legally and reasonably due to the petitioner."
7.
In view of the above settled position of law and the admitted facts in the present case, we are not able to persuade ourselves to hold that the petitioner was not in service as on 3131993.
Once award in favour of the petitioner attained finality and the petitioner was entitled to continuity in service in terms thereof, it was neither just nor fair for the respondents to deny the benefit of continuity of service on the ground of physical absence of the workman, which in fact was own creation of the respondents.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation under 1993 policy, annexure P/2 to the petition, within a period of three months from today and the petitioner, upon such regularisation, would be entitled to the benefits in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.