Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed in this writ petition for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing orders Annexures P-2 and P-3.
The learned counsel has further submitted that the petitioners's society is a Cooperative Society.
Respondent No. 4 Jagtar Singh committed embezzlement in the office of the Cooperative Society and also committed various other irregularities.
Disciplinary proceedings were started against him.
Charge-sheet was issued to him.
Enquiry was conducted by appointing an Enquiry Officer and, thereafter, his services were terminated on 2091997.
2.
Against his termination respondent No. 4 Jagtar Singh filed an appeal under rule 15 of the Services Rules before the Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Ludhiana and vide his order dated 19.2.1999, (Annexure P-1), the Deputy Registrar set aside the termination order dated 2091997 and he was reinstated in service.
Against this order, the petitioner society filed a revision before the Joint Registrar, Cooperative Societies Patiala.
The petitioner society did not allow Jagtar Singh to join his duty as he was a bad worker and the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Society, Jagraon in his bid to get the order (Annexure P1) implemented, placed the Members of the Managing Committee of the petitioner Society under suspension under Section 27(2) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
Shri Mohinder Singh Inspector of the Society was appointed as an Administrator and he appointed Jagtar Singh- respondent No. 4 as Secretary of the Society on 2661999.
Jagtar Singh- respondent No. 4 in connivance with the Administrator of the Society got Rs. 1,13,700/- as arrears of salary till the date of his reinstatement in service.
The Deputy Registrar in his order Annexure P-1 did not allow any arrears of salary of respondent No. 4.
This amount was withdrawn by Jagtar Singh without any approval from the higher authorities.
Suspension order of the Society was challenged in the High Court by filing C.W.P.
No. 8825 of 1999 and this petition came up for preliminary hearing on 771997.
Suspension order of the Members of the Society was stayed.
The petitioner, thereafter, took a very serious view of the withdrawal of the amount of Rs. 1,13,700/- by respondent No. 4 Jagtar Singh and removed him from service by passing a resolution dated 281999.
This removal order was never challenged by respondent No. 4.
Against order Annexure P-1, a revision petition was filed before the Joint Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Patiala and vide his order dated 17.8.1999 (Annexure P02), he dismissed the revision petition of the petitioner Cooperative Society and also set aside the order dated 281999 without any appeal being filed by respondent No. 4 - Jagtar Singh against that order.
3.
Further, the petitioner-Society challenged the orders Annexures P-1 and P-2 by filing separate revision petition under Section 69 of the Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, who also dismissed the same vide order 1212000 (Annexure P-3).
4.
Notice of motion was issued.
Written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record very carefully.
6.
Counsel for respondent No. 4 has contended that the impugned orders Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4 have been executed and implemented by Registrar.
Thus, this writ petition has become infructuous.
These orders have been annexed as annexures R-4/1 and R-4/7.
It is further argued that the petitioner society did not allow respondent No. 4 to joint duty and, therefore, proceedings under the Contempt of Courts Act were initiated against the petitioner society.
The learned counsel for the petitioner society stated that even if the order of the Deputy Registrar Annexure P-1 was implemented, still the impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 can be taken into consideration by this Court.
7.
The total amount which the petitioner society is saying has been embezzled is not the amount it can be said that it was taken out fraudulently by respondent No. 4.
It was after the order Annexure P-2 passed in favour of Jagtar Singh only then he withdrew the salary and other emoluments.
8.
Going through Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4, there is no charge of embezzlement nor is any embezzled amount under scrutiny for which Jagtar Singh could be held liable.
The only ground taken by the counsel for the petitioner-Society is that Jagtar Singh-respondent No. 4 has embezzled this amount.
This is actually arrears of back wages of respondent No. 4.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 4 has placed reliance on The Patiala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Mehar Chand, 1998(2) SCT 356, wherein it was held that once termination is held to be unjustified and illegal, the necessary corollary is that the workman is entitled to be reinstated with full back wages.
The other judgment cited by counsel for the respondent is Central Cooperative Consumers' Store Ltd through its General Manager v. Labour Court, HP at Shimla, 1993(3) SCT 576 is reproduced below :  "Termination/Backwages - illegal termination.
Termination of the employee found illegal and was reinstated with back wages - Adamant behaviour of the authorities against the employee - Public money wasted due to that and they went on pursing the litigation which literally prosecuted the employee for 20 years - Working life of the employee lost in long avoidable litigation - Arrears of back wages ordered to be recovered from the salary of the officers responsible for termination her services and those who went on pursuing the litigation unnecessarily".
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is without merit and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.