RL Anand, J - Shri Arun Malik, Sub Division Officer, Irrigation Department, Haryana has filed the present writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he has made a prayer for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 16th August, 2001 (Annexure P-2) vide which the petitioner has been placed under suspension on the plea that the said order is totally illegal and arbitrary and has been passed with a mala fide intention at the behest of respondent No. 2 Shri Om Parkash Chautala, the present Chief Minister of Haryana.
The petitioner has further made a prayer that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to revoke the aforesaid order of the petitioner with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that Shri Randeep Surjewala is a political rival of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner is the brother-in-law of Shri Randeep Surjewala who contested the election on the Congress ticket against Shri Om Parkash Chautala in the assembly elections held in February 2000 from Narwana Constituency.
The said Shri Randeep Surjewala is the son of Shri Shamsher Singh Surjewala, a senior Congress leader who is elder brother of Shri Tarif Singh, father-in-law of the petitioner.
Right from the day when respondent No. 2 assumed the charge of the office of the Chief Minister, the petitioner has continuously been harassed either by way of frequent transfers or with false complaints, Shri Chautala (respondent No. 2) came to power in the State of Haryana in July 1999.
In October 1999, the petitioner was transferred from Gohana to Rohtak where he worked only for less than one and a half year.
Thereafter, in April 2000 the petitioner was transferred from Rohtak to Chandigarh.
In May 2000 the said order was abruptly cancelled.
In June 2001, the petitioner was again transferred om Rohtak to Chandigarh where he is still continuing.
In the month of October 2000 an anonymous complaint was procured against the petitioner which was addressed to the Chief Minister Haryana.
The said complaint was marked by respondent No. 2 to the Chief Vigilance Officer, Haryana.
The said complaint was enquired into by the Chief Vigilance Officer-cum-Joint Secretary, Irrigation Department.
In the said inquiry, the petitioner was associated but a copy of the complaint was not supplied.
The allegations in the complaint were that the petitioner who is son-in-law of Shri Tarif Singh, has sent his Maruti Car No. 704 and Japanese Toyota No. 704 twice in the election at Narwana against the Hon'ble Chief Minister.
It was further alleged that the petitioner used the foul language against respondent No. 2 and used to make intensive propaganda against the Chief Minister and even spoke from stage seeking votes against him claiming that Shri Randeep Surjewala would become a Minister.
It was also alleged in the complaint that the petitioner took part in the elections of Member of Parliament from Bhiwani and he is close to Shri Jagger Singh Malik who was a Minister in the Government of Shri Bansi Lal and went to Bhiwani with him and handed over Rs. 50,000/- to Shri Surinder son of Shri Bansi Lal, which amount he had earned in an illegal manner through allotment of different works in favour of the relatives of Shri Jagbir Singh and the Political Secretary of Shri Surjewala.
3.
The inquiry officer finding no truth in the allegations made in the anonymous complaint, the same was filed by the Chief Vigilance Officer with the approval of the Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Irrigation Department Haryana, in the month of May 2001.
Since the complaint was received by the Chief Vigilance Officer, Haryana from the office of respondent No. 2, therefore, the information that the complaint has been enquired into and has been filed, was sent to the office of respondent No. 2 who showed his displeasure to the filing of the complaint against the petitioner and directed that the complaint should again be enquired into by the Director, State Vigilance Bureau Haryana and was so upset that the petitioner had been exonerated and that he went to the extent of ordering that action should be taken against the Chief Vigilance Officer who had filed the complaint.
This proves the mala fide on the part of the respondent No. 2.
The inquiry was again marked to the Director, State Vigilance Bureau, Haryana but till date the petitioner has never been called by the said Bureau in the inquiry.
Rather the petitioner has been placed under suspension, vide order dated 16th August, 2001 (Annexure P-2).
It is alleged by the petitioner that a bare perusal of the order dated 16th August, 200 would show that no reasons have been assigned as to why the petitioner is being suspended.
He has been placed under suspension on account of political rivalry.
The earlier anonymous complaint had already been enquired into by the Chief Vigilance Officer.
He did not recommend any action.
In these circumstances, there was hardly any justification on the part of the Government to suspend the petitioner.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that there is no inquiry pending against him nor it is contemplated.
Therefore, there is no justification with the respondent to place the petitioner under suspension.
4.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that he is a victim of a complaint on the part of the respondent No. 2 Shri Om Parkash Chautala, the present Chief Minister of Haryana.
The order of suspension is totally mala fide one.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondent No. 1 filed the separate written statement.
It is the stand of respondent No. 1 that the Superintending Engineer Vigilance Circle, Irrigation Department, conducted an inquiry No. 10/Amb/2000 that Shri Arun Malik in connivance with his Junior Engineer Shri RS Chhikara got prepared fraudulent bill amounting to Rs. 98525/- during the period of 1999.
Subsequently due to his transfer, he prepared another bill with ante dated entry in old Measurement Book for Rs. 7131300, whereas when the work was measured by two Sub Divisional Officers, they found that the work was executed for Rs. 6729900 only.
Further the petitioner tried to defraud the government exchequer.
6.
It was also alleged by respondent No. 1 in the written statement that the petitioner issued an unused Measurement Book since 27th January, 1992 available with another Junior Engineer of the same Sub Division and transferred it to the Junior Engineer Incharge of the work of Constructing platform of "Chatia Deva Pump House" on back date and the second measurement as well as new abstract of cost was entered in back date and also recorded his check measurement.
In another case, the petitioner has also been served with a show cause notice on account of issue of a cheque for Rs. 7073200 over and above the allotted limit of the letter of credit unauthorisedly and in contravention of rules 326 of Punjab Financial Rules Vol.
I and Government relevant instructions regarding introduction of letter of credit system.
Another complaint against the petitioner was referred to the Director State Vigilance Bureau for investigation on 682001 by the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana while in the course of yet another complaint, prima facie evidence of manipulation and financial irregularities have been found.
The respondent No. 1 also took the stand that the petitioner is not an officer of unblemished record.
The suspension order issued by the Government is just, right and is in public interest and there is no question of any kind of mala fide on the part of respondent No. 1.
7.
Respondent No. 2 has also filed the written statement.
He has taken the preliminary objection that he is neither a necessary nor proper party and his name has been mentioned in the writ petition in order to divert the attention of the court from the real issue.
The petitioner has made reckless and irresponsible allegations against the respondent.
Respondent No. 2 became the Chief Minister of Haryana in July 1999.
It was thereafter that vide order dated 28th October, 1999 the petitioner was transferred from a small place like Gohana to the District Headquarters at Rohtak and, that too, in Vigilance Sub Division where an incumbent is supposed to act as a watch dog against other officers of the Department.
The petitioner was allowed to continue in the Vigilance Sub Division Rohtak for a reasonable long term and it was only in May 2001 that he was transferred to the Head office at Chandigarh.
Even in the Head Office, the petitioner was posted in an important Wing known as the Design Wing.
Thus, there is no mala fide, malice or ill-will on the part of respondent No. 2.
After denying the other material averments of the writ petition, respondent No. 2 prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
8.
In support of his case, the petitioner has placed on record a copy of the letter dated 1st May, 2001 (Annexure P-1) from the Executive Engineer (Vigilance.
II) to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana in which it has been mentioned that the complaint was investigated and the duly processed report was submitted to the Chief Vigilance Officer on single file.
As recommended by the Chief Vigilance Officer and approved by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Irrigation, the case has been filed.
Annexure P-2 is the order vide which the petitioner was placed under suspension and Annexure P-3 is the Government Circular dated 27th September, 1954 in which a decision was taken by the Government that every case involving a proposal of suspension would be carefully considered and suspension would be ordered only when the circumstances of the case are found to justify it and that ordinarily suspension should not be ordered unless the allegations made against the official concerned are of a serious nature and are based on evidence available.
Also mentioned in the order is that if there is a prima facie case for the dismissal or removal of a public servant and that the investigation is likely to be hampered, in such like cases the suspension order can be passed.
9.
In rebuttal, the respondents have placed on record the transfer orders, including that of the petitioner vide which the petitioner was transferred from Gohana to Rohtak.
10.
I have heard Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Surya Kant, learned Advocate General Haryana (assisted by Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG) on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
11.
This writ petition was admitted by the Hon'ble Division Bench vide its order dated 20th September, 2001.
The order runs as follows :  "This petition challenges the order dated 1682001 (Annexure P-2) whereby the petitioner has been placed under suspension.
It is stated that the petitioner is brother-in-law of Shri Randeep Surjewala who contested election against respondent No. 2.
It is stated that respondent No. 2 is hostile to the petitioner as a result of which the latter was transferred from Gohana to Rohtak in October 1999 and from Rohtak to Chandigarh in April, 2000 which order was challenged in May, 2000.
Fresh order was passed in June, 2000 transferring the petitioner from Rohtak to Chandigarh.
In October, 2000 an anonymous complaint was procured against the petitioner which was marked to the Chief Vigilance Officer, Haryana who did not find any substance therein and when this report was put up before respondent No. 2, he directed that action be taken against the Chief Vigilance Officer who did not enquire into the complaint even though the facts were verifiable, 12.
In reply to the notice of motion issued by this Court, two written statements have been filed - one by the State of Haryana and the other by respondent No. 2.
In the written statement filed by the State of Haryana, it is stated that there were allegations of petitioner preparing a fraudulent bill amounting to Rs. 98,525 during the year 1999 in connivance with his Junior Engineer and also preparing another bill with ante dated entry for Rs. 71,313/- while the work was found to be before Rs. 67,299; the petitioner issued an unused measurement book and an entry was made in back date; a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on account of his issuing a cheque for Rs. 70,732 over and above the allotted limit of letter of credit; another complaint against the petitioner was preferred to the Director State Vigilance Bureau on 682001 by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana while in the course of yet another complaint, prima facie evidence of manipulation and financial irregularities have been found.
13.
Respondent no. 2 in his written statement submitted that he is neither necessary nor proper party and the allegations made are reckless and irresponsible; it is stated that under the order of respondent No. 2, the petitioner has remained posted against one of the most prestigious assignments at Rohtak and his transfer from Gohana to Rohtak on 28101999 was a better posting than earlier and, similarly the petitioner's transfer from Rohtak to Chandigarh was also a better posting and, in any case, respondent No. 2 had no malice or ill-will against the petitioner; respondent No. 2 has no knowledge of petitioner's relationship with Randeep Surejwala; the orders passed on complaints by respondent No. 2 were as a part of his duty.
14.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Advocate General, Haryana on behalf of the respondents.
15.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was now posted in the Head Office; the incident for which the petitioner was sought to be proceeded against was an old incident; record was with the State Government and there was no question of tampering with the record; as per instructions of the Haryana Government, Annexure P-3, suspensions are not ordinarily to be ordered unless the allegations are of serious nature and a prima facie case for dismissal or removal was made out, or there was likelihood of causing embarrassment to or hampering the investigation, and ordinarily, instead of suspension, there should be transfer to another place.
The Advocate General, Haryana submitted that if respondent No. 2 had been hostile to the petitioner, he would not have waited for two years for taking action against him.
He further submitted that there was prima facie evidence against the petitioner and a decision has been taken to charge sheet him for major penalty and, therefore, the suspension was justified.
It is also stated that the inquiry will be completed within a reasonable period and the petitioner will be given due opportunity to defend himself.
16.
It is well settled that the disciplinary authority is entitled to place an employee under suspension pending inquiry and courts do not normally interfere with the order of suspension.
At the same time, suspension also adversely affects the employee and if the same is arbitrary or mala fide, the same is liable to be interfered with.
In the present case, the petitioner is undoubtedly related to the political rival of respondent No. 2 and according to the petitioner, he is being proceeded against out of malice.
The allegation against him is that he approved the bills prepared by the Junior Engineer.
Case put forward by the petitioner is controverted by the respondent.
17.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and considering the circumstances of the case, we feel that though the case of the petitioner requires further consideration, he has not made out a prima facie case for grant of stay of the order of suspension and lest the merits of the case should be prejudiced, we do not record any view on the allegations of mala fide or malice.
Accordingly, this Writ Petition is admitted and ordered to be listed for final hearing on December 3, 2001.
The prayer for stay or order of suspension of the petitioner, dated 1582001 (Annexure P-2) is declined at this stage."
18.
During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner has tried to highlight his case by drawing my attention to the order dated 6th June, 2001 passed by Shri SY Quraishi, Political Secretary to the Hon'ble Chief Minister in which it has been mentioned as follows :  "C.M.
has seen.
He has expressed his displeasure on the plea of CVO that this is a pseudonymous complaint and he has not inquired into it in spite of the fact that facts are verifiable.
He would like that Director, SVB, may inquire into it and also propose action against the CVO."
19.
On the strength of the above office noting, learned counsel for the petitioner Shri Patwalia has tried to show that all is not well on the part of the respondents, especially respondent No. 2 Shri Om Parkash Chautala, who has gone to the extent not only for taking action against the petitioner, but he has not even spared the Chief Vigilance Officer who earlier enquired into the matter and filed the inquiry with the approval of the authorities.
The counsel submitted that the petitioner Shri Arun Kumar Malik is a relation of Shri Randeep Surjewala and his father who was a renowned senior Congress cites.
They are deadly against Shri Chautala.
In order to show down to the relative of Shri Randeep Surjewala, the action has been taken at the instance of respondent No. 2.
Again on the part of respondent No. 2, it is a mala fide action.
Therefore, the suspension order should be quashed.
20.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents vehemently submitted that the petitioner wanted to make a capital of the fact that he is a relation of Shri Surjewala who might be a rival of respondent No. 2.
The Government has the right to put an employee under suspension if a departmental inquiry is pending or is being contemplated.
Against the petitioner the departmental enquiry was contemplated.
In fact, the charge-sheet has already been issued against the petitioner.
He has filed the reply and when the charge sheet has already been issued, the question of suspension does not arise.
Moreover, there are serious allegations against the petitioner involving financial implications and, therefore, the government has the right and the justification to place the petitioner under suspension.
Meeting the argument of the adversary, learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that in the suspension order, there is nothing to suggest that any departmental inquiry is going to be contemplated and, therefore, the order Annexure P-2 be set aside.
21.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that this writ petition must fail.
Relationship per se with Shri Randeep Surjewala or with his father, is no ground to come to the conclusion that any action taken by the State Government or under the orders of respondent No. 2 is a mala fide one.
It is the right of the government to suspend a public servant if a departmental inquiry is pending or it has been contemplated.
From the written statement of the respondents it is evident that prima facie the government has the basis to say as to what had promoted it for placing the petitioner under suspension.
No case of suspension now is made out when the charge-sheet has already been issued to the petitioner.
At the most, this Court can given directions to the respondents to expedite the inquiry.
It is a settled principle of law that the High Court in its extra ordinary jurisdiction does not interfere in the matter of the suspension order with the issuance of charge-sheet by the department unless such orders of suspension are totally mala fide or the orders of the charge-sheet are based upon no evidence altogether.
The matter of evidence cannot be scrutinised in writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, especially the writ in the nature of certiorari, which only talk of supervisory jurisdiction.
In this view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion that the writ petition is totally devoid of any merit and the same is hereby dismissed with the directions to the respondents to conclude the inquiry as early as possible and, preferably within six months, from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs in the present writ petition.
Petition dismissed.