Amitava Lala, J - This writ petition being CR 10303(W)/93 relates to absorption of the partitions who have performed their duties for long five years with not less than 120 days of work consecutively on regular basis in appropriate establishments.
2.
From the record it appears that another writ petition being C.O.
No. 19182(W)/94 (Pardip Kr.
Biswas and Ors v. Election Commission of India and Ors) is also tagged with the matter for the purpose of analogous hearing.
In the second writ petition a challenge has been thrown not to give effect or further effect to the directives of the Election Commission in its letter No. 23/94-Vol. TV dated 23rd August, 1994 banning appointment of job workers as enumerators/supervisors/inspectors during the revisions of electoral rolls with reference to Ist January, 1995 as the qualifying date as connected by the radiogram of the Chief Electoral Officer, West Bengal dated 25th August, 1994 (Annexure `C' to the writ petition).
Therefore, it appears to me that the second writ petition was directed to be heard with the first writ petition for a common purpose i.e. regularisation of service which is the ultimate purpose of the parties.
In the record, no paper relating to C.O.
No. 14702(W) of 1994 is available although it was directed earlier to be (heard) analogously.
Therefore, such writ petition has not been taken into consideration.
4.
From the main writ petition it appears to this Court that the petitioners have done important functions during the conduct of election.
Admittedly, the duties were seasonal.
But they have been doing such seasonal duties for years together.
Under Memorandum No. 1700-EMP dated 3rd August, 1979 the concerned Labour Department laid down certain principles in the matter of absorption of casual and such other categories of workers under the State Government.
By a further Memorandum Nos. 1650-EMP dated 28th August, 1980 it gave a definition of seasonal workers referred to in paragraph 5 of the earlier Memorandum as aforesaid.
The seasonal workers mean those who were still continuing as such and who possess the qualifications prescribed in the rules of recruitment for the posts in which they would be considered for appointment in the regular establishments subject to the condition that they were in employment at the material time for five calendar years or more in consecutive seasons from the date of their initial appointments as seasonal workers.
Under memorandum No. 1000-EMP of the State of West Bengal, the Labour Department also laid down the guidelines for the purpose of the above by saying that for appointment of casual and such other categories of workers irregular service the incumbent should be allowed to deduct from his/her actual age the period spent by him/her as casual worker and if after deducting the period he/she is within the maximum age limit he/she shall be considered eligible for absorption.
Under another memorandum being No. 300-EMP dated 13th May, 1985 the selection of job workers/enumerators who were engaged by the Home (C & E) Department during the revision of the electoral rolls between 1979 and 1985 and who have put in a total of at least 240 days' work during the prescribed period may be included in the exempted categories provided that these job workers/enumerators fulfilled the conditions of eligibility as may be laid down by the relevant rules of recruitment prescribed for the post.
Their names will be forwarded to the Director of National Employment Service who will maintain a running list for such persons.
By a further memorandum being No. 350-EMP dated 21st September, 1990 the period between 1979-85 was extended upto June, 1989.
5.
For an example, the petitioners have given the instance of `punkha- pullers'.
Such `punkha-pullers' were doing their seasonal work in the summer season and by memorandum No. 600-EMP dated 17th August, 1984 it was decided that such `punkha-pullers' who have worked for 5 calendar years or more in consecutive seasons from the date of their initial appointments and are still in employment or have been rendered surplus due to introduction of electricity may be absorbed in the regular establishment.
6.
According to me, in this respect two very important judgments have been delivered by the Apex Court.
One is reported in 1998(1) S.C.T.
331 : AIR 1998 SC 1477 SC, Arun Mr. Rauth and Ors v. State of Bihar and ors. and also in 1998(9) SCC 78, Keshab Narayan Gupta and Ors v. Zilla Parishad, and Shibpuri and Ors, where it has been held that the persons who are working as casually or temporarily they deserve sympathy for consideration even if they could not claim regularisation as a matter of course.
This was considered as an equitable justice since such incumbents are not guilty of fraud or sharp practice and they did not lack any requisite qualification.
The case of the petitioner also be considered along with others by waiving the age bar, if necessary.
7.
Therefore, according to me, the case of the petitioners should be guided by the well-settled principles of law as aforesaid.
8.
By a further judgment reported in 1999(2) SCT 600 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 1160, Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board v. Suresh and ors. etc., the Supreme Court has taken a very wide outlook to give a shape and offer reality to the Part III and Part IV of the Constitution by the Law Courts.
Such case is specially important in this respect on the ground that the same is related to contract labour.
The view of the Supreme Court is as follows:-  "The equality clause in the Constitution does not speak for mere formal equality before the law but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality which strikes at the inequalities rising on account of vast social and economic differentiation and is thus consequently an essential ingredient of social and economic justice.
The security clause in the Constitution has been equated to mean that the people of the country ought to be secured of socio-economic justice by way of a fusion of Fundamental Rights of Directive Principles of State Policy.
Socialism ought not to be treated as a mere concept or an ideal but the same ought to be practised in every sphere of life and be treated by the Law Courts as a Constitutional mandate since the Law Courts exists for the society and required to act as a guardian angel of the society.
As a matter of fact, the socialistic concept of society is very well laid in Part III and Part IV of the Constitution and the Constitution being supreme, it is bounden duty of the law Courts to give shape and offer reality to such a concept."
9.
According to me, all the aforesaid cases are dealt with for service security by giving a permanent shape to those who have worked in the aforesaid manner with a hope and trust to get an equitable relief for the purpose.
10.
Therefore, such equitable relief cannot be ignored.
Hence, the writ petitions are allowed with a direction upon the authority concerned to consider their representation or representations in the light of the judgment of this Court within a period of four months from the date of communication of this order upon giving fullest opportunity of hearing and by passing a reasoned order thereon.
For the purpose of effective adjudication, copies of the writ petitions along with annexures and the affidavits in connection there with also along with the annexures will be forwarded to such appropriate authority.
This order will be operative subject to payment of Court fees by all the petitioners as well as added respondents asking similar reliefs excepting the petition order (petitioner ?)
No. 1 on whose account the Court fees are treated as paid.
Thus, both the writ petitions stand disposed of.
No order is passed as to costs.
Let an urgent xeroxed certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the Ld.
Advocates for the parties within two weeks from the date of putting the requisites.
Petitions disposed of.