VM Sahai, J - Sri PN Singh the respondent No. 2 was officiating principal of Janta Inter College, Mau Airma, Allahabad.
On the basis of an enquiry report dated 11.9.1998, he was suspended on 1291998 by petitioners.
The committee of management on 1891998 forward papers to the District Inspector Schools (in brief DIOS) for grant of approval to the suspension order as provided under Section 16-G(7) of the UP Intermediate Education Act, 1921 (in brief Act).
By order dated 26.9.1998 the DIOS disproved the suspension order.
The petitioners have challenged the order dated 26.9.1998 by means of this writ petition.
2.
Shri RK Ojha, the learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that the DIOS did not give any reason for disapproving the suspension order nor any provision of Act was mentioned in the impugned order of the basis of which decision of this Court in Chandra Bhushan Mishra v. District Inspector of School, Deoria, 1996(1) SCT 70 (All.)
(FB) : 1995(1) UPLBEC 460.
He further pointed out that on 7101998 this Court has stayed the order dated 26.9.1998 passed by DIOS.
And the petitioner was permitted to complete the enquiry against respondent No. 2.
On the other hand Sri AB Singh, the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has urged that after expiry of sixty days, the suspension order would automatically, come to an end.
He placed reliance on decisions of this Court in Committee of Management, Vasudev Mishra Higher Secondary School, Kanpur Nagar v. Deputy Director of Education, Kanpur Region, Kanpur, 1992(2) UPLBEC 1325 and Committee of Management, Jan Sahyogi Intermediate College, Modhi Etawah v. District Inspector of Schools, Etawah, 1986 UPLBEC 144.
He also relied on the decision of the Apex Court in Rajendra Prasad v. Kayastha Pathshala, AIR 1987 SC 1644.
The learned counsel has further urged that enquiry has been completed and the management has passed a resolution for terminating the service of the respondent No. 2.
The resolution has been sent by the petitioners through the DIOS to the Commission Board as provided by UP Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Boards Act, 1982 for grant of approval.
And the matter is pending before the Commission/Board.
He urged that the suspension order would be deemed to have come to an end.
3.
Under Section 16-G(7) of Act the DIOS is under a statutory duty to approve or disapprove the suspension order in writing.
This power has been conferred on him so that the management may not suspend the Head of the Institution or a teacher arbitrarily, in highhanded manner.
The only reason given by the DIOS for disapproving the suspension order is that from the examination of records he came to the conclusion that the management has suspended the respondent No. 2 in violation of the provision of Act.
From the impugned order it is clear that the DIOS and not apply its mind to the facts of the case nor any provision of Act was considered.
Statutory provision of Section 16-G(7) of the Act expressly provides that order under the sub-section has to be passed in writing by the DIOS.
It is implicit that while passing an order in writing he has to apply his mind and give reasons for approving or disapproving the suspension order.
He is under a legal duty and obligation to pass a reasoned order that can be upheld in law.
It is not a formality.
Mere writing that suspension order was contrary to the provision of the Act was not sufficient.
The impugned order cannot be upheld.
4.
I have held that order passed by the DIOS is illegal, therefore, it is not necessary for me to consider the other arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
In the result, this writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
The order dated 26.9.1998 passed by respondent No. 1, Annexure-6 to the writ petition is quashed.
The District Inspector of Schools, Allahabad shall pass a fresh order in accordnace with law within a period of two months from today.
The petitioners and respondent No. 2 are directed to serve a certified copy of this order on respondent No. 1 within a period of one week from today.
6.
Office shall issue certified copy of this order to learned counsel for the parties on payment of usual charges within three days.
7.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.