VM Sahai, J - Adarsh Janta Inter College, Aung, Fatehpur (in brief institution) is an unaided and recognised institution imparting education up to Class VIII.
In 1994 the institution was upgraded to High School and again it was upgraded to Intermediate in 1996.
The institution is an un-aided institution and it was never in the grant-in-aid list of the State Government.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Teacher in the institution on 171992 and no appointment letter was issued to him.
It is alleged that salary of the petitioner is not being paid by the respondents.
In the year 1998 in the identity card issued to the petitioner it is stated that the petitioner was appointed on 171998 as Hindi lecturer.
It has been stated in paragraph 12 of the writ petition that the petitioner has been disengaged by respondents with effect from March, 2000.
This writ petition has been filed for a direction to respondents No. 2 and 3 to permit the petitioner to function as lecturer in the institution and pay his salary since March, 2000.
2.
Sri SK Mishra, the learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently urged that the petitioner was appointed in the institution and even though the institution is un-aided the management could not even disengage the petitioner from service and he is entitled to salary.
He has placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in Dharmendra Pal Dwivedi v. District Inspector of Schools, 2000(2) LBESR 790 : 2000 All LJ 2706 and Smt. Shashi Kala Singh v. District Inspector of Schools, Maharajganj, 2000(1) UPLBEC 2327 : 2000 All LJ 2602.
He further urged that respondents No. 2 and 3 be directed to permit the petitioner to function as lecturer in the school and pay him salary since March, 2000.
3.
On the other hand, Sri KK Chand, the learned standing counsel has urged that decision of this Court in Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 51940 of 2000, Smt. Sumanlata Sharma v. Regional Joint Director of Education, Meerut, 2001(3) SCT 635 (Allahabad) : 2000 All LJ 159 decided on 4122000 it has been held that a part time teacher appointed under Section 7-AA of the U.P.
Intermediate Education Act, 1921 (in brief Act) is not a teacher envisaged under Section 16-G of the Act.
The service conditions of such teachers are to be governed by the Government order dated 15.10.1986.
The Goverment order dated 15.10.1986 provided that the scheme of engaging part-time teachers is being made on experimental basis for imparting education in the interest of the students and the payment was to be made from the own funds of the management.
The Government order further provided that there was no age limit for appointing any person as part-time teacher and even a retired person could be appointed as part time teacher.
4.
A teacher working in a recognised unaided institution could not be said to be a regular teacher as envisaged by Section 16-G of the Act.
He can only be a part-time teacher or an honorary teacher.
He could be engaged or disengaged by the management, which pays honorarium from its own resources.
The controversy involved in the case is covered by the decision of this Court in Smt. Suman Lata (supra).
5.
The other argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the management and principal of the institution be directed to continue him as teacher and pay him salary is devoid of any merit.
A Full Bench of this Court in Ali Ahmad Abidi v. District Inspector of Schools, Allahabad, AIR 1977 All 539, has held as below (Para 29) :  "The Committee of Management of an Intermediate College is not a statutory body.
Nevertheless, a Writ Petition filed against it is maintainable if such petition is for enforcement of performance of any legal obligations or duties imposed on such committee by a statute."
A writ of mandamus cannot be issued as a matter of course.
It is a discretionary jurisdiction and can only be issued for enforcement or performance of statutory duty by administrative authority, on an application of a person who can show that he himself has a legal right to insist for such performance.
A part-time or honorary teacher does not have any statutory right to claim continuance as a teacher in the institution nor the committee of management is entrusted with performance of statutory duty.
Therefore, a writ of mandamus cannot be issued to the management or principal to continue a part-time or honorary teacher nor it can be compelled to pay any honorarium due to such teacher.
6.
For the reasons aforesaid, this writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.