JS Narang, J - The petitioner joined the service with the respondents as Lecturer in Electrical Engineering and was posted at Government Polytechnic, Sirsa on September 2, 1965.
He was regularised on the same post and was posted on 491966 at JR Polytechnic, Hoshiarpur.
He was promoted as Head of the Department of Electrical Engineering and was posted at Government Polytechnic Guru Teg Bahadur, Faridkot in October 1980.
In the year 1981, he was promoted as Principal in the same institution.
The last posting which was held by the petitioner before his superannuation was as Principal in Government Polytechnic College for Women, Ludhiana, in January 1995.
The petitioner superannuated upon attaining the age of 58 years on 2821999.
The petitioner was appointed as Member of a Sub Committee comprising of Shri JM Malhotra, Shri DC Sharma and the petitioner.
The scope of the Sub Committee was to submit a list of lowest tenderers for supplying some machinery in pursuant to the tenders which had been invited by the Directorate.
It is stated that the matter relating to the said functioning of the said Committee was investigated by the Vigilance Bureau, Punjab and F.I.R. No. 22 dated March 22, 1996 came to be registered under Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and under Sections 420 and 120-B IPC at Police Station Vigilance Bureau, Patiala.
The petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated 441996 on account of the registration of the above mentioned FIR.
However, the said orders were revoked by the Governor of Punjab vide order dated 1771996.
As a sequel thereto, the petitioner assumed the charge of the post of Principal at Ludhiana and remained posted as such till attaining the age of superannuation on February 28, 1999.
It may be noticed here that while issuing notification, the Governor of Punjab observed that pensionary benefits shall not be given to the petitioner till the clearance/No Objection Certificate is granted by the Vigilance Department.
The petitioner made various representations seeking release of his retiral benefits and in pursuant to his efforts, the authorities sanctioned 90% of the General Provident Fund (GPF) amount to the petitioner vide order dated March 4, 1999 and the remaining 10% GPF was sanctioned by the said authority on March 5, 1999.
Thus, the payment of Rs. 2,03,566/- was made on 7.6.1999 and that of Rs. 20,370/- on 2991999.
Thereafter, the authorities sanctioned provisional pension to the petitioner under rule 914(1)(d) of the Punjab Civil Services, Vol. II Rules vide order dated 13.9.1999 and the payment was actually released to the petitioner on 22111999.
Similarly, the amount of GIS (Group Insurance Scheme) amounting to Rs. 32,368/- was also released on 31121999.
The petitioner was not satisfied as the complete retiral benefits had not been released in favour of the petitioner, as such the petitioner submitted representations dated September 23, 1999 and October 20, 1999 respectively whereby it had been specifically stated that a period of three and half years had passed from the date of registration of the FIR but no challan had been filed by the authority concerned in the Court.
The petitioner claimed that the amounts which are due and payable to the petitioner under the two heads i.e. leave encashment for ten months and death-cum-retirement gratuity (DCRG) and further claimed commutation of pension as in that regard, the requisite papers had been filed with the Government.
Despite the representation nothing was heard from the Government.
Thus aggrieved of this inaction on the part of the Government, the present petition has been filed by the petitioner.
Rule had been issued vide order dated 2442000 and the matter was ordered to be listed before the appropriate Bench for directions on July 27, 2000.
2.
Government filed written statement and has taken the plea that the payments due and payable in respect of leave encashment, DCRG and commutation of pension could not be permitted as the case stood registered against the petitioner and others and the same is still pending.
As per the provisions of law contained in the Punjab Civil Service Rules and the notification issued by the Government, the same could not be released as the judicial proceedings are pending and would be released on the finalisation of the said proceedings.
So far as the case of Shri JM Malhotra, similarly situated member of Sub Committee is concerned, he had retired on November 30, 1994 whereas the FIR had been registered on 2231996 as such the said case cannot be considered at par with the case of the petitioner.
Thus, the petition merits dismissal on this ground.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the plea of the government is devoid of any merit because the leaved encashment and gratuity payable can only be withheld if the departmental proceedings or the judicial proceedings are pending aforesaid the officer concerned at the time of his retirement but that is not the case of the petitioner.
The petitioner had retired on February 28, 1999 and till that even challan had not been put in Court though the FIR had been registered on March 22, 1994.
In any case, no case would be registerable after the expiry of four years from the date of the incident as envisaged under the rules.
Learned counsel made reference to clause (b) of Rule 22 and proviso (3) of Clause (b) to rule 22 which read as under :-  Rule 22: Recovery of Pensions :- (a) xxx xx xx (b) The Government further reserve to themselves the right of with holding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss accused to Government, if, in a departmental or judicial proceeding, the pensioner is found guilty of grave mis-conduct or negligence during the period of his service, including service rendered upon re-employment after retirement, - provided that - (1) Such departmental proceedings, if instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall after the final retirement of the officer, he deemed to be proceeding under this article and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer had continued in service: (2) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-employment - (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government: (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution; and (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the officer during his service.
(3) No such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution; and  The Public Service Commission should be consulted before final orders are passed.
Explanation :- For the purpose of this rule - (a) a departmental proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which the statement of charges is issued to the officer or pensioner, or if the officer has been placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such date: and (b) a judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted - (i) in the case of a criminal proceeding, on the date on which the complaint or report of the police officer on which the Magistrate takes cognizance, is made; and (ii) in the case of a civil proceeding, on the date of presentation of the plaint in the Court.
Note :- As soon as proceedings of the nature referred to in the above rule are instituted, the authority which institutes such proceedings should without delay intimate the fact to the Accountant-General.
The amount of the pension withheld under clause (b) should not ordinarily exceed one-third of pension originally sanctioned, including any amount of pension to be withheld, regard should be had to the consideration whether the amount of the pension left to the pensioner in any case would be adequate for his maintenance.
(c) xxx xxx xxx (2) xxx xxx xxx".
Learned counsel has also drawn my attention to Clause (c) to sub-rule (1) and sub rule (2) of Rule 914 of the Rules which read as under:-  "914.
Provisional pension where departmental or judicial proceedings may be pending :- (1) (a) xxx xxx xxx (b) xxx xxx xxx (c) No gratuity shall be paid to the Government employee until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final order thereon : Provided that where departmental proceedings have been instituted under rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, for imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of rule 5 of the said rules, the payment of gratuity shall be authorised to be paid to the Government employee.
Payment of provisional pension made under sub-rule (1) shall be adjusted against final retirement benefits sanctioned to such Government employee upon conclusion of such proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period."
The argument is that the right would ensue to the Government to withhold the retiral benefits only if the departmental or judicial proceedings are pending on the retiree on the date of retirement.
Admittedly, no proceedings were pending on the date of retirement of the petitioner.
In support of his argument, the learned counsel relied upon the dicta of this Court expressed in LR Dhawan v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) Service Cases Today 11.
4.
So far as initiation of judicial proceedings is concerned, the same is entertained under clause (3) supra and presently period of four years having expired long back, no judicial proceedings could be initiated in pursuant to the said FIR against the petitioner for the purpose of withholding the retiral benefits.
In support of his arguments, my attention was drawn to Walaiti Ram Gupta v. Punjab State, 1977(4) SCT 230 and KC Duggal, Sub Divisional Engineer v. The State of Punjab, 1989(2) RSJ 513.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the pensionary benefits which are admittedly due and payable to the petitioner had been withheld by the respondents without any justification and, therefore, the Government is liable to pay interest at the rate of 18%.
In support of his argument, learned counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in RS Randhawa v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) RSJ 318 and Vijay L Malhotra v. State of UP and others, JT 2000(5) SC 171 : 2000(4) SCT 267 (SC).
6.
Learned counsel appearing for and on behalf of the State has not been able to rebut the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner and has candidly admitted that in fact no judicial proceedings were pending at the time of retirement and even now the challan is yet to be put in Court.
So far as departmental proceedings are concerned, they in fact had not been initiated against the petitioner.
Thus, the learned counsel had not been able to substantiate his argument except that reference has been made to rule 111 of the Rules which reads as under :-  "111.
(a) xxx xxx xxx xxx xx xxx xxx xxx xxx Provided also that a Government employee against whom judicial or a departmental proceeding has been instituted or continued under rule 22(b) ibid, shall not be permitted to commute any part of his pension during the pendency of such proceeding.
(b) xxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx Note 1 :- The commutation of an anticipatory pension will require the sanction of the Finance Department.
(See also sub-note below Rule 11.4 below).
An explanation of the reasons of delay in the sanction of the final pension should be furnished to the Finance Department, alongwith the report on the title to the commutation applied for.
In order to secure repayment of the commuted value of the part of an anticipatory pension paid in declaration in the form below should be obtained from the pensioner concerned along with the application for commutation."
7.
I am of the view that the respondents did not have any authority in withholding the amount due and payable as leave encashment, DCRG and the commutation of the pension because no judicial proceedings or departmental proceedings were pending against the petitioner at the time of retirement.
In fact no judicial proceedings have been initiated for the last four years from the date of incident and in fact as per the said rule, before passing final orders, the Public Service Commission is required to be consulted.
Admittedly, even the challan has not been put up in the court pursuant to the FIR till date.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this petition is allowed and the Government is directed to release the amount due against leave encashment, DCRG and consider the case of the petitioner for commutation of pension in accordance with Annexure P6 within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy from the petitioner whichever is earlier.
9.
So far as interest is concerned, I do not find that the amount under the said heads had been withheld wilfully by the Government.
In fact, the pension had been released along with other various payments payable under the separate heads, though as per the petitioner there is a delay in releasing the same but nothing has been stated as to when the papers had been furnished by the petitioner.
In the absence of the same, I am not inclined to grant any interest upon the amount.
No costs.
Petition allowed.