KJ Sengupta, J - This writ petition is directed against the order of dismissal passed by the Departmental Appellate Authority.
On earlier occasion the petitioner approached this court challenging the charge-sheet itself.
By the order dated 4th March, 1994 in the previous writ petition passed by Justice Dilip Kumar Basu no relief was granted to the writ petitioner excepting direction upon the respondents to complete the disciplinary proceeding expeditiously.
So the legality and validity of the charge-sheet is deemed to have been adjudicated against the petitioner by necessary implication.
Therefore, the aforesaid point is not open for adjudication.
2.
Mr. Banerjee while pressing this application contends that the domestic proceeding has been conducted by the Enquiry Officer in complete breach of the principles of natural justice as the documents sought to be relied upon by the writ petitioner were not supplied to him in spite of demand.
Therefore he contends that, in fact, the allegation of misappropriation has not been proved by cogent documentary evidence.
When the charges have not have proved by evidence the petitioner cannot be held to be guilty of the alleged misconduct by misappropriation of the Bank's fund.
He, therefore, submits that the departmental appellate authority while confirming the order of the punishing authority has done the same mistake without deciding the question of breach of the principles of natural justice.
He further submits that even no personal hearing was given to the writ petitioner while disposing of the appeal.
Mr. Banerjee further submits that the quantum of punishment has not been considered imposing extreme penalty in the matter.
As such the disciplinary proceeding as well as the report of the Enquiry Officer and the punishment order are liable to be set aside.
3.
Mr. Kundu while opposing this application submits that all the documents relied on by the Bank were supplied to the petitioner.
It is the duty of the delinquent to procure the documents upon which he wants to place reliance to substantiate his defence.
Moreover, there is no allegation of any prejudice being suffered by the petitioner due to non-supply of such documents to effectively participate in the domestic proceeding and defend his case.
The Enquiry Officer has considered all the evidence both oral testimony and documentary.
After considering all aspects and with reasons the Enquiry Officer has come to a fact finding that the petitioner is guilty of misappropriation of the fund.
He contends further that the factum of misappropriation is also established by the fact that the writ petitioner later on refunded a portion of the misappropriated amount and this charge of misappropriation of fund has not been denied in the reply to the show cause.
Apart from the aforesaid non-traversable of the said allegations of misconduct the Enquiry Officer in his own way independently has come to fact finding of the misappropriated amount.
Under such circumstances the writ court should not and cannot interfere with the fact finding of the Enquiry Officer playing a role of the appellate authority.
As such the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
Having heard the respective submissions of the learned counsel and having considered the materials it appears to me that the charges against the writ petitioner are of very grave in nature.
The charges of misappropriation of the Bank money and further refund of a portion of the misappropriated amount has not been denied.
5.
I have gone through the charges and also the reply to the charges and I have also gone through the report of the Enquiry Officer.
It appears to me that that the Enquiry Officer after considering in details, the evidence both documentary and oral has come to a fact finding and held the writ petitioner guilty of misappropriation.
I also find from the findings of the Enquiry Officer that the writ petitioner has not denied the refund of a portion of the misappropriated fund.
Such fact substantiates, in my view, the allegations of misappropriation.
Anyway my findings, however, will not be taken note of by the appellate authority and it would be open for the appellate authority to take note of everything.
For the reasons I propose to dispose of this application by the order which is passed later on.
6.
It is settled law that the writ court cannot sit as a court of appeal and as such cannot scrutinise the sufficiency and adequacy of the evidence.
It is not a case of without evidence.
It is a case backed by evidence and on the basis of evidence the Enquiry Officer has come to a fact finding.
7.
Non-supply of documents, however, was alleged at the initial stage that is to say before filing of the reply.
It is surprising that in spite of non- supply of the documents the writ petitioner could reply to the show cause and could defend his case.
In the written brief submitted by the writ petitioner, there is no whisper of suffering prejudice due to non-supply of the documents.
In the writ petition I do not find any suffering of prejudice due to non-supply of documents.
The allegations of breach of natural justice cannot be taken in all cases.
Such kind of allegation is to be considered by the court seriously when a particular person has established that he had suffered prejudice because of this breach of natural justice.
Accordingly, I cannot accept the argument of Mr. Banerjee that there is breach of natural justice due to non-supply of documents.
8.
I have examined the Appellate Authority's order.
I am of the view that the Appellate Authority has not considered the matter in great detail though various points were taken by the writ petitioner challenging the dismissal order imposed by the punishing authority.
In a case of this nature the petitioner should have been heard personally as the extreme punishment was sought to be imposed.
The Appellate Authority's order should have contained reasons dealing with the allegations made in the appeal by the writ petitioner.
Moreover, I find the Appellate Authority, however, has not decided the question of quantum of punishment either.
Under such circumstances, I set aside the order of the Appellate Authority and the appellate authority shall hear this appeal afresh after giving a personal hearing to the writ petitioner and the appellate authority would be at liberty to pass appropriate order in accordance with law as he thinks fit.
There will be no order as to costs.
9.
Mr. Banerjee upon instruction submits that his client is prepared to accept the residual retirement benefits without prejudice to the rights and contentions.
Mr. Kundu submits that in terms of the court's order the retirement benefit has been disbursed.
Mr. Banerjee's client, however, shall make a written representation giving particulars of the dues on account of different heads.
The Bank officials shall consider this representation and they shall disburse this amount, if the amount is due and justified under the law within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of such representation.
The appellate authority shall decide the question afresh within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Order accordingly.