SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - This writ petition is filed by the employer challenging the award of the Labour Court dated September 21.1.1999 (copy Annexure P-3) vide which respondent No. 1 was ordered to be reinstated in service, however, without back wages.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the Labour Court has erred in holding that respondent No. 1 has completed 240 days of his service.
He has also argued that respondent No. 1 is a backdoor entrant and therefore, is not entitled to the protection under the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
3.
So far as the question of working for 240 days is concerned, the Labour Court found that the muster roll qua the crucial period was not produced and except that period, the working days were admittedly 213 and considering the working days for the period for which the muster roll was not produced, the total number of working days came to be 274.
It has been observed by the Labour Court as under :-  "I have considered the rival contentions of the learned authorised representatives of the parties.
I find substance in the contention of the authorised representative of the workman.
It is evident from the statement of MW1, Shri Rajinder Saini, that neither the payment rolls for the crucial period, i.e., October and November, 1994 nor muster rolls have been produced on the record.
Admittedly, as per the statement of MW1, the working days of the workman from January, 1994 to September, 1994 are reckoned as 213 days excluding the period October, and November, 1994 which the workman has asserted and alleged to have worked and 61 days of these two months if counted, make the total working days of the workman to 274 days in a calender year."
4.
We do not find any infirmity in this finding.
The non-production of muster rolls further comes in the way of the petitioner as it was the best evidence in its possession which has not been produced and an adverse inference has rightly been drawn in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Gopal Krishnaji Ketkar v. Mohammed Haji Latif and others, A.I.R. 1968 SC 1413.
5.
Regarding the next argument that respondent No. 1 was a backdoor entrant, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on in the case of Brij Bhushan v Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat, 1998(3) SCT 17.
However, we do not find it necessary to go into the aspect of that case, the reason is that in the reply submitted before the Labour Court, the petitioner has not taken up this plea.
On the contrary, the plea taken is that respondent No. 1 was engaged for a specific work.
However, it has not been shown to us as to what for specific work, respondent No. 1 was appointed.
No other argument has been advanced.
In view of the above reasons, we do not find any merit in this writ petition.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.