SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - By this writ petition, the employer is challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 12101999, copy Annexure P/4, vide which respondent No. 1 workman has been reinstated with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The case of the workman is that she had worked upto 1391996 and after that her service were illegally terminated.
Case of the petitioners is that the workman herself left the job and that she had worked upto the year 1993 only.
3.
The Labour Court has observed that the petitioner has not produced the relevant record to substantiate its stand that the workman had only worked upto the year 1993.
The demand notice in this case, is given on 3121996.
In the claim statement, it is asserted by the workman that her services were terminated on 1391996.
It is pertinent to note that though this assertion has been made in the claim statement, yet it is not stated in the written statement before the Labour Court that the workman has worked only upto the year 1993.
4.
There was no reason to disbelieve the workman who had stated on oath that she had worked till 1391996 when her services were terminated.
The date of the demand notice also corroborate this statement of the witness.
5.
It was for the petitioners who were having best evidence to produce the same before the Labour Court.
The petitioners could have from the evidence, shown and substantiated the case that the respondent did not work upto 1996.
This is not done.
Adverse inference is rightly drawn against the petitioners in view of the principles laid down in the case of Gopal Kishnaji Ketkar v. Mohamed Haji Latif and others, AIR 1968 SC 1413.
6.
Moreover, when the petitioners were sure regarding the date till which the respondent workmen had served, no reason is forthcoming to show why the petitioners were shy to state the fact in the written statement before the Labour Court.
Pleas taken up in the writ petition cannot be taken as substitute for the pleadings before the Labour Court.
We therefore, do not find any reason to interfere in the award of the Labour Court.
This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.