Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By the above writ application the petitioner, Principal of Jogesh Chandra Choudhury Law College challenged charge-sheet dated 20th March, 2003 and also enquiry proceedings commenced pursuant thereto by the respondent No. 4 viz. the Enquiry Officer.
In the writ application originally the legality and validity of the charge-sheet was challenged and the propriety and impartiality of the Enquiry Officer appointed by the governing body had also been questioned.
As far as challenge to the charge- sheet is concerned it is stated that charge-sheet is invalid and illegal, and initiation of the disciplinary proceedings pursuant thereto is contrary to the provisions of the West Bengal College Teachers' (Security of Services) Act, 1975 and also the rules framed thereunder.
To specify the grounds as above it is stated that a teacher in a college can be departmentally proceeded against only by the governing body and not by the President alone.
It is alleged that the Enquiry Officer is absolutely biased against the petitioner and he has been influenced by the President of governing body.
While conducting disciplinary proceedings he has demonstrated his biased attitude in favour of the governing body and against the petitioner by not allowing the documents to be supplied and further not allowing the witnesses to be cross-examined.
2.
On 10th November, 2003 the above writ petition was moved and instead of granting stay of the disciplinary proceedings I allowed the proceedings to be continued by the same Enquiry Officer laying down the details and meticulous procedure to be adopted to eliminate the possibility of any procedural irregularity, arbitrariness or alleged biasedness.
The aforesaid order was passed without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
I gave direction for filing affidavits.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order the disciplinary proceedings was concluded and Enquiry Officer submitted report holding the petitioner guilty of alleged charges.
Subsequently, two applications were made by the petitioner being CAN No. 9535 of 2004 and CAN No. 9536 of 2004 respectively.
In view of completion of proceeding during the pendency of the writ petition on subsequent development an application for amendment of writ petition was made challenging the report of the Enquiry Officer and also the order of punishment of removal.
By my order dated 21st December, 2004 I allowed the said amendment of writ petition, since report of the Enquiry Officer and the order of removal are the culmination of the disciplinary proceedings in connection with charge-sheet sought to be impugned in the original writ petition.
By my later order, I stayed the operation of the impugned order of removal and gave direction for filing affidavits.
3.
Pursuant to the said order a comprehensive amended copy of the writ petition has been filed in which in addition to her earlier grounds, fresh grounds have been taken to challenge the report of the Enquiry Officer and the order of punishment.
4.
It is pertinent to mention that on earlier occasion the petitioner approached this Court challenging the report of the Enquiry Officer made earlier on the self-same charge.
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Pradipta Roy, (as His Lordship then was) by order dated 24th July, 2003 disposed of the writ petition with a direction which is as follows :  "(i) The Enquiry Officer will consider the petitioner's application for supply of documents to support his defence and pass necessary order within two weeks;  (ii) If the Enquiry Officer directs supply of any copy of the documents, same will be supplied within one week from the date of the order.
(iii) The writ petitioner will be permitted to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses and also to produce, and examine defence witness, if any".
5.
It was made clear by His Lordship that enquiry proceedings would continue from the stage of cross-examination of the prosecuting witnesses afresh in accordance with law.
6.
After the aforesaid order was passed the Enquiry Officer proceeded afresh and the present writ petition has been filed.
7.
Mr. Saktinath Mukherjee, Learned Senior Advocate, with Mr. L K Gupta, Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner submits that the charge-sheet has been issued by the President of the governing body of the college authority and he has no jurisdiction alone to issue such charge-sheet.
Under the provision of the aforesaid Act and Rules framed thereunder it is the governing body who can issue the charge-sheet alone.
He contends that if that law requires a particular thing is to be done in one manner it has to be done under that particular manner along, or not at all.
The meeting in which governing body decided to issue charge-sheet and place the petitioner under suspension was not convened in accordance with the provision of Section 99 (d) of the Calcutta University First State, 1979.
Under this provision the Secretary along was to convene the meeting, but this was not followed in this case.
Mr. Mukherjee has drawn my attention to the definition of the "governing body" given in the West Bengal College Teachers' (Security of Services) Act, 1975 and also the definition given for the "disciplinary authority".
It is provided that the disciplinary authority means the "governing body" which has been defined in the Act for college as the Managing Committee or any other body charged with management.
8.
He contends that as far as charge No. 1 is concerned the same on the fact mentioned therein does not and cannot constitute any misconduct.
Charge of misappropriation is not supported by any statement of imputation.
Mere word "misappropriation" does not clearly spell out misconduct so as to initiate disciplinary proceeding.
In this connection he has relied on two decisions of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1988 SC 434 : (1988 Lab IC 948) : (1992) 4 SCC 54 (1992 Lab IC 2391).
The vague allegation of non-payment of salary is not proved at all rather it is established by the documentary evidence that there has been no misappropriation of any amount on account of salary.
It is further proved by the document that there has been proper disbursement of the fund received by the Government on account of salary as Government would not have released grant for the subsequent period.
Such release in the subsequent periods negate so-called charges sought to be levelled.
Moreover, there has been no complaint either in writing or otherwise about non-receipt of arrears of salary.
So far as the charge No. 2 regarding alleged utterance of abusive words is concerned, the same is based on the undated letter.
The three staff members denied the allegations during the preliminary enquiry.
The three staff members were not produced as witnesses.
The Enquiry Officer, in fact, without considering the legal evidence has come to a fact finding on the second charge.
By this act and conduct the Enquiry Officer has exposed himself to be a biased person.
In this context he has referred to the following Supreme Court decisions and also English decisions viz. AIR 1976 SC 2140, (1985) 3 SCC 378: (1985 Lab IC 1219).
(1988) 1 SCC 626 : (AIR 1988 SC 719), (1979) 1 All ER 209, (1992) 1 All ER 646.
He further contends that so far as charge No. 3 relating the operation of bank account of college without obtaining the signature of President is concerned the same does not constitute any misconduct as the petitioner acted on the basis of governing body resolution dated 25th October, 2000 and pursuant to Section 99 (d) of the Calcutta University First Statute, 1979.
The said resolution dated 25th February, 2000 was confirmed by the subsequent resolution of the governing body on 21st March, 2000.
After the resolution is confirmed the same cannot be criticized or questioned without due process of cancellations of earlier resolution.
He has relied on a text book of Shackleton at pages 83 and 85.
The charge No. 4 regarding the construction/renovation works has nothing to do with the petitioner and the same have been done by the owner of the premises viz. Chowdhury Foundation Trust who has engaged their own contractor for this purpose, as such these charges on the face of it are contrary to the records.
The charge No. 5 relating to non-disclosure of accounts relating to construction and renovation works in connection with the charge No. 4 is merely connecting charges to charge No. 4.
If charge No. 4 does not have any leg to stand, charge No. 5 automatically falls.
The allegations of insubordination as levelled in charge No. 6 is concerned the same do not constitute charge.
The petitioner merely applied for prior approval of Government which is required for the purpose of opening LLM course in college and this cannot be charged at all.
It is merely a preliminary step taken by the petitioner.
Question of insubordination in these circumstances is absolutely misplaced.
It is alleged in charge No. 7 that the petitioner failed to produce appropriate explanation from the auditor in respect of the audit report for the year ending 31st March, 1997.
This charge is contrary to the records.
On the other hand it would reveal from the record that audit report for the year ending 31st March, 1997 was placed in the governing body meeting held on 21st March, 2000.
It is also on the record of disciplinary proceeding that petitioner had written a letter on 4th February, 2000 to Sri Jashodeb Choudhury, the then Secretary of the governing body requesting to advise the auditor relating to accounts for the year ending 31st March, 1997.
9.
The plea of alternative remedy raised by the respondent is not sustainable as the petitioner has raised question of jurisdiction and also violation of principle of natural justice.
When such pleas are raised the Writ Court is the only Court to examine this aspect in exercise of power of judicial review, in this connection he has placed reliance on the following Supreme Court decisions viz. (1) AIR 1987 SC 2186 (ii) AIR 1961 SC 1506, (iii) (1998) 8 SCC 1 : (AIR 1999 SC 22).
10.
Under those circumstances he submits that the charge-sheet and report of the disciplinary proceedings and order of punishment should be quashed.
11.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharay, Learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondents, submits that the plea of illegality and validity of the charge-sheet is no longer open for decision as this plea is hit by the principle of res judicata and/or constructive res judicata.
On earlier occasion before this Court the petitioner raised the identical Point before the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Pradipta Roy.
This charge-sheet was questioned, but His Lordship did not entertain as such plea as such the petitioner is estopped from taking such point.
Moreover, in this writ petition such plea has been taken but at the ad interim stage this Court was not inclined to accept such plea, on the other hand this Court allowed the disciplinary proceedings to continue.
It is now settled in the writ proceedings also.
He has referred to a decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2005) 1 SCC 444 : (AIR 2005 SC 446).
He submits further that it is an admitted position that the petitioner has been given complete chance of hearing.
The disciplinary proceeding has been conducted as per the norms laid down by this Court.
The petitioner cross-examined the witness produced by the college authority and he also produced his own witness.
After analysis and appreciation of the evidence produced before the Enquiry Officer the petitioner was found guilty of the alleged charges.
This Court in exercise of the power of judicial review cannot reappreciate or reanalyze the evidence to substitute its decision with that of the Enquiry Officer nor this Court can take the role of appellate authority.
When there has been evidence in the disciplinary proceedings, sufficiency or insufficiency thereof cannot be examined by the Writ Court.
The Writ Court can intervene only in cases where there has been no evidence or the report is based on such evidence that is not sustainable under the law.
In support of his contention he has referred to the following decisions of the Supreme Court viz. (1998)2 SCC 394, (1999) 1 SCC 759: (1999 Lab IC 918), (1999) 2 SCC 10: (1999 Lab IC 437), (1999) 5 SCC 762: (1999 Lab IC 2819).
He further contends that the petitioner never raised any plea about procedural irregularity before the Enquiry Officer and having not raised such grievance he is estopped from raising such plea in this Court.
He has relied on a Supreme Court decision in this context viz. reported in (1996) 2 SCC 12 : (1996 Lab IC 993).
He concludes that no interference is called for in this matter and the writ petition should be dismissed.
12.
I have heard the respective learned Counsels and I have gone through carefully the material placed before me.
Mr. Bhattacharya has rightly reminded me of the writ Court's power to interfere with the matter of this nature.
The position is well settled about the extent up to which the writ Court can go to examine the legality and validity of the disciplinary proceedings and order passed by the administrative authority.
Nonetheless I feel it proper to record the Supreme Court decisions cited by Mr. Bhattacharya.
13.
The High Court in exercise of power of judicial review cannot reappreciate the evidence nor can come to its own conclusion to substitute the findings of the departmental authorities.
In case of Commissioner and Secretary of the Government v. C Shanmugam, reported in (1998) 2 SCC 394, in paragraph 7 it is observed as follows :  "In the light of the settled view of this Court as expressed above, we are of the view that Tribunal was not right in reappreciating the evidence and coming to a conclusion that in the absence of independent evidence the enquiry report cannot be accepted without appreciating the place of incident and the circumstances.
Moreover, it is not the finding that there was no evidence to sustain the impugned order".
14.
In the case of Apparel Export Promotion Council v. A K Chopra, reported in (1999) 1 SCC 759 in paragraph 16 it is observed by the Apex Court as follows :  "The High Court appears to have overlooked the settled position that in departmental proceedings, the disciplinary authority is the sole judge of facts and in case an appeal is presented to the appellate authority, the appellate authority has also the power/and jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence and come to its own conclusion, on facts, being the sold fact-finding authorities.
Once findings of fact, based on appreciation of evidence are recorded, the High Court in writ jurisdiction may not normally interfere with those factul findings unless it finds that the recorded findings were based either on no evidence or that the findings were wholly perverse and/or legally untenable.
The adequacy or inadequacy of the evidence is not permitted to be canvassed before the High Court.
Since the High Court does not sit as an appellate authority over the factual findings recorded during departmental proceedings, whole exercise of the power of judicial review, the High Court cannot normally speaking, substitute its own conclusion with regard to the guilt of the delinquent, for that of the departmental authorities.
Even so far as imposition of penalty or punishment is concerned, unless the punishment or penalty imposed by the disciplinary or the departmental appellate authority, is such that it shocks the conscience of the High Court, it should not normally substitute its own opinion and impose some other punishment or penalty.
Both the learned single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court, it appears, ignored the well-settled principle that even though judicial review of administrative action must remain flexible and its dimension not closed, yet the Court, in exercise of the power of judicial review, is not concerned with the correctness of the finding that are reasonably supported by evidence and have been arrived at through proceedings which cannot be faulted with for procedural illegalities or irregularities which vitiate the process by which the decision was arrived at.
Judicial review, it must be remembered, is directed not against the decision, but is confined to the examination of the decision-making process.
Lord Lailsham in Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans, (1982(3) All ER 141) observed :  "The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment, and not to ensure that the authority, after according fair treatment, reaches, on matter which it is authorized or enjoined by law to decide for itself, a conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the Court'."
15.
Again in paragraph 17 of the same judgment it is stated as follows :  "Judicial review, not being an appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which the decision was arrived at the Court, while exercising the power of judicial review, must remain conscious of the fact that if the decision has been arrived at by the administrative authority after following the principles established by law and the rules of natural justice and the individual has received a fair treatment to meet the case against him, the Court cannot substitute its judgment for that of the administrative authority on a matter which fell squarely within the sphere of jurisdiction of that authority".
16.
Supreme Court in case of Bank of India v. Degala Suryanarayana, reported in (1999) 5 SCC 762 in paragraph 11 it is observed as follows :  "Strict rules of evidence are not applicable to departmental enquiry proceedings.
The only requirement of law is that the allegation against delinquent officer must be established by such evidence acting upon which a reasonable person acting reasonably and with objectivity may arrive at a finding upholding the gravamen of the charge against the delinquent officer.
Mere conjecture or surmises cannot sustain the finding of guilt even in departmental enquiry proceedings.
The Court exercising the jurisdiction of judicial review would not interfere with the findings of fact arrived at in the departmental enquiry proceedings excepting in case of Amicus curiae or perversity i.e. however there is no evidence to support a finding or where a finding is such that no man acting reasonably and with objectivity could have arrived at the finding.
The Court cannot embark upon re-appreciating the evidence or weighing the same like an appellate authority.
So long as there is some evidence to support the conclusion arrived at by the departmental authority, the same has to be sustained."
17.
This case has now to be examined within the paramates laid down by the Apex Court as above.
Mr. Saktinath Mukherjee has said that the charge-sheet is nonest in the eye of law as the President has no jurisdiction to issue such charge-sheet rather under the relevant rules it is the Governing Body who is to charge the petitioner.
The governing body is also defined in the Calcutta University Statute, which is the relevant, and appropriate law for the purpose.
18.
Mr. Bhattacharya contends that this point is hit by the principle of res judicata, as on earlier occasion this point was adjudged by the writ Court ignoring this plea.
On the contrary the Court allowed the disciplinary proceedings to continue.
This will be clear from the order of Justice Pradipta Roy (as His Lordship then was).
Mr. Bhattacharya has placed a Supreme Court decision in support of his plea that principle of res judicata is applicable in case of writ proceedings as well.
I have seen his citation and undoubtedly this citation (2005) 1 SCC 444 (UP Road Transport Corporation v. State of UP) has force of law.
The principle of res judicata is adopted from the principle of Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure and this has been applied to see that the Court may not be vexed twice over the same controversy, whether controversy is on fact or law, do not make any difference with regard to applicability of this principle.
In order to apply the principle of res judicata first precondition is this that there must be an issue raised and the Court has addressed and decided the issue or, party could have raised the issue but omitted to do so and in such a case it is called constructive res judicata.
19.
It will appear from the plain reading of the order of Justice Roy that at no point of time any issue was raised nor did His Lordship decide such issue.
It is, therefore, in my view in this context legality and validity of the charge-sheet can be examined.
Thus plea of res judicata is not acceptable.
20.
From the relevant provision of the law it appears to me that the decision of issuance of charge-sheet has to be taken and the same has to be issued by the Governing Body of the College.
This charge-sheet has been replied by the petitioner and subsequently this charge-sheet has been accepted and/or ratified by necessary implication by other members of the governing Body.
It is not the question of inherent lack of authority of the President.
He is one of the members of the Governing Body and had there been any objection of other members they or any of them could have avoided this act of President.
As such by act and conduct of other members of the Governing Body the defect in the charge-sheet has been cured, I therefore, do not see any illegality and infirmity of the charge-sheet with regard to alleged incompetence in issuance.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner delinquent has been given full chance to defend himself.
This Court in all its anxiety ensured that he could get fair treatment and there could not be any procedural lapse as on earlier occasion this has happened and Justice Roy had to interfere with the same.
Both the sides produced their witnesses and placed their documents and then disciplinary proceedings was concluded.
21.
I think it is necessary to set out the charges for which all this exercise was undertaken :  "Articles of Charges:  1.
It appears from records that you have drawn the following amounts mentioned against the persons respectively from West Bengal Government as Gross Salary which includes arrear salary of the respective teacher, whereas, in declaration Form No. 16 before he Income-tax authority you have certified an amount shown below, as Gross Salary for the year 2001-2002 for the persons concerned.
Name of the Teacher Gross Salary received from Government including arrear Salary for the year 2001-2002 Amount certified as Gross Salary in Form 16 for income for the year 2001-2002 (a) Nilansu Bhattacharya Rs.208,240.00 Rs.1,57,696.00 (b) Soma Chakraborty Rs.208,240.00 Rs.1,57,696.00 The Gross salary received from the Government and certified in Form 16 for the teachers shows large discrepancy.
Thus you are charged of misappropriation of Government fund.
2.
You have abused Smt. Sunanda Goenka, a full time teacher with utterances "Tomai Chabke Chamra Chhariye Debo" in presence of other teachers and your threatening remarks towards Sri Nilansu Bhattacharya, a full time teacher `Apni Shesh hoye jaben, apnar porlbar shesh hoye jabe' and `Soonoon ami hijre noi je anyer darjay giye dhol, bajabo' are not expected from a normal civilized person.
Your actions are, therefore, unbecoming of a Principal of a college.
3.
You have operated the Bank Account of the College with UCO Bank, Prince Anwar Shah Road branch without obtaining the signature of the President on Bank cheques, although the Governing Body resolved at its meeting held on 25-2-2000 that the Bank account will normally be operated jointly by the Secretary and the President of the Governing Body.
4.
You have constructed a 2 storeyed structure within the college premises without obtaining sanction from the Kolkata Municipal Corporation and without the approval of the Governing Body.
Such is unbecoming of a Principal and is insubordination as well.
5.
In spite of repeated verbal request, you have failed to disclose the accounts relating to the construction of the above structure in the college premises.
Such failure amounts to misappropriation of fund.
6.
You have applied to the Government/Calcutta University for the introduction of LLM course in our college with self-finance beyond the knowledge of the Governing Body.
Your action amounts to insubordination.
7.
You have failed to produce appropriate explanation from the auditor and place it before the Governing Body, though the Governing Body asked you to do so at its meeting held on 21-3-2000 in respect of audit report for the year ending 31-3-1997.
Your action amounts to disregard and violation of the order of the Governing Body."
22.
The aforesaid charges have been denied by the delinquent Principal and he has also explained as to disbursement of the salary to the respective teachers and furnishing of the certificate in Form 16.
He has also explained the other charges.
The enquiry officer after analysis and appreciation of evidence of his own has found the petitioner guilty for each and every charges.
Mr. Mukherjee has said that first charge even in its face value under no circumstances constitute any misconduct of committing misappropriations of fund.
Mr. Bhattacharya on the other hand submits that it is true the language of the first charges does not constitute misconduct but from the analysis of evidence and findings of the enquiry officer misappropriation of Government fund is established.
23.
Mr. Bhattacharya submits that misappropriation in the sense that two teachers have not been paid their arrears of salary though they were asked to sign on the acquittance roll and this is serious allegation and the petitioner by not paying their actual dues has committed misappropriation of fund and this has been established in the evidence of the two teachers.
24.
I have examined the findings of the enquiry officer with regard to charge No. 1.
He has found that the petitioner having shown lesser amount in the certificate issued in Form 16 for deduction of Income Tax and further not paying the amount of arrears of salary of the aforesaid two teachers has misappropriated the funds.
I am unable to accept the submission of Mr. Bhattacharya that charge of misappropriation of fund is not required to be stated specifically with particulars and this can be established by the evidence.
Mr. Mukherjee is right in saying that reading apparently the said charge do not find any misconduct has been committed by the Principal.
At the highest the Principal has issued a certificate in Form 16 as a disbursing officer mentioning lesser amount and this in my view may be or may not be his mistake at the highest, consequences of this mistake under the law has to be faced by him.
Under the provision of the Income Tax Act if lesser amount is deducted from the income under the heading salary then this has to be paid by him as deemed assessee and he has to face penal consequence.
None has alleged that Income Tax Department has taken any action for alleged showing of lesser amount in Form 16 and he cannot be described to be deemed assessee.
The Enquiry Officer has found completely on the basis of surmises that the arrears were not paid to the aforesaid two teachers as there has been no documentary evidence nor any complaint by these two teachers.
On the other hand in the acquittance roll these two teachers have signed to have received payment.
Moreover, in the charge-sheet there is no whisper regarding non-payment of the arrears of the salaries to the aforesaid two teachers.
It is not understood as to how the enquiry officer can proceed with the charges, which are not told to the petitioner.
It is submitted by Mr. Mukherjee that surprisingly neither the enquiry officer nor even the disciplinary authority has considered the statement of defence or the evidence adduced by the petitioner.
Therefore, both the authorities have not acted fairly rather acted in gross breach of the principle of natural justice.
25.
It appears from the second show cause notice that the governing body being disciplinary authority has not only agreed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer but has recorded their own findings even without giving a chance of hearing to the petitioner before such findings were arrived at.
The petitioner replied to the second show cause notice and detailed his statement of defence pointing out the defect, illegality in the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
Disciplinary authority unfortunately did not consider this defence nor recorded reason as to why his statement of defence is not acceptable.
The Governing Body as well as enquiry officer have proceeded basing oil charge and evidence of the College authority alone as being sacrosanct, and did not think it fit even to apply their mind with the relevancy and acceptability of the petitioner's version.
From this act and conduct of the governing Body it is clear that they have acted in a biased and prejudged mind.
In a decision rendered in case of Anil Kumar v. Presiding Officer, reported in (1985) 3 SCC 378, the Supreme Court while dealing with this kind of problem in paragraphs 5 and 6 has observed as follows :  ".....It is well-settled that a disciplinary enquiry has to be a quasi-judicial enquiry held according to the principles of natural justice and the Enquiry Officer has a duty to act judicially.
The Enquiry Officer did not apply his mind to the evidence.
Save setting out the names of the witnesses, he did not discuss the evidence.
He merely recorded his ipse dixit that the charges are proved.
He did not assign a single reason why the evidence produced by the appellant did not appeal to him or was considered not credit worthy.
He did not permit a peep into his mind as why the evidence produced by the management appealed to him in preference to the evidence produced by the appellant..........."  Then paragraph 6 is as follows :  "Where a disciplinary enquiry affects the livelihood and is likely to cast a stigma and it has to be held in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The minimum expectation is that the report must be a reasoned one.
The Court then may not enter into the adequacy or sufficiency of evidence.
But where the evidence is annexed to an order sheet and no correlation is established between the two showing application of mind, we are constrained to observe that it is not an enquiry report at all.
Therefore, there was no enquiry in this case worth the name and the order of termination based on such proceeding disclosing non-application of mind would be unsustainable".
26.
I respectfully following above principle of law, hold that the findings by this charge No. 1 is concluded in breach of principles of natural justice.
27.
As far as the charge No. 2 is concerned I find these charges have been proved and it cannot be said with the findings of the Enquiry Officer is without any evidence.
I have gone through the deposition of witnesses of both the sides on this issue and I find evidences given by both the sides in their own way.
But there is evidence of some witnesses, which prove that the petitioner has uttered the words mentioned in the charge sheet.
It is for the Enquiry Officer whom he believed or disbelieves, the writ Court cannot discard the observation and state of mind of the Enquiry Officer, because he has seen the demeanour and the style of giving evidence.
Now, the question is whether the words uttered by the petitioner as mentioned in the charge-sheet constitute any misconduct or not.
There has been no defined norms or standard in the service code, which will constitute misconduct.
The charges are not misbehaviour but utterances of the words which are not expected of a Principal.
It is quite possible in the working field during exchange of words the language may be somewhat distasteful but by the words themselves he cannot be said to have meted out misbehaviour or committed misconduct.
It is not the charge that the petitioner is in habit of using these types of words, it may be mere accident or casual slip of tongue.
If the words uttered by him are understood in a plain meaning the same at the highest can be termed a threat to his colleague.
Such threat of a Principal is not commensurate to his position and status.
His mannerism and way of talking would be a model to everybody in the institution itself.
But I do not think for this reason he should be punished with the removal from service.
At the highest he should be warned or asked to write a letter of regret.
This incident could have been mitigated by the Governing Body.
Governing Body has come to the extreme level in order to get rid of the Principal for the reasons best known to them.
28.
So far as the charge No. 3 relating to operation of bank account of the college without obtaining signature of the President to Governing Body is concerned "it appears to me that neither the Enquiry Officer nor the disciplinary authority has considered the explanation of the petitioner, they have not taken into consideration of the documents submitted by the petitioner and also the relevant provision of law viz.
Section 99 (d) of the Calcutta University First Statute, 1979.
From this it will appear that the petitioner has not done anything wrong.
It is noteworthy that the charge was for one misconduct while Enquiry Officer has reported of misconduct of different kind viz. allegations of tampering of resolution dated 25th February, 2000.
The delinquent employee is not expected to explain what he was not charged with.
So, these findings of the Enquiry Officer are without jurisdiction and void.
29.
As far as charge Nos. 4 and 5 are concerned, the same do not constitute any misconduct at all.
Firstly, the petitioner cannot be charged with making illegal construction because the college is not the owner of the building or property in question.
Whether the building has been constructed unauthorised by any person has to be enquired into by the Municipal body.
There is absolutely no proof of fact that the petitioner undertook any construction work.
On the contrary, the petitioner has explained and stated who had undertaken the construction work.
This factual aspect was not considered nor discussed even by the Enquiry Officer or by the disciplinary authority.
The writ Court cannot examine which version is correct but certainly it has jurisdiction to examine why the Enquiry Officer or the disciplinary authority has not considered the version of the petitioner.
On this ground, all the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the disciplinary authority are not sustainable.
30.
The charge No. 6 concerns insubordination on the plea that the petitioner had applied to the Government/University for introduction of LLM course in the college without knowledge of the Governing Body.
This in my view does not constitute any misconduct in absence of any defined code of conduct.
The Principal being the Secretary of the Governing Body is always expected to look after the interest of the institution.
Upgradation of the standard of an educational institution is one of such step for improvement.
The petitioner applied for introduction of LLM course for the betterment of the institution.
It is not understood how this step of the Principal can be termed to be misconduct or an act of insubordination.
In the Governing Body President, Secretary and other members are at par.
The step taken by any of the members or the Secretary or the President without concurrence of other members may not be accepted or approved, but step taken without their knowledge and consent cannot be termed to be misconduct nor an act or insubordination.
31.
Both the Enquiry Officer and the disciplinary authority have totally misdirected themselves and their mental faculty with respect, to this extent is not that of an ordinary man of prudence, not to speak of the arbiter of quasi-judicial proceedings.
32.
The charge No. 7 is wholly unfounded to constitute any misconduct as it appears from the record that the petitioner did his best to obtain an explanation from the auditor for the year ending 31st March, 1997.
If the auditor did not supply the explanation the petitioner cannot do anything more than making a request and that he has done.
33.
From the discussion as above it is absolutely clear that findings and decisions of both the authorities are not sustainable under law.
The punishment, in my view, is disproportionate to the alleged misconduct of charge No. 2.
The order of punishment is, thus, set aside and the Governing Body is directed to reinstate the petitioner with all back wages.
Thus, the writ petition is allowed with costs assessed at Rs. 5000/- to be paid to the petitioner.
He shall be reinstated in service forthwith.
Petition allowed.