JS Narang, J - Petitioners Nos 1 and 2 were enrolled as Constables on 25.8.82 and 12.1.84 respectively in district Jind.
In April, 1991 B-1 test was held and from amongst the candidates who had appeared in the test, 24 candidates were declared successful and in the merit list petitioner No. 1 was placed at serial No. 22 and petitioner No. 2 was placed at serial No. 23.
2.
The respondents had originally identified 20 seats for the said posts but later on all the candidates on the merit list had been cleared to be sent for the said course.
But before any such order was passed the petitioners were dismissed from service on 2.10.91 and 3.10.91 respectively.
3.
The petitioners challenged the order of termination by way of filing CWP No. 2843 of 92.
The said petition was dismissed.
The said judgment was challenged by the petitioners by way of filing LPA No. 182 of 95.
The LPA filed by the petitioners was disposed of in terms of LPA No. 918 of 96 as agreed between the learned counsel for the parties before the Hon'ble Division Bench.
The order passed by the LPA Bench reads as under :-  "The civil miscellaneous application is allowed.
Delay caused in re-filing the letters patent appeal is condoned.
Issues raised in this letters patent appeal are identical to those in LPA No. 1996.
We have heard learned counsel.
According to him this appeal can be disposed of in the manner this Court disposed of LPA No. 918 of 96.
Accordingly, this appeal is disposed of in terms of the judgment in LPA No. 918 of 96.
Copy of the judgment in LPA No. 918 of 96 will form part of this judgment No costs.
Since the order of dismissal which was passed against the petitioners had been set aside by this Court and the petitioners were reinstated with continuity of service and 50% back wages; it is obvious that the petitioners became entitled to other consequential benefits which were available to them at that time.
One of the benefits which became available was that they had been declared successful for undergoing lower school course by virtue of the test which was held earlier in which they were placed in the merit list at serial Nos. 22 and 23 respectively.
It is averred by the petitioners that they have not been deputed for the course as yet despite the fact that they had been declared successful in the test which had been held earlier and the order of dismissal having been set aside by this Court.
The petitioners had represented to the respondents that they be deputed to the lower school course and after they successfully complete the course they should be given the seniority immediately above the junior persons who had been sent for the course at that time.
The petitioners did not receive any reply from the respondents as no order was passed on the said representation/s.
Aggrieved by this the petitioners filed this writ petition.
4.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioners remained out of service at the relevant time when the petitioners were declared successful in the said test and such other successful candidates had been sent for the lower school course, now it is too late in the day to send the petitioners for the said course on the basis of the said list.
I am afraid this submission of the learned counsel for the respondents cannot be accepted.
The petitioners have been reinstated with continuity of service with only reservation on that they shall be paid 50% back wages meaning thereby that they shall be entitled to all the consequential reliefs accruing therefrom.
In this view of the matter I find substance in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners and I allow this petition and direct the respondents that the petitioners be deputed for the lower school course which is to commence henceforth and if the petitioners successfully complete the course they shall be given the seniority immediately above the junior persons who had been deputed for the lower school course in pursuant to the test which was held in the year 1991.
This petition is allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.