GS Singhvi, J - The only point sought to be raised in this appeal filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent is that while accepting Civil Writ Petition No. 4647 of 1986 filed by the appellant against the termination of his service, learned Single Judge could not give liberty to the District and Sessions Judge, Jind (respondent No. 2) to pass appropriate order against him after holding a regular enquiry in accordnace with law.
2.
We have heard Shri Mahesh Grover, learned counsel for the appellant and carefully perused the record.
3.
Annexure P2 enclosed with the writ petition is the order dated 17.12.1985 passed by respondent No. 2 terminating the services of the appellant on the ground that the same are no longer required, Annexure P5 is the order passed by one of the Judges of this Court on administrative side.
By that, the learned Judge rejected the appeal filed by the appellant.
4.
It appears from the pleading of the parties that the respondents had defended the orders Annexures P2 and P5 and justified the termination of the services of the appellants by contending that he had indulged in acts of indiscipline.
The learned Single Judge, after considering the respective submissions, held that the termination of the services of the appellant brought about by an innocuous order was, in fact, stigmatic.
He quashed the same on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice and Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India with liberty to respondent No. 2 to pass appropriate order against the appellant after holding a regular enquiry in accordance with law.
5.
Shri Mahesh Gover, learned counsel for the appellant could not put forward any tangible argument to convince us that the order under challenge suffers from any legal error.
We are rather amazed that against such an innocuous order, the appellant invoked the appellate jurisdiction of this Court.
However, we refrain from making any comment about the justification of entertaining such an appeal which is nothing but an unnecessary burden on the already over-burdened Court.
In our opinion, the appeal is misconceived and it deserves to be dismissed as such.
Order accordingly.
Appeal dismissed.