RL Anand, J - Though the initial claimed relief by the petitioner Angrez Kaur was different, but her revised claim in the present writ petition is different.
Through this decision, it will be determined by this court whether the petitioner can claim the benefit of service w.e.f.
1141991 to 1791992 when she could not be absorbed in any of the departments of the Govt. up to 1791992 on which date she was absorbed in the Home Guards Deptt.
Ancillary to this, this court would determine whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief w.e.f.
131994 to 1131995 when she was again declared surplus from the Home Guards Deptt.
and was absorbed in the Homoeopathic Deptt of the State Govt.  2.
The original claim by the petitioner in the writ petition was for directions to the respondents to absorb and adjust her as Sr. Assistant in any of the departments of the State Govt. on the basis of the Punjab Govt. circular No. 7/1/1991-3Pb-3/7454 dated 1751991, Annexure P-17, and the petitioner further prayed that the junior-most from amongst respondents 7 and 8 be reverted to their original posts in the Cadre of the Sr Assistants and that directions be also given to the State to re-instate the petitioner into service in the office of respondent No. 4, i.e. Commandant General, Punjab Home Guards and Director, Civil Defence, Punjab, Chandigarh, with effect from the date the junior-most amongst respondents 7 and 8 were promoted as Sr. Assistant.
3.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  4.
The petitioner was duly selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, vide letter dated 1211977 for the post of Typist, on passing the typing test in English/Punjabi and the Board recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Typist in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh.
About 20000 applicants appeared in the examination.
The merit of the petitioner was at No. 55.
The President, Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, issued an appointment letter dated 511977 to the petitioner.
The petitioner joined the post of Typist on 1121977 and continued working as Typist to the entire satisfaction of the superiors.
The petitioner was promoted to the post of Sr.
Clerk on 1.3.1979.
She was further promoted as Sr. Assistant on 19111987 and, thereafter, she passed the Assistant Grade Examination conducted by the Punjab Govt.
The petitioner continued to work as Sr. Assistant in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal when on 1141991, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 12(1) of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal was dissolved with immediate effect.
On the dissolution of the Tribunal, the petitioner along with others became surplus staff.
According to the petitioner, no termination order was passed against her.
Some of the staff in the Tribunal was on deputation and on the dissolution of the Tribunal, that staff was repatriated to the parent department.
The case of the petitioner along with three employees; namely, Prem Singh, Rama Kant and Smt. Sutantar Kaur was sent to the office of the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Punjab, and respondent No. 5, the Re-employment Cell.
The petitioner submitted a representation to the Chief Secretary praying that she may be adjusted on priority basis in some other Department or against some new posts sanctioned by the Punjab Govt. during the general elections in the year 1991.
Prem Singh, Rama Kant and Smt. Sutantar Kaur were adjusted and absorbed against the existing posts in the Deptt.
of Town Planning and Consolidation, Punjab, Chandigarh.
However, the petitioner remained unadjusted and without a job.
The petitioner was also considered in the office of Legal Remembrancer but could not be adjusted.
Later on, the Punjab Govt. re-constituted the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal vide notification dated 2421992.
The petitioner made a representation that with the revival of the Tribunal, she may be absorbed there but the Presiding Officer of the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal did not think proper to have the staff from the State Govt. as a result of which the petitioner could not be adjusted.
However, the petitioner kept on making the representations.
Later on, she made a representation to the Chief Secretary, Punjab, praying that she may be adjusted and absorbed in any other Department of the Punjab Govt.
It is only on 23.7.1992 that the petitioner got a letter from respondent No. 4 calling her for interview on 581992, for the post of Sr. Assistant.
This letter was issued in pursuance of the circular issued by respondent No. 5 for the absorption and adjustment of the petitioner.
Finally, the petitioner was duly selected for the post of Sr. Assistant vide office order dated 1091992 and she joined the duty in the office of Commandant General, Punjab Home Guards, on 1791992.
Thereafter, respondent No. 4 issued a Pay Protection Order whereunder the pay and allowances of the petitioner as Sr. Assistant in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200 was protected by giving her the benefit of past service.
Thereafter, vide order dated 25.1.1993, the petitioner was appointed as Sr. Assistant by giving her the benefits of service rendered by her in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal as Sr. Assistant.
According to the petitioner, once she had been duly appointed as Sr. Assistant vide order dated 25.1.1993, it was illegal on the part of respondent No. 4 to have subsequently promoted Parshotam Ram and Zora Singh on 9.2.1993 because they were juniors to her in the Cadre of Sr.
Assistants.
The petitioner submits that her appointment was purely against a temporary vacancy when she was absorbed in the office of respondent No. 4.
The petitioner submits that various clauses of Annexure P-10, vide which the appointment was offered to her in the office of respondent No. 4 stood superseded by a conscious decision taken in Annexure P-11 whereunder the petitioner was appointed as Sr. Assistant by giving the benefits of service rendered by her in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal.
Further, it is the case of the petitioner that her post as Sr. Assistant in the office of respondent No. 4 stood abolished for want of sanction on 2821994 and in that eventuality, she should have been adjusted immediately against a regular vacancy against which respondents 7 and 8 were illegally promoted.
The petitioner applied to respondent No. 4 for treating the period between 1341991 to 1641992 as terminal leave, when she was forced to remain out of job with the dissolution of the Tribunal under Rule 8138(A) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I Part I, and the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of past service.
The petitioner made a representation in this regard but no decision was taken.
Rather, respondent No. 4 terminated her service on 131994 on the ground that the Punjab Govt. has granted sanction to continue the post up to 2821994 and further there was no proposal to continue with this post.
5.
The facts further go and can be gathered from CM 2845 of 1995.
After the petitioner was relieved from the office of Home Guards, she was offered absorption on 231995 in the Homoeopathic Deptt.
of the Punjab Govt. at Chandigarh against the post of Sr. Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 1800- 3200.
The grouse of the petitioner is that certain unwarranted and illegal conditions have been imposed which are not acceptable to her when she has put in 17 years of regular service.
She is aggrieved by clauses 1, 2, 5 and 12 of the office order dated 131995, which clauses I shall deal in the later portion of this judgment.
The petitioner alleges that the respondents cannot be permitted to treat the absorption of the petitioner as a fresh appointment.
They are not permitted to ignore her past service towards the benefits in the matter of seniority/promotion/pension, etc. She could not be put on probation as has been done in the latter dated 231995 because she was a confirmed Sr. Assistant.
The clauses of this letter dated 231995 are offensive and should be deleted and quashed.
Thus, the controversy has been narrowed down in this petition as to whether the petitioner is entitled to be declared on terminal leave w.e.f.
1141991 to 1791992 and whether the clauses 2 and 12 of the order dated 231995 are illegal and should be quashed or not.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
There are two sets of written statements on the record.
One written statement was filed on behalf of respondent 2 and 4 and it was submitted that the petitioner was appointed as Sr. Assistant from the surplus staff against a purely temporary vacancy, which was likely to be abolished at any time through Departmental Selection Committee vide order dated 1091992.
The post was abolished w.e.f.
131994 and the services of the petitioner were terminated in accordance with the rules and instructions.
The petitioner was not a confirmed employee of respondent No. 4.
There was no provision in the rules of the Department that the post of Assistant is to be filled in by direct recruitment.
The case of the petitioner for re-employment was considered because the petitioner joined her service in the Election Department of Punjab and the case of surplus staff was considered by respondent No. 5.
It was also the stand of the respondents that the petitioner was adjusted in the Home Guards Deptt.
against the terms and conditions of her appointment letter.
The period from 1141991 to 1791992 could not be termed as terminal leave.
It was also maintained by the respondents that the clauses of the letter dated 321995 are legal and could not be quashed as prayed for.
7.
It may also be mentioned here that the petitioner has filed a separate writ petition No. 8694 of 1999 in which she has challenged that the rules of Ayurvedic Deptt.
could not be made applicable in her case as she is an employee of the Homoeopathic Deptt.
of the State Govt. which department is separate and was created by a separate notification and the rules applicable to the staff of Ayurvedic Deptt cannot be invoked for her disadvantage.
That writ petition, I have also decided by my separate decision of the even date.
8.
To continue with this order, the petitioner has placed on record various documents, the summary of relevant documents can be described in the following manner :-  9.
Annexure P-1 is the letter of appointment of the petitioner when she was recommended for appointment to the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal vide the letter issued by the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board, dated 1211977.
Annexure P-2 is a letter of appointment which was issued by the President, Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal on 511977.
Annexure P-3 is the notification dated 1141991 issued by the Punjab Govt., Department of Elections (Gurdwaras), vide which the President of India was pleased to direct the dissolution of the Tribunal with immediate effect, which was constituted vide Punjab Govt. notification dated 2321970.
Annexure P-4 is the representation made by Angrez Kaur and Prem Singh to the Chief Secretary, Punjab, vide which they requested for their adjustment being surplus staff.
Annexure P-7 is the other representation dated 31121991 vide which the petitioner prayed for the re-appointment in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal after it was reconstituted.
Annexure P-8 is the representation made to the President, Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal.
Annexure P-9 is the representation made by the petitioner to the Chief Minister, Punjab, through which the petitioner prayed for her absorption in any department of the State Govt. Annexure P-10 is the letter dated 1091992 issued from the office of the Commandant General, Punjab Home Guards and Director, Civil Defence, Punjab, in the name of the petitioner vide which she was offered appointment to the post of Assistant.
Clause-2 narrates that the appointment of the petitioner will be purely against a temporary vacancy, which was likely to be abolished at any time.
It was also made clear to the petitioner that her services could be removed without giving any notice though there was less possibility of so happening.
In para-5 of this letter, the Govt. also made it clear while sending the offer for that the appointment will be fresh and no benefit of service rendered by the petitioner in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal will be given in the office of the Home Guards.
The petitioner accepted these clauses and the offer of appointment.
Resultantly, vide Annexure P-11, she was appointed as Sr. Assistant.
The office of Home Guards also extended the benefits of service rendered by the petitioner in the Tribunal as Sr. Assistant and her pay was fixed at Rs. 1,920/- w.e.f.
1791992 in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
Annexure P-12 is the representation made by the petitioner dated 581993 wherein she prayed that the period of one year 5 months and 3 days may be considered as terminal leave under rule 8.138(A) of the Punjab Civil Services Vol.
I Part I. Annexure P-13 is the order dated 2821994 vide which the services of the petitioner were terminated w.e.f.
2821994 (AN) as the Punjab Govt. did not grant sanction to continue with the post and there was no proposal in future to continue with that post.
10.
On the contrary, respondents have placed on record Annexure R-1 vide which one post of Sr. Assistant was sanctioned in the office of Home Guards and it was also observed that this post will be filled up from the surplus staff according to the instructions of the Punjab Govt. Annexure R-2 is the order dated 2321994 issued by the State Govt. vide which the sanction was conveyed up to 2821994.
11.
The present writ petition was admitted by the Hon'ble D.B.
consisting of Hon'ble Ashok Bhan, J and Hon'ble Sat Pal, J on 14.3.1995 and it was observed as under -  "Admitted.
Petitioner has already been given a fresh appointment as Senior Assistant.
Petitioner is satisfied with the job offered to her but has prayed for striking down conditions No. 1, 2 and 12 of the fresh letter of appointment dated 231995 which has been attached with CM 28845 of 1995.
In the meantime, operation of conditions No. 1, 2 and 12 of the fresh appointment letter shall remain stayed during the pendency of the writ petition."
12.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
13.
I have already stated above that the controversy in the present case has been narrowed down between the parties.
The points for determination would be whether the petitioner can take the benefit for the period from 1141991 to 1791992 by treating this period as terminal leave and whether the clauses 1, 2 and 12 of the letter of appointment dated 231995 are oppressive and may be struck down or not.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that it was not the fault of the petitioner when she was put on the roadside by the Tribunal.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner competed and her merit was at No. 55 in the selection list, she was offered job in the Sikh Gurdwaras Tribunal but she was declared as surplus when the Tribunal was abolished.
Mr. Raina, counsel for the petitioner, submitted that the services of the petitioner were never terminated by any order issued by the State Govt. or the Tribunal.
Therefore, in the absence of any termination order, the petitioner will remain an employee of the State Govt. Mr. Raina elucidated that till the thread is broken, the petitioner will be deemed to be in service of the State Govt. She joined the Home Guards Deptt.
on 1791992 and worked up to 2821994.
The intervening period will be considered as terminal leave and, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the benefits of continuity of service, etc.  15.
The argument of the counsel for the petitioner is not acceptable to the court.
There is no question of terminal leave in this case.
The petitioner was offered employment in the Tribunal.
Annexure P-2 is the offer of appointment which spells out that the offer was purely against a temporary post and the services of the petitioner could be dispensed with at any time.
The petitioner accepted these conditions.
The Tribunal itself was abolished vide Annexure P- 3.
The deputation staff sent to the parent departments.
Since the offer of appointment to the petitioner was given by the Tribunal, therefore, with the abolition of the Tribunal, the relationship of master and servant, i.e. employer and employee, stood terminated automatically.
No formal letter of termination was required in the case of the petitioner.
The relationship did not revive even with the revival of the Tribunal.
As per the policy of the State Govt., the surplus staff of a department was required to be adjusted subject to suitability in the other departments.
When the petitioner was employed in the Home Guards Department, it was totally a fresh appointment.
The appointment of the petitioner was purely against a temporary vacancy which was likely to be abolished at any time.
It was made clear to the petitioner that her appointment was a fresh one and no benefit of service rendered by her in the Tribunal would be given to her in the Home Guards Deptt.
Still, the Home Guards Deptt.
extended the benefit of service rendered by the petitioner in the Tribunal and her pay was protected and her pay was fixed at Rs. 1920/- w.e.f.
1791992, the date when she joined the Home Guards Deptt.
Unfortunately for the petitioner, the sanction for this post was up to 2821994.
The State Govt. did not extend the sanction and there was also no such proposal in future.
In these circumstances, the petitioner does not get any right to claim any benefit for the period from 1141991 to 1791995.
It is not a case of terminal leave.
The services of the petitioner were not terminated.
Rather, the post was abolished with the abolition of the Tribunal.
There is patent distinction between abolition of the post and termination of service.
The petitioner was not re-instated in the Home Guards Deptt.
Rather, her appointment was fresh in all respects.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the first relief.
16.
With regard to the second relief, the case set up by the petitioner is that under the orders dated 231995, she started serving in the Homeopathic Deptt., which Deptt.
was the creation of the State Govt. by a separate notification and the Ayurvedic Department (Class II Ministerial Services) Rules, 1963, cannot be imposed upon the petitioner in that if there are no rules in the Homoeopathic Deptt., then the general rules will apply.
17.
On the contrary, the stand of the respondents is that the Ayurvedic Department (Class II Ministerial Services) Rules, 1963, have been made applicable to the staff of the Homoeopathic Deptt.
as well.
There is a common seniority and the posts are inter-changeable and, in these circumstances, the petitioner has no case.
18.
Let us see what are clauses of the order dated 231995.
This order says that the petitioner may be absorbed in the Homoepathy Deptt.
within three days from the date of issue of the letter in order to honour the undertaking given by the Additional Advocate General, Punjab, Shri KS Sidhu, in the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court, during the hearing of Writ Petition No. 6277 of 1994, and the petitioner was offered a fresh appointment on the post of Sr. Assistant in the Homoeopathic Deptt., clearly bringing to her notice that her appointment will be a fresh except that her pay will be protected as far as possible; the services rendered by the petitioner in the previous office will not be counted for any other purposes excepting mentioned above.
It was clearly spelt out that the services of the petitioner shall be governed by the Ayurvedic Department (Class II Ministerial Services) Rules, 1963.
As per clause 12, the petitioner will be considered on probation for a period of two years as the post against which she was posted was a temporary post and even on clearing the probation period, the petitioner will not claim, as a matter of right, to be confirmed against the post.
These clauses of the order dated 231995 were duly accepted by the petitioner and, thereafter, she joined the Homoeopathic Deptt.
When the conditions of service have been accepted by the petitioner, she will not be able to re-agitate the same issue especially when she has not challenged clause No. 3.
Rather, clauses 1 and 2 clearly indicate that only the pay of the petitioner will be protected and the previous service rendered by her will not be counted for any other purpose.
It cannot be said that these clauses are oppressive or offensive.
The Govt. had been showing compassion to the petitioner from time to time in order to absorb her in one department or the other so that she may not face starvation.
The petitioner accepted the offer of appointment including the terms and conditions and, in these circumstances, it will not be open to the petitioner, at this stage, to say that the terms and conditions of the order dated 231995 are violative or oppressive or indecent.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is also not entitled to the second relief as prayed for.
19.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.