GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India under an apprehension that in view of the letter Annexure P5 dated 4121999 sent by the Vice-Chancellor, Punjabi University, Patiala, his services may be terminated.
2.
Respondent No. 4 Guru Kashi College, Damdama Sahib is privately aided college affiliated to Punjabi University, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as `the University') and respondent No. 5 is its Managing Committee.
They advertised the post of Principal in 1997 and on the recommendations made by the Selection Committee consisting of the Chairman, Governing Body of the College, nominees of the Vice-Chancellor and the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) (respondent No. 3), the petitioner was appointed as Principal of respondent No. 4 subject to the following conditions :  "1.
The pay scale of this post would be 3700-5300 and placement scale.
2.
Your initial pay in the above mentioned pay scale would be Rs. 5100/- (five thousand and one hundred).
3.
You will be paid all the allowances with the initial pay as per the rules of the Non-Government Colleges under Punjabi University.
4.
The conditions stipulated by the University Grants Commission with regard to revision of pay shall be applicable to you.
5.
You will/will not be permitted to keep your lien on the present post.
6.
This appointment would be on probation for a period of one year at the first instance.
In this the Managing Committee can extend the period of one year more 7.
During the probation this appointment can be terminated by both the sides on giving one month's notice.
8.
On being confirmed this appointment can be terminated by both the parties by giving three months' notice.
Any of the two parties want to dispense his services, it will have either to give three months' notice or to deposit pay of three months or the pay of the period for which the notice falls short.
In case of resignation you will not be relieved till the end of the academic year i.e. till 15th March.
9.
Your services will be governed by the stipulated notification/rules and conditions of services as issued by the Punjabi University for the Non- Government colleges from time to time."
3.
Soon after the issuance of appointment letter Annexure P.3, respondent No. 5 forwarded copies thereof to the concerned authority of the University and respondent No. 3.
Vide Annexure P.4, the University conveyed its approval to the appointment of the petitioner but no order was passed by respondent No. 3 even after the petitioner had completed the period of probation.
Instead, vide letter Annexure P5, the Vice-Chancellor of the University informed the petitioner that if the approval of respondent No. 3 is sent to the University within 10 days, it would not be possible to continue him in service.
This is the precise reason why the petitioner has sought the Court's intervention for stalling any further action by the University by contending that in view of the express approval granted by the University to his appointment as Principal, the Vice-Chancellor cannot nullify his appointment due to lack of formal approval by respondent No. 3.
4.
Respondents No. 1 and 3 have not filed written statement to contest the averments made in the writ petition.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 2, 4 and 5, the very maintainability of the writ petition has been challenged on the ground that respondent No. 4 does not fall within the ambit of the expression "other authorities under Article 12 of the Constitution of India".
They have also averred that without the approval of respondent No. 3, the petitioner's appointment cannot be treated as regular.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
The selection to the post of Principal in private aided affiliated colleges is governed by the provisions contained in Chapter XX of the Punjabi University Calendar, Volume III, Part II.
Rule 2, extract of Rule 4 and Rule 7 of the said Calendar, which have been relied upon by the petitioner read as under :  "Rule 2  In these ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires : (i) `college' means a Non-government college admitted to the privileges of the University; and (ii) `employee' means a teacher including the Principal in the service of a Non-Government College.
xx xx xx Extract of Rule 4 4.
The appointment will be valid only if the selection has been made through a duly constituted selection committee as below and is approved by the University : (i) for Principal of College, the selection committee shall consists of :  a) Chairman, Governing Body of the college.
b) Two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor.
c) One person to be appointed by the Chairman of the Governing Body out of a panel of ten persons prepared by the DPI (Colleges), Punjab.
d) DPI (Colleges) Punjab or his representative.
(ii) for teacher for a College, the selection committee shall consist of : xx xx xx Rule 7 The employee appointed on one year probation would be confirmed if his work and conduct is found satisfactory subject to availability of post.
The employer shall notify to the employee in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, if his period of probation is to be extended and in the absence of such a notice, the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period shall in no case be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment.
In case a person appointed temporarily is re-appointed on probation, the period of his service in temporary capacity shall be counted towards his probationary period.
The rules regarding Medical Fitness and verification of character and antecedents in the case of teaching/non-teaching staff working in non-govt. colleges shall be applicable on the pattern of teaching/non-teaching staff working in Punjab Government Colleges."
8.
A conjoint reading of the rules, reproduced above and the conditions subject to which the petitioner was appointed shows that his appointment on the post of Principal was subject to the condition that had been made on the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted in terms of Rule 4 and was approved by the University.
That rule does not envisage approval by respondent No. 3 as a condition precedent to a valid appointment.
Therefore, we agree with Shri Rajiv Atma Ram that the absence of express approval by respondent No. 3 cannot be made a ground to treat the appointment of the petitioner as irregular.
9.
We also agree with the learned counsel that the very presence of respondent No. 3 in the Selection Committee should be treated as his approval to the appointment of the petitioner on the post of Principal and, therefore, the University cannot take any adverse action against him on the premise that the said respondent has not communicated in writing his approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
10.
Before concluding, we consider it appropriate to mention that after the filing of writ petition, the Secretary, Secondary Education, Punjab, had, vide memo No. 11/57/95-I Edu 1/29470 dated 21.12.1999 informed respondent No. 3 that the government/department does not deem it proper to accord approval to the selection of the petitioner because C.W.P.
No. 6573 of 1995 filed by him is pending in the High Court and his appointment is subject to the final decision of the said writ petition and further that he had joined respondent No. 4 at his own will without obtaining prior approval of the department.
In this context, it is necessary to make a mention of the fact that after having served another private aided college from 1992 to 1995, the petitioner was appointed as Principal of National College, Bhikhi, District Mansa which is also a private affiliated college, but the State Government had refused to relieve him on deputation and also declined to accept his request for premature retirement.
This was challenged by the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 6573 of 1995 and in pursuance of the interim order dated 16.5.1995 passed by this Court, he had been relieved for being allowed to join the post of Principal.
At this stage, we do not want to make any comment which may affect the final adjudication of the said petition but, at the same time, we cannot refrain from observing that two reasons assigned in the government's letter dated 21.12.1999 are totally irrelevant on the issue relating to the validity of the petitioner's appointment and, therefore, on the basis of that letter, no action can be taken by the University adversely affecting him.
11.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 are restrained from taking action against the petitioner on the basis of letter Annexure P5.
Petition allowed.