Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - By an Award dated 18th March 2005 passed by the learned Judge, 7th Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal, the writ petitioner was directed to reinstate the respondent No. 3 in service with immediate effect and to pay him 25% of the back wages with consequential reliefs.
2.
The writ petitioner challenged the propriety and/or correctness of the said Award in this writ petition.
3.
This writ petition was admitted for hearing on 19th August 2005.
An interim order was also passed on 9th August 2005 in connection with the said writ petition whereby the writ petitioner was directed to pay the unpaid wages from the month of November 2001 to the respondent No. 3 within seven days from the date of communication of the said order without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
The said writ petition is still pending for consideration before this Court.
4.
In connection with this writ petition, an application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the said application), was filed by the respondent No. 3 inter alia praying for direction upon the writ petitioner for payment of full wages to the said respondent during the pendency of this writ petition.
5.
In the said application, the respondent No. 3 categorically stated that he is not gainfully employed in any establishment for the purpose of earning his livelihood.
6.
Such an application was opposed by the writ petitioner who claimed in his affidavit-in-opposition filed in connection therewith that since the applicant is earning more than 10,000/- per month as a commission agent by selling plywood of various merchants, viz., Plywood House at Central Avenue, Sitapur Plywood at Central Avenue and Hindustan Woodcraft at Bowbazar Street etc., the application is not entitled to any interim payment under provision of Section 17B of the said Act.
7.
Mr. Das, learned Advocate, appearing for the writ petitioner, submits that the applicant is not entitled to any relief under Section 17B of the said Act as the applicant has not filed any separate affidavit by declaring that he has not been gainfully employed in any establishment during the pendency of this writ petition.
Mr. Das further submitted that the applicant filed an application under Section 15B of the said Act before the learned Tribunal in connection with the said reference inter alia praying for similar interim relief during the pendency of the said dispute case before the Tribunal.
Mr. Das pointed out that after taking note of the disclosure of the writ petitioner's defence in the said proceeding, the applicant withdrew the said application under Section 15B of the said Act.
It may be incidentally mentioned herein that in the objection against the applicant's petition under Section 15B of the said Act, the writ petitioner categorically mentioned about the earnings of the respondent No. 3 out of his aforesaid business.
8.
Mr. Das, thus, contended that when the applicant withdrew the said application under Section 15B earlier, the applicant cannot claim any relief under Section 17B of the said Act inasmuch as such claim of the applicant under Section 17B of the said Act, is barred by the principles of res judicata.
9.
Mr. Das further submitted that even if it is held by this Court that the applicant is entitled to such relief, still then the claim of the applicant for payment of wages from the date of the award, cannot be granted under the provision Section 17B of the said Act.
10.
Mr. Das further contended that the last drawn wages of the applicant is Rs. 5,450/- and as such, even in case the applicant's such prayer is allowed, still then the applicant cannot get much more than the last drawn wages of the applicant, i.e. Rs. 5,450/-.
Mr. Das further contended that the scooter allowance of Rs. 1,700/- per month cannot be claimed by the applicant as part of his wages as the applicant is not rendering his service presently.
11.
These are the grounds on which the writ petitioner resisted the applicant's prayer for interim payment under Section 17B of the said Act.
12.
Mr. Majumdar, learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 3/applicant, submitted that Section 17B of the said Act does not contemplate filing of a separate affidavit by a workman for declaring that he is not gainfully employed in any establishment during the pendency of this writ petition.
According to Mr. Majumdar, the statement made by the said respondent No. 3 in his application under Section 17B of the said Act which is affirmed by the applicant on affidavit, is sufficient compliance of the requirement of the provision of Section 17B of the said Act.
13.
Mr. Majumdar further submitted that the application under Section 15B of the said Act was withdrawn by the respondent No. 3 only to expedite the hearing of the said dispute case before the Tribunal.
Mr. Majumdar further contended that whatever may be reason for withdrawal of the said application under Section 15B of the said Act, the applicant's entitlement under Section 17B of the said Act cannot be denied for withdrawal of the applicant's application under section 15B of the said Act.
14.
Mr. Majumdar further submitted that in an application under Section 15B of the said Act, the workman is required to prove that he is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the dispute case before the Tribunal, but in connection with a proceeding under Section 17B of the said Act, the workman is required to prove that he is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of this writ petition before the higher forum.
15.
Thus, the consideration for grant of interim relief under Section 17B of the said Act is distinctly different from the consideration for grant of interim relief under Section 15B of the said Act.
As such, even the withdrawal of the application under Section 15B of the said Act, provided however the workman can satisfy the conditions for such grant under the said provision.
16.
Mr. Majumdar further submitted that earning of livelihood by carrying on his own business cannot be equated with the concept of gainful employment of the workman in any other establishment.
By referring to a Division Bench decision of Kerala High Court in the case of Jaya Raman v. Quilon Gas Service, reported in 1995 Labour Law Reporter 634, Mr. Majumdar submitted that an identical question was decided in the said decision wherein it was held that the retrenched workman cannot be deprived of his benefit under Section 17B of the said Act merely because of his engagement in any activity or in some avocation to eke out a livelihood.
17.
Mr. Majumdar frankly admitted that the respondent No. 3 is not entitled to get such relief from the date of the award.
Mr. Majumdar submitted that the claim of the respondent No. 3 should be restricted during the pendency of this writ petition, i.e., from the date of instruction of the writ petition up to the date of its disposal.
18.
By relying upon a decision of our High Court in the case of Hooghly Printing Co Ltd v. State of West Bengal, reported in 2004 Vol. II CHN page 390, Mr. Majumdar further submitted that the full wages last drawn are to be looked into from the angle as if the worker was in service i.e., if the workman would have been in service, what he would have got as his wages, i.e., the amount what the workman would have taken home at the end of the month.
19.
Relying upon the said decision, Mr. Majumdar submitted that since this scooter allowance was a part and parcel of his wages, he is entitled to the said allowance also in addition to the last drawn wages of the said respondent.
20.
Heard the learned Advocates of the parties.
Considered the materials on record.
21.
Let me now consider the submissions of the learned Advocates of the respective parties one after another.
A.
On consideration of the provision under Section 17B of the said Act, it appears to this Court that in order to avail of such benefits, the following conditions must be fulfilled :- (i) There must be an award of the Tribunal for reinstatement of the workman in service;  (ii) The employer prefers any proceeding challenging the said award in a High Court or before the Hon'ble Supreme Court;  (iii) The workman is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the appeal;  (iv) A declaration to the effect that the workman is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the appeal should be filed by affidavit by the workman.
22.
In my view, all the aforesaid conditions are satisfied in the instant case.
Admittedly there is an award of the Tribunal for reinstatement of the respondent No. 3.
The said award is under challenge in this writ petition at the instance of the writ petitioner being the employer of the respondent No. 3.
23.
Now the only question which still remains to be considered is as to whether a separate affidavit is required to be filed by the workman for declaring that the workman is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of this appeal.
24.
In my view the statements to the above effect made by the applicant in the application under Section 17B supported by an affidavit by the workman himself, is sufficient compliance of the provision of Section 17B of the said Act.
No doubt, in the instant case the applicant made a categorical statement in his application under Section 17B of the said Act supported by his affidavit to the effect that the respondent No. 3/applicant is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the writ petition.
25.
Thus, I hold that the applicant's prayer for such interim relief cannot be refused on the ground of non-filing of any separate affidavit to the above effect by the respondent No. 3/applicant.
26.
Let me now consider the effect of withdrawal of the application under Section 15B of the said Act by this applicant during the pendency of the dispute case before the Tribunal.
27.
Withdrawal of the application under Section 15B of the said Act by the applicant, in my view, cannot be a ground for refusal to grant relief to the respondent No. 3/applicant under Section 17B of the said Act, provided however the conditions for grant of such relief, as indicated above, are satisfied.
28.
The consideration for grant of relief under Section 15B of the said Act is distinctly different from the consideration of grant of relief under Section 17B of the said Act.
In order to obtain a relief under Section 15B of the said Act, the workman is required to prove that he is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the dispute case before the Tribunal, but for obtaining such an interim relief under Section 17B of the said Act, the workman is required to prove that he is not in gainful employment in any establishment during the pendency of the appeal.
Since the consideration for such grant is distinctly different at different stage of the proceedings, as indicated above, the withdrawal of the application under Section 15B cannot debar the applicant from getting the interim relief under Section 17B of the said Act subject to the fulfilment of the requisite conditions as indicated above.
29.
That apart, this Court does not find any substance in the submission of Mr. Das to the effect that the claim of the respondent No. 3 under Section 17B of the said Act is barred by the principles of res judicata.
Since admittedly no decision was taken by the Tribunal on the entitlement of the respondent No. 3 under Section 15B of the said Act, the applicant's claim under Section 17B of the Act in this writ petition, cannot be barred by the principles of res judicata.
The principle of res judicata applies to subsequent stage of proceeding only when the rights of the parties under similar circumstances were adjudicated upon by the Court at the earlier stage of the proceeding.
Since it is nobody's case that the Tribunal rejected the interim prayer of the respondent No. 3 on contest, the principle of res judicata has no application in the instant case.
30.
It is rightly pointed out by Mr. Majumdar that relief under Section 17B of the said Act cannot be refused by taking note of the earning of the respondent No. 3 from his business as commission agent.
Earning from the business as commission agent cannot be equated with the concept of earning out of employment.
Earning from the business and/or other avocation is absolutely uncertain while earning from employment in other establishment does not suffer from any uncertainty.
31.
That apart, when the particular provision provides for grant of such interim relief during the pendency of the appeal to a workman who is not gainfully employed in any establishment, this Court cannot refuse such prayer of the respondent No. 3 by taking note of his earning from his business as commission agent.
The respondent No. 3, however, disputes his income from any of such business.
Be that as it may, in my view, even the earning from of the respondent No. 3 by taking note of his earning from his business as commission agent.
The respondent No. 3, however, disputes his income from any of such business.
Be that as it may, in my view, even the earning from other business and/or avocation is absolutely immaterial for refusal to grant such nterim relief to the workman.
On consideration of the decision cited by Mr. Majumdar in the case Jayaraman v. Quilon Gas Service (supra), I fully agree with the principle as laid down in paragraph 7 of the said citation which is set out hereunder :-  "7.
The question whether a workman running a tea shop and earning income would be entitled to the benefits under Section 17B was considered in Management, Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. v. Judge, Labour Court and Another, 1992-1-LLJ 494 where the Rajasthan High Court held that to disentitle a workman the benefit of Section 17B it should be established that he was employed under an establishment and mere carrying on an activity to make both ends meet will not deprive him of the benefit.
Workman who was engaged in any activity or in some avocation to eke out a livelihood, so long as it is not employment under any establishment cannot be denied of the benefit.
To deny the benefit it must certainly be established that he was gainfully employed in some establishment during the pendency of the proceedings before the High Court or the Supreme Court and during that period he was receiving adequate remuneration."
Gainful employment in any establishment, in my view, means that the workman must be employed under somebody in any establishment gainfully.
Such gainful employment is not synonymous with the concept of earning from one's own business.
32.
What is meant by full wages last drawn by the worker under the provision of Section 17B of the said Act has already been defined by Justice Arun Kumar Mitra in the case of Hooghly Printing Co Ltd v. State of West Bengal, reported in 2004 Vol. II CHN 3.
The relevant part of the said decision is set out hereunder :  "Now, what would be the position of full wages last drawn ?
These terms `full wages last drawn' are to be looked into from the angle as if the worker was in service, that is if the workman would have been in service, what he would have got as his wages, that is, the amount what the workman would have taken home at the end of the month, to be more clear and specific, it must be stated that the intent of the legislature is that on the date of termination, the amount towards wages which the petitioner could have got in hand or could have taken home towards his emolument that should be the full wages drawn.
It cannot, by any stretch of imagination or any stretch of clarification, be said that `full wages drawn' means what amount of wages the workman could have got after his promotion or after his revision or after his enhancement of DA etc.
It has to be remembered that this is a relief granted to the workman for his struggle against the company; this is neither an economic concession nor a consequential benefit of a result of collective bargaining.
The amount the legislature intended to allow to the petitioner is an amount which he used to take home or which he used to get in hand on the date of his termination as has been made clear in Dena Bank's case, the learned Counsel for the applicant submitted with much emphasis that the gross pay should be given to the employee but as observed earlier this is neither an economic concession nor a resultant effect or consequential benefit of a collective bargaining.
This is a relief granted by the statute, to the workman so that he can fight out the writ petition or he can run his family during the pendency of the writ petition before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
The learned Counsel for the applicant submitted with much emphasis that in such circumstances the workman should be paid back wages or a portion of back wages as has been observed in Dena Bank's case or in Varadraja's case (supra).
In this context, it has to be borne in mind that ultimately termination may be legal and may be illegal which cannot be decided now.
Then of course there will be a question of recovery if any excess amount is paid.
Therefore, excess amount, in the form of a gratuitous reliefs has not been made in the legislature or in Dena Bank's case also.
In Dena Bank's case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in my opinion, pointed out that if there is any extraordinary circumstance, then the Court can grant some more payment, but not in all the cases and if a question of termination is taken into consideration in all the cases of termination, the workman is to fight against the employer, but ultimately it may be found that the termination is legal or illegal."
33.
In view of the aforesaid decision of this Hon'ble Court, this Court has no hesitation to hold that the applicant is entitled not only the wages amounting to Rs. 5,450/- but also the Scooter allowances of Rs. 1,700/- per month, as the Scooter allowances, in my view, is a part and parcel of the wages of the applicant.
34.
Accordingly, I direct the writ petitioner to pay to the respondent No. 3/applicant the full wages inclusive of Scooter allowance at the rate which was drawn by the said respondent No. 3/applicant lastly prior to his retrenchment from service after deducting the statutory deductions therefrom, for the period commencing from the date of institution of this writ petition upto the date of its disposal, subject to adjustment of any amount, if already paid to the applicant towards interim payment under Section 17B of the said Act.
Such payment upto the month of December 2005, should be made by the writ petitioner to the respondent No. 3/applicant positively within the period of one month from date.
The writ petitioner is directed to go on paying the full wages to the applicant month by month commencing from the month of January 2006 till the disposal of this writ petition.
Such payment should be made within 7th day of each following month.
35.
The application under Section 17B, thus stands allowed.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, be given to the parties, as expeditiously as possible.
Petition allowed.