ML Singhal, J. (Oral) - In the month of January, 1975 Shri RK Goel was appointed as Staff Reporter by the Government of Haryana.
From the post of Staff Reporter, the next promotion was to the rank of Public Relations Officer (PRO)/District Public Relations Officer (DPRO).
As per him, he became eligible for promotion to the next higher rank in April, 1982 on the ground of seniority/eligibility.
For being eligible for promotion to the next higher rank one was required to put in seven yearrs as Staff Reporter i.e. in the lower rank.
In the month of April 1982, he was considered suitable for the post of DPRO.
He was transferrred to Karnal vide order dated 15482.
He was asked to look after the work of DPRO.
At that time, the post of DPRO was lying vacant at Karnal.
He was relieved on 3582 from the post of Staff Reporter.
Thereafter, he took charge at Karnal.
Vide letter dated 21682, he was given the powers of Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
In this manner, he became virtually clothed with the status of the post of DPRO, he signed all documents in the capacity of DPRO.
Department gave clarification qua this fact vide letter dated 15782.
He represented to the department to pay him the salary, which is payable to the holder of the post of DPRO.
No decision was taken on his representation.
Thereafter he was transferred to Bhiwani and he was asked to work as DPRO.
Later on, he was transferred to Chandigarh vide order dated 2441985 against the post held by Ramesh Ahuja who was PRO.
Post of PRO was carrying the par scale, which is admissible to the post of DPRO.
He was asked to perform the duties being performed by Ramesh Ahuja.
Vide order dated 22.12.87, he was again transferred to Karnal and was asked to discharge the duties of DPRO though in officiating capacity.
He requested the Department time and again to regularise him on the post of DPRO with effect from 5582.
Department promoted him to the post of DPRO with effect from 9689.
As per him, this action of the department in promoting him not with effect from 5582 but with effect from 9689 was illegal and unwarranted when he had been performing the duties of DPRO/PRO all this period since 5582.
On these allegations, he filed suit for declaration against the State of Haryana to the effect that he be taken to have been promoted with effect from 5582 against the salary admissible to the post of DPRO/PRO and that he is entitled to the salary admissible to the post of DPRO with effect from 5582 with increments and allowances etc. admissible to the post of DPRO/PRO.
2.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that the plaintiff was never promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO.
He could be promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO after the names of eligible of Staff Reporters etc. had been included in the panel for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO.
His name was never included in such panel.
He completed seven years of service on 10182.
A Staff Reporter with practical experience of seven years was eligible for promotion but as he was quite down below in the ladder of seniority, he could not be considered for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO in 1982 or thereafter.
He was posted as Staff Reporter in the office of District Public Relations Officer, Karnal vide government order dated 15482 to look after the work of DPRO and was posted as such in stop-gap arrangement where he worked form 5582 to 29485.
He was declared Drawing and Disbursing Officer vide Government order dated 21682.
His representation for promotion was justifiably rejected because he was not falling within the zone of consideration with other Staff Reporter etc. for promotion to the rank of DPRO/PRO.
He was transferred as Acting District Public Relations Officer, Bhiwani vide order dated 24485 and worked as such from 30485 to 261285.
He was transferred as Staff Reporter in the Press Section at Head Quarters Chandigarh and he was again posted as officiating DPRO, Karnal in his own pay scale of Staff Reporter vide government order dated 4188.
He was again posted as officiating DPRO, Narnaul vide order dated 18888 and worked as such from 12.9.88 to 8689.
He was promoted as DPRO Narnaul vide order dated 9689.
He was never promoted to the post of District Public Relation Officer at any time till 9689 when he was regularly appointed.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether the order dated 961989 vide which the plaintiff was promoted w.e.f.
961989 instead of 551982 and the order dated 12101994 vide which the representation of the plaintiff was rejected are illegal, ultra vires and not binding on the rights of the plaintiff ?
OPP 2.
If issue No. 1 is proved whether the plaintiff is entitled to arrears of salary and other benefits as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi and cause of action to file the suit ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 5.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
4.
Civil Judge, Senior Division, Gurgaon decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration that he shall be deemed to have been promoted with effect from 5582 and not with effect from 9689 and consequentially entitled to draw salary and allowances etc. of the post of DPRO with effect from April, 1985 with salary and allowances etc. admissible to the post of DPRO in view of her finding that during this period, he discharged the duties of the higher post and he must draw the pay, allowances etc. of that post relying upon Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(2) RSJ 685 (SC).
In a way, Civil Judge, Senior Division, Gurgaon held him entitled to the salary to the post of DPRO with effect from April 1985, onwards.
5.
In appeal by the State of Haryana, Additional District Judge, Gurgaon set aside the decree passed by the trial Court in so far as it went that he shall be taken to have been promoted with effect from April 1985 but he gave him declaration that he is entitled to the salary of the post of DPRO/PRO for the period during which he performed the duties of DPRO/PRO but he shall not be considered to have been promoted when he was not promoted through any conscious act.
6.
Feeling not satisfied with the decree passed by the Additional Distt.
Judge, Gurgaon, State of Haryana has come up in this appeal to this Court.
7.
Learned Additional AG Haryana submits that plaintiff could not have been allowed the salary of the post of DPRO/PRO when he had not been promoted to that post and when he had been called upon to discharge the duties of that post in addition to the duties of the post, which he was holding substantively.
On being questioned by the Court, Additional AG Haryana admits that at the place where the respondent-plaintiff was posted in his own substantive rank, the post of DPRO/PRO remained unfilled and he was discharging the duties of the post of DPRO/PRO in addition to the duties of his own substantive post he was holding.
If that was so, he becomes entitled to the salary, which is admissible to the holder of the post of DPRO/PRO.
8.
It was observed by Division Bench of this Court in Gurmej Singh v. State of Punjab, 1995(3) RSJ 491 : 1995(3) SCT 279 (P&H) (DB), that "if a person is holding current duty charge of a higher post, he is entitled to pay and allowances of the current duty charge post."
It was held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(2) RSJ 685 : 1998(3) SCT 90, that "where the respondent was promoted as JEI in 1990 and had been continuing on that post without being paid salary for that post or without being promoted on regular basis.
An agreement that if a person is promoted to the higher post or just to officiate on that post or, a stop-gap arrangement is made to place him on the higher post, he would not claim higher salary or other attendant benefits "would be contrary to law and against public policy."
It was also observed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Salva Raj v. Lt.
Governor of Island, Port Blair and other, 1998(4) RSJ 22 (SC).
that "where an employee is ordered to look upon duties of higher post and he worked on higher post though temporarily and in an officiating capacity, he is entitled to salary attached to higher post.
Payment of higher salary shall, however, not amount to promotion."
9.
It is, thus, clear that plaintiff was entitled to draw the salary of the post of DPRO/PRO for the period during which he performed the duties of the post of DPRO/PRO particularly when the post of DPRO/PRO remained unfilled during that period.
Learned Addl.
AG Haryana submits that there was no post of DPRO/PRO lying vacant against which he could be promoted because he is a ranker and there was no post lying vacant against which a ranker could be promoted.
That may be so, here we are not concerned with promotion.
Here we are concerned with whether he was entitled to pay admissible to the post of DPRO/PRO when he discharged the duties of the post of DPRO/PRO.
In equity also, an employee must be remunerated for the post which he was discharging.
When he was discharging the duties of the post of DPRO/PRO he should have been remunerated for the post of DPRO/PRO.
If he is held entitled to draw the salary admissible to the post of DPRO/PRO, that will not clothe him with the status of DPRO/PRO as only "promotion" would have clothed him with the status of DPRO/PRO.
He just discharged the duties of the post of DPRO/PRO and became entitled to the salary of that post.
Decree passed by Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Gurgaon is modified to the extent that at no stage shall the plaintiff be deemed to have been promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO but he will be entitled only to the salary of this post during the period he discharged the duties of that post.
His pay shall be fixed with effect from 5582 in the pay scale of the post of DPRO/PRO.
He shall be entitled to the arrears for the period of 38 months preceding the date of suit in wake of this pay fixation.
Order accordingly.