VS Aggarwal, J - Dr Rajinder Kumar petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution for directing respondents 1 and 2 to make fresh counselling after considering the candidature of the petitioner under reserved HCMS quota for MD/MS courses in accordance with the merit position of the petitioner in the written examination and his deemed completion of probation period.
2.
It has been pleaded that after passing Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery in 1993, the petitioner completed his interenship in May, 1994.
The petitioner joined the post of Medical Officer on ad-hoc basis in pursuance of his selection made by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The aforesaid appointment was made after adopting the procedure and the rule.
The petitioner joined as a Medical Officer on 621995 and was appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
671995 by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
He remained in rural service till 25.5.1998.
The services of the petitioner are governed by the Haryana Civil Medical Services (Class-II) Rules, 1978.
According to Rule 11 he was put on probation.
The period of probation was to expire on 1991997.
It was extended for one year from 1991997.
3.
Vide notification dated 28121998 issued by the Haryana Government, Health and Medical Education Department, a committee was constituted for conducting the entrance examination for the admission in MD courses etc.
According to the eligibility criteria `in-service HCMS doctors' are eligible provided they submit the application through their employers with `No objection certificate' from the employer on or before the last date of receipt of application for admission against the seats reserved for such doctors.
The last date of receipt of applications was 831999.
The entrance examination was to be held on 441999.
The petitioner applied in the quota admissible for MD/MS courses.
His name was sponsored under the Open Category on the assumption that petitioner has not completed the period of probation.
The result was declared on 741999.
The petitioner was declared a successful candidate but against the wrong category.
He was made to understand that since his name had been considered under the General category, therefore, he is at serial No. 51.
He was not considered in the category of `in-service doctors of HCMS'.
The petitioner's claim is that he topped in the HCMS reserved category but he was considered as a general candidate.
4.
On basis of these facts, it is contended that action of the respondent is illegal and deserves to be quashed.
The petitioner has completed 3 years probation period successfully.
He is deemed to have been confirmed and he should have been considered under `in-service HCMS doctors' category.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, it was asserted that petitioner had not crossed his probation period successfully.
Therefore, he was not eligible for grant of `No objection certificate' for doing MD/Diploma course.
As per terms and conditions of the appointment of the petitioner, he was placed on probation for a period of 2 years as per the Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) Rules.
There were some adverse remarks that he does not maintain his headquarter, though over all he was graded as `Good'.
The competent authority after carefully considering the case of the petitioner decided to extend his probation period from 991997 for one year.
The admission in PG Degree/Diploma course for reserved seats is on basis of a policy decision.
The admissions were made strictly in accordance with that.
A criteria had been laid for grant of `No objection certificate' to `in-service HCMS doctors'.
The doctor should be working on regular basis.
He should have successfully crossed his probation period and there should be nothing adverse against him.
The integrity of the petitioner was found to be doubtful and thus he was not entitled to get the `No objection certificate.'
The petitioner was called for counselling on 1851999.
He was asked to join for Diploma in Anaesthesia which was allotted to him as a General category candidate.
This was done as per the orders of the High Court and the petitioner was asked not to resign.
The petitioner refused to accept the said seat.
6.
In the separate written statement by respondents 5, 6, 11, 20, 22, 30, 31, 32 and 36 it was pointed that petitioner had not crossed the probation period successfully as per the requirement of the Rules.
He was, therefore, not entitled to `No objection certificate.'
7.
The petitioner filed a rejoinder.
The petitioner insisted that as per Rule 11 of the Haryana Civil Medical Services (Class-II) Rules, the total period of probation including extension is not to exceed 3 years.
The petitioner had completed the said period.
He secured 62 marks in entrance examination of MD/MS course.
He was at No. 1 in HCMS reserved category.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondent-authority rectified the mistake and certified that petitioner satisfactorily completed 2 years probation period on 991997.
The petitioner was considered in reserved category of `in-service HCMS doctors' and recounselling held on 1851999 but the seat could not be allotted because of the pendency of the writ petition.
8.
On basis of these facts, learned counsel for the petitioner highlighted that for MD and MS courses 40% seats in the test are for open category candidates and 60% are meant for `in-service HCMS doctors' who are members of Haryana Medical Service.
The petitioner admittedly is one of the members of the said service.
According to the learned counsel, the maximum period of probation is 3 years which was completed by the petitioner and, therefore, he is deemed to have been confirmed before even the test was held.
He was on the top of the list of reserved category of `in-service HCMS doctors.'
He further asserted that during the pendency of the writ petition Annexure P-3 had been issued which indicates that petitioner has been taken to have completed the probation period.
As regards the question as to if the petitioner had completed the probation period and must be taken to have been appointed regularly, reference can well be made to Rule 11 of the Haryana Civil Medical Services (Class-II) Rules, 1978.
It reads :-  "11.
Probation - (1) Persons appointed to the post in the Service shall remain on probation for a period of two years; Provided that - (a) any period after such appointment spent on deputation on a corresponding or a higher post shall count towards the period of probation; (b) any period of officiating appointment shall be reckoned as period spent on probation, but no person who has so officiated shall, on the completion of the prescribed period of probation, be entitled to be confirmed, unless he is appointed against a permanent vacancy.
(2) If, in the opinion of the appointing authority, the work or conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory, it may dispense with his services or extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation: Provided that the total period of probation, including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may, if his work or conduct has, in its opinion, been satisfactory :- (i) confirm such person from the date of his appointment, if appointed against a permanent vacancy; (ii) confirm such persion from the date from which a permanent vacancy occurs, if appointed against a temporary vacancy; or (iii) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactory, if there is no permanent vacancy: Provided that if neither of the above three decisions is taken within six months of the expiry of the original or extended period of probation, if any, then at the expiry of the aforesaid six months' period the officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation."
A bare reading of the relevant rule would show that initially the period of probation is 2 years.
If the work and conduct is not satisfactory, then the services of the doctor can be terminated or probation period can be extended by one year.
The maxium period of probation is 3 years.
The other requirements are not relevant for purposes of disposal of the present writ petition.
In other words, if 3 years period had been completed and order for terminating the services has not been passed, the concerned person must be taken to have been confirmed.
Such is the position in the present case.
The petitioner was appointed on probation on 671995.
At best after the period of 3 years in 1998, he would be deemed to have been confirmed.
This question had been considered by this Court in the case of Dr. Mrs. Neeta Mehta v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) Recent Services Judgments 4.
This Court held :-  "It is, thus, clear that the appointing authority has to take a decision on the issue of termination of the service of a probationer either at the end of initial period of probation or at the end of extended period of probation.
It is also required to decide the issue of confirmation of the officer who has satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
However, if no order is passed by the competent authority at the end of initial period of probation, the officer cannot treat himself as automatically confirmed.
Rather he will be deemed to be continued on probation by employment subject to the condition that the maximum period of probation cannot exceed the outer limit of 3 years indicated in proviso to Rule 11(2).
Within a reasonable time from the expiry of the maximum period of probation, the competent authority is to take a decision regarding the confirmation of the officer.
On a conjoint reading of Rule 11(2) and Rule 11(3), it can be said that this power has to be exercised by the appointing authority within six months of the expiry of extended period of probation.
Failure of the authority concerned to pass appropriate order will bring into operation the deeming clause contained in proviso to Rule 11(3) and then the officer concerned will be entitled to claim that he has satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
In other words, the appointing authority will be deemed to have divested of its power to pass an order of termination of the service of a probationer on the ground of unsatisfactory work or conduct after the expiry of the period specified in proviso to Rule 11(3)."
Same question was considered by another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Shiva Mathur v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) Recent Services Judgments 221 : 1998(4) SCT 161 (P&H) (DB).
It was again held that maximum period of probation is 3 years.
If no order regarding termination is passed within a reasonable period by operation of legal fiction, the petitioner would be entitled to be deemed to have been confirmed.
It must, therefore, follow for the reasons already recorded that the petitioner must be deemed to have been confirmed.
9.
In addition to that during the pendency of the present writ petition, the matter as such had been seemingly reconsidered and it has been pointed in the letter dated 1051999 (Annexure P-3) that Dr. Rajinder Kumar satisfactorily completed 2 years probation period.
To check the said fact, the confidential dossier of the petitioner was called.
It deserves a mention that instructions have been issued by the State that `No objection certificate' has to be given to such a candidate who has completed the probation period.
Two years should be in the rural area and there should be nothing adverse regarding his integrity and efficiency.
For the year 1994-95 in the confidential dossier it has been recorded that petitioner is honest but it was further recorded that after office hours he does not remain in the head office.
In the confidential report for the year 1996-97 it has been recorded that he remains at the head office and even remains present on holidays.
It is recorded further that he is honest.
Learned counsel for the respondents urged that for the year 1997-98 against the column `As to what is reputation', there is an entry that it requires `Improvement'.
Over all assessment for all the years has been `Good'.
10.
The obvious question is as to if it would be an adverse entry against the petitioner or not ?
We all know that men can never be perfect.
We expect others to be paragon of perfection.
In all human deeds and acts, there can always be scope of improvement.
Therefore, if it is recorded that the petitioner's above said act requires improvement, it cannot be read as `Integrity doubtful'.
If it was so, the Senior Medical Officer should have specifically so stated.
On top of it, there is nothing to indicate that this entry had been communicated to the petitioner.
In these circumstances, it can hardly be taken to be an adverse entry.
11.
These reasons clearly reveal that petitioner had not been given a fair deal.
The petitioner worked against the post for 3 years.
It is the outer limit.
Even within six months thereafter the petitioner continued.
Thus it must be taken that he completed the period satisfactority.
Thus, he should have been considered against the category of `in-service HCMS doctors' and assigned a discipline according to the merit in the entrance test.
That has not been done.
Therefore, he has a reason to complain.
12.
For these reasons, the writ petition is allowed and it is directed that case of the petitioner should be considered as per his merit in the entrance test for MD/MS course at the earliest.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.