Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner joined Army Medical Corps on 25.6.1963.
He claims to have performed his duties and functions to the required standards and when recruited in the Army was medically fit.
As such no adverse entry of any kind was noticed by medical examination at the time of entrance into the service or even thereafter for a considerable time.
However, in September, 1974 during the routine medical check up the petitioner was found to be suffering from Myocardial Infraction.
On 2971977 the petitioner was subjected to a medical board for his discharge from military service.
The medical board recommended release of the petitioner from Army service and noticed his disability at 40% vide its report dated 2131979.
On 891979 the petitioner was directed to leave for his home after his retirement leave expired.
Civil Defence Accounts, hereinafter referred to CDA, on 211980 rejected the claim of the petitioner for grant of disability pension against which he preferred an appeal on 2561980.
The Ministry of Defence, Government of India, referred the matter back to CDA, to which some reminders for decision were sent by the Government.
However, according to the petitioner he did not come to know about the decision of the appeal except on 24111997 when the Dak Pension Adalat informed the petitioner in response to his complaint dated 10101997 that his claim of pension had been rejected on 2791982.
Thus, the petitioner pleads knowledge of the rejection of the appeal only in the year 1997 resulting in filing of the present writ petition praying for a direction to the respondents to grant disability pension to the petitioner.
2.
The respondents, upon notice, have filed the written statement and the facts are hardly in controversy.
The relevant paragraphs of the written statement read as under:  "2.
That in reply to para 2 it is submitted that petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 25.06.1963 and discharged from service with effect from September 8, 1979 being placed in medical category "BEE" (Permanent) on account of "MYOCARDIAL INFRACTION" on completion of 16 years and 76 days of service".
"4.
That in reply to this para it is submitted that as per medical categorisation form (AFMSF-15) Annexure P-1, the petitioner was placed in medical category "BEE" (Permanent) with effect from August 19, 1977.
Although, it has been opined through para 5 of AFMSF-15 that the disease was aggravated by stress and strain of service but petitioner was not put on any strenuous duty as per charter of duties available Annexure P-2."
"The Medical Board opined that the disease was aggravated due to stress and strain of Army Service.
Column No. 2(c) at page 3 of Release Medical Board Proceedings (AFMSF-16) Annexure P-3.
The percentage of disability of the petitioner was assessed at 40% by the Release Medical Board."
Vide Annexure P/1 to the writ petition, which is the proceedings of the Medical Board, in Part-2 in answer to Column No. 5, 6 and 7, the Medical Board recorded as under:  "5.
Is it directly attributable to service Stress and was it aggravated thereby by what strains of specific conditions ?
Strees and strains of service life.
6.
Medical category recommended BEE (Perm) 7.
Period for which the above medical category is recommended.
Permanent" In the face of report of the medical board vide Annexure P/3 dated 1511980 the claim of the petitioner was rejected for grant of disability pension.
The concerned authorities informed the petitioner of rejection of his claim as under:  "Your claim for disability pension was submitted to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions) Allahabad who has decided that the disability from which you suffered during your service in the Army and on which your claim is based: (a) is not attributable to Military service, and (b) does not fulfil the following conditions namely that is existed before or arose during Military Service and has been remains aggravated thereby.
In view of the above you are not entitled to disability pension under Army Pension Regulations."
The appeal was rejected simplicitor in the year 1982.
3.
The short question that falls for consideration of this Court in the present writ petition is : whether the findings of the medical board could be altered to the prejudice of the petitioner by the CDA and could the CDA sit in judgment over the findings recorded by the medical board.
This question is quite settled and does not call for any detailed discussion on the subject.
It is a settled principle of law that the CDA is not an expert body in regard to the determination of extent of medical disability or its attributability or aggravation due to the military service.
At this stage it will be appropriate to refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of Ujagar Singh v. Union of India and others, 1997(4) Recent Service Judgments 587, where after detailed discussion, it was held as under:  "From the above narrated facts and the stand taken by the parties before us, the controversy that falls for determination by us lies in a very narrow compass viz whether the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) has any jurisdiction to sit over the opinion of the experts (Medical Board) while dealing with the case of grant of disability pension, in regard to the percentage of the disability pension, or not.
In the present case, it is nowhere stated that the petitioner was subjected to any higher medical board before the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) decided to decline the disability pension to the petitioner.
We are unable to see as to how the accounts branch dealing with the pension can sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher medical board which can be constituted under the relevant instructions and rules by the Director General Army Medical Corp.
Somewhat similar defence was raised on behalf of the Union of India before the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ex Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on 14th January 1993, where the Court held as under: "We have examined the relevant materials and we do not feel satisfied with the plea taken in the counter affidavit.
No details of the consultation have been disclosed by the respondent nor it is claimed that the appellant has been re- examined by any higher medical authority.
We are not prepared to act on the vague allegations in the counter affidavit referred to above.
In view of all the relevant circumstances of the case we are of the opinion that the Disability Pension assessed at the rate of 40% the Medical Board which had examined the appellant, should be respected until a fresh Medical Board examined the appellant against and reached a different conclusion."
An identical stand was taken by the Union of India in the case of Mam Raj v Union of India, CWP No. 2302 of 1997 decided on 10.9.1996 by this Court where this Court held as under:  "Instruction No. 27 under the head of "function and responsibilities" Appendix II of these instructions at best empowers the Medical Authority so constituted to give its view about assessment of disablement restricted to the medical issues.
The Medical Board's views and findings could be subject to an appellate view by the Direct General, Armed Forces Medical Services whose view would be final.
Nothing has been brought on record before us which would show that subsequent to the Medical Board, as a result of which the petitioner was discharged from Army was held by the competent authority and it gave any findings contrary to the view expressed by the earlier Medical Board."
Reference can also be made to the decision, rendered in LPA No. 82 of 1997 entitled as Union of India v. Ex. Captain Harbhajan Singh decided on 25.4.1997".
In view of the above settled principles and more particularly keeping in view the facts stated in the written statement itself this Court has no choice but to set aside the impugned orders as they suffer from an apparent error of lack jurisdiction.
As per rules CDA cannot sit in judgment over the findings of the medical board specifically when the Government had referred the matter back to CDA and sent reminders.
In that event, the CDA was expected to act in consonance with rules and settled law.
4.
There is some delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching the Court but that stands fully explained by the facts that the order of 2791982 was not communicated to the petitioner.
The facts averred by the petitioner in regard in paragraph No. 14 of the writ petition have not been disputed in reply as such.
Rather it is further stated that the claim of the petitioner was again rejected on 24111997.
Thus, it is also clear that the relief to the petitioner cannot be declined for delay or laches.
5.
In view of the above discussion this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders dated 211980, 2791982 and 24111997 are hereby quashed.
The respondents are further directed to consider the case of the petitioner and grant disability pension to the petitioner in accordance with law unless the findings of the medical board are disturbed by the competent authority as afore-noticed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.