THB Chalapathi, J - Common questions of law and facts arise in both these petitions.
Therefore they are disposed of this common judgment.
For the facility of reference, the facts are taken from CWP No. 14830 of 1997.
2.
This writ petition is filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondents 1 to 3 to issue appointment letters to the petitioners.
3.
The Admission Bench by its order dated 27th April, 1998 dismissed the writ petition in so far as it relates to respondents 4 and 5 being not pressed, but regarding petitioner No. 2, it is stated that his claim for appointment is being considered.
Therefore, it restricted the writ petition only in regard to petitioners 1 and 3 as the cause of action still survives in respect of them.
4.
The 2nd respondent namely the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the `Service Commission') advertised 62 posts of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and Allied Services in the year 1992.
Subsequently number of vacancies was increased to 74 before the declaration of the result of the written examination held in 1996.
The petitioners applied for the said posts being eligible and also appeared in the written examination.
According to the petitioners, they were successful in the written examination and also appeared for the interview and in the final result which was declared in the month of March 1996 the petitioners were shown as selected in the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and Allied Services.
The petitioner No. 1 was shown at Sr. No. 47 while the petitioner No. 3 was shown at Serial No. 49.
The Service Commission also forwarded the names of the selected candidates.
Meanwhile several complaints were received in regard to selection of the candidates.
The said complaints were forwarded to the Vigilance Department and at the same time the 1st respondent asked the concerned departments to keep the appointments in abeyance.
The decision of the 1st respondent to keep the appointments in abeyance was challenged in writ petition No. 11684 of 1996 in which a direction was given to the State Government to offer appointments to the selected candidates and the decision of the 1st respondent to keep the appointments in abeyance was quashed.
The increase in vacancies was also admitted by the respondents in Civil Writ Petition No. 8748 of 1996 which was upheld by this Court.
Since respondents 1 to 3 ignored the claims of the petitioners on the ground that their placement in the selection list is beyond the advertised posts against the general category is discriminatory, the petitioners filed this writ petition.
According to the petitioners, the posts have to be filled from the general category as the number of vacancies meant for general category was increased from 44 to 49.
5.
In the written statement filed by the 2nd respondent-Haryana Public Service Commission it is admitted that the names of the petitioners 1 and 23 were recommended for the post of Block Development and Panchayat Officers at Serial No. 7 and 9 respectively in General Category.
6.
In the written statement filed by the 1st respondent, it is stated that the petitioners have no legal right to claim appointment and in the first instance a requisition for filling up 62 posts in Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) and Allied Services were advertised and in that advertisement, it is mentioned that number of posts was liable to variation and according to the 1st respondent, originally 62 posts were advertised.
Though the increase in number of vacancies was communicated to the Service Commission, the Commission did not issue any corrigendum so as to increase the vacancies to 74.
Therefore, the State Government cannot make appointments more than the advertised posts and accordingly the respective departments were directed to make the appointments of the candidates to the extent of advertised vacancies.
It is further stated that there were only 44 posts meant for general category and the placement of the petitioners is beyond 44 posts.
Therefore, they cannot be appointed.
7.
There is no dispute of the fact that the State Government itself had written to the Commission that subsequent to the advertisement 12 more vacancies have arisen and these vacancies were intimated to the Service Commission.
On the basis of the requisition given by the State Government, the Service Commission selected 74 candidates.
Out of 62 posts originally advertised, 44 posts were to be filled from general category.
After the increase in number of posts to 74, 49 candidates belonging to general category have to be appointed.
There is also no dispute of the fact that the names of the petitioners have been recommended for appointment.
Even in the advertisement, it is clearly stated that the number of vacancies are liable to be varied.
Therefore, the contention of the 1st respondent that since the Service Commission did not issue any corrigendum, the vacancies have to be restricted to originally advertised posts cannot be accepted.
8.
It is also not disputed that the Service Commission on the basis of the result of the written examination interviewed the candidates keeping in view the fact that there were 74 vacancies and recommended 74 candidates for appointments.
But the fact remains that no corrigendum has been issued nor it was made known to the candidates that there were 74 vacancies.
The State Government may not fill up all the vacancies.
It has been observed by the Supreme Court in Union Public Service Commission v. Gaurav Dwivedi, in Civil Appeal No. 3177 of 1999 decided on 1351999 : 1999(3) SCT 67 (SC) that it is not incumbent upon the Government to fill up all the vacancies which are notified even if the candidates have been selected.
9.
A Division Bench of this Court in Kamal Singh Singhmar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(4) RSJ 818 : 1996(4) SCT 609 (P&H)(DB), held that recommendations beyond notified vacancies are not permissible and the selection/appointments over and above the notified vacancies is liable to be quashed.
In Surinder Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) RSJ 57 : 1997(4) SCT 395 (P&H)(DB), it has been held by the Apex Court as follows :  "It is in no uncertain words that this Court has held that it would be improper exercise of power to make appointments over and above those advertised.
It is only in rare and exceptional circumstances and in emergent situation that this rule can be deviated from.
It should be clearly spelled out as to under what policy such a decision has been taken.
Exercise of such a power has to be tested on the touchstone of reasonableness.
Before any advertisement is issued, it would, therefore, be incumbent upon the authorities to take into account the existing vacancies and anticipated vacancies.
It is not as matter of course that the authority can fill up more posts that advertised."
10.
It has also been held in Prem Singh and others v. The Haryana State Electricity Board and others, 1996(3) RSJ 98 : 1996(3) SCT 563 (SC), as follows :  "In the case of Gujarat State Dy.
Executive Engineers' Association v. State of Gujarat, 1994 Supp.
(2) SCC 591 : 1994(3) SCT 325, the following question arose for consideration.
What is a waiting list ?
; can it be treated as a source of recruitment from which candidates may be drawn as and when necessary; and lastly how long can it operate ?
Though this question was examined in the context of Executive Engineers (Civil) Gujarat Service of Engineers Class I Recruitment Rules, 1979, the following observations made by this Court are of general application.
Therein this Court has observed : "How a waiting list should operate and what is its nature, may be governed by the rules.
Usually it is linked with the selection or examination for which it is prepared.
For instance if an examination is held say for selection of 10 candidates for 1990 and the competent authority prepares a waiting list then it is in respect of those 10 seats only for which selection or competition was held.
Such lists are prepared either under the rules or even otherwise mainly to ensure that the working in the office does not suffer if the selected candidates do not join for one or the other reason or the next selection or examination is not held soon.
Therefore, once the selected candidates join and no vacancy arises due to resignation etc. or for any other reasons within the period the list is to operate under the rules within reasonable period where no specific period is provided then candidate from the waiting list has no right to claim appointment to any future vacancy which may arise unless the selection was held for it."
11.
From the above discussion, it becomes clear that the selection process by way of requisition can be started for clear vacancies and also for anticipated vacancies, but not for future vacancies.
If the requisition and advertisement are for a certain number of posts only, the State cannot make more appointments than the number of posts advertised even though it might have prepared a select list of more candidates.
The State can deviate from the advertisement and make appointments on posts falling vacant thereafter in exceptional circumstances only or in an emergent situation and that too by taking a policy decision in that behalf.
State Govt. cannot make appointments more than the number of posts advertised.
12.
Further the contention of the petitioners also affects the Equality Clause.
Advertisement was originally issued in the year 1992.
The process of the selection proceeded and came to an end in 1996.
After 1992 some persons may become eligible for being appointed to the vacancies that have arisen after the advertisement.
Thus the persons who became eligible for appointment are deprived from applying to the posts and being appointed.
If the candidates have been selected more than advertised posts and the future vacancies have been filled up by those candidates who applied in pursuance of 1992 advertisement, it deprives of the opportunity to those persons who became eligible after 1992.
Even according to the petitioners the increase in number of posts from 62 to 74 was made long after advertisement issued in 1992.
Therefore, the candidates who became eligible after 1992 cannot be deprived of the opportunity of applying for the vacancies that have arisen subsequently to 1992 or advertised thereafter.
This is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In this context, reference may be made to the decisions of the Apex Court in the State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha and others, 1974(3) SCC 222, Mani Subrat Jain and others v. State of Haryana, 1977(1) SCC 486 and State of Kerala v. A Lakshmikutty, 1986(4) SCC 632.
13.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I do not find any merit in these writ petitions and the same are, accordingly, dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.