Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for quashing the order dated 22.8.1988 passed by the respondents rejecting the claim of the petitioner for grant of disability pension.
The said order reads as under :-  DISABILITY PENSION 1.
The pension sanctioning authorities after careful examination have decided that the disability on account of which, you were invalided out of service :- (a) Is not attribute to military service.
(b) Does not fulfil the following conditions namely that it existed before or arose during military service and has been or remained aggravated thereby.
(c) Is attributable to/aggravated by service assessed at less than 20% (i.e.) ______ to _____) for 2.
Accordingly no disability pension is admissible to you.
3.
You have right to appeal and, therefore, if you desire you may prefer an appeal against the decision of the CDA(P) within a period of six months from 4888 on such grounds as you deem fit to put forth.
Although the last date is 4289 but you should send your appeal in duplicate at the earliest to this office for onward submission to the CDA(P) Allahabad."
2.
The relevant facts giving rise to the present petition are that petitioner originally was enrolled in the Indian Army on 18.1.1978 where he served for nearly 10 years.
On 31.1.1988 the petitioner was discharged as having suffered permanent disability and was declared unfit for continuation of army service.
The petitioner raised his claim for disability pension which was declined on 22.8.1988.
As is clear from the above order, the petitioner was declined disability pension as his disability was assessed to be less than 20% and it was stated to be neither attributable nor aggravated by army service.
Petitioner preferred an appeal against the said order on 631989 which was also rejected by the Secretary to Government of India on 31101989.
Petitioner has been making representations till the year 1991, but to no avail.
Thereafter the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
The petitioner has contended that in the year 1983 he was transferred to Assam State and he served about 3 years in Mizoram Hills at high altitude where he suffered severe attack of jaundice and remained admitted in Army Hospital.
He also remained on leave.
Subsequently, the petitioner states to have been placed in permanent low medical category 'BEE' (permanent) and finally invalided from the military service.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents it is not disputed that the petitioner had acquired qualifying length of service to the extent of 9 years 342 days and had also acquired 36 days as non-qualifying service.
It is also admitted that the petitioner was released from Army on medical grounds having suffered permanent disability.
In the reply it is stated that the medical board had opined that obesity was constitutional in its origin and was neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
Rejection by the respondents of the disability pension of the petitioner is also not disputed.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the Union of India has relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Zora Singh (Syp.)
v. Union of India, 1994(3) Recent Services Judgments 464 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
734 to contend that disallowing of the disability pension is in conformity with the rules and, therefore, this Court should not interfere, in the impugned order.
While, on the other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the disability of the petitioner has further aggravated over the years and such disability would be much more than 20%.
As such even on date he would be entitled to receive the disability pension.
It is a settled principle of law that the writ petition has to be decided on the basis of the facts averred in the petition and the cause of action, which was available to the petitioner at the time of filing of the writ petition unless there has been amendment of the pleadings to claim such a relief.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that disability of the petitioner as of now is in excess of 20%, it would not invalidate or render the order passed in the year 1989 as bad which was passed upon due consideration of the medical board.
There is no document on record before this Court to presume that the disability of the petitioner at the time of passing of the impugned order was in excess of 20%.
The respondents have stated by way of affidavit that the disability of the petitioner at the time of his discharge, of course, was of permanent nature, but it was only 6% to 10%.
The record produced by the respondents in Court at the time of arguments fully supports the case pleaded by the Union of India in its written statement.
6.
Regulation 173, which is the enabling provision for sanction and grant of disability pension makes it mandatory that the disability should be 20% or above and it should also be attributable or aggravated to military service.
There could be some argument in relation to aggravation and attributability of the injury/disability, but there could be no argument to the extent of disability being obesity of 6%.
For this reason alone, the petitioner would not be entitled to the relief prayed for i.e. for quashing of the order dated 22.8.1998.
However, if the petitioner is desirous of subjecting himself to a Re-survey Medical Board, which is permissible under the rules and plead his case for grant of disability pension as of today, in that event the petitioner is at liberty to approach the respondents with such request.
If such a request is made by the petitioner to the respondents, the respondents shall, within a reasonable time, subject the petitioner to a Re-Survey Medical Board to ascertain the extent of disability as of today.
If the disability is found to be 20% or above, then the respondents shall process the case of the petitioner in accordance with law.
7.
As a result of the above discussion, the writ petition is disposed of with above directions, however, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed