VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Dharam Veer seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus for directing the respondents to give him admission in Diploma in Education (Hindi) for the academic session 1998-2000.
2.
The petitioner has passed his Matriculation examination from the Haryana School Education Board, Bhiwani in 1983.
In the year 1985, the Indira Gandhi Nation Open University was established by an Act of the Parliament namely Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985.
The University offered admission to Bachelor's degree programme i.e. BA, BCom.
for such students who did not possess 10+2 examination or equivalent examination and had obtained the age of 16 years.
In view of the said offer, the petitioner was admitted in BA and he passed the BA examination from the above said University in December, 1996.
He secured 4445 per cent marks.
In July, 1998 the office of respondent No. 2 (Director, Secondary Education, Haryana) issued prospectus for admission to various courses/diploma in Education for the year 1998-2000.
The last date for receipt of application form was 481998.
The petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste category and was permanent resident of Haryana.
He sent his application form in the prescribed form to respondent No. 3 (Director, State Council of Educational Research & Training, Haryana).
On basis of the application form, the petitioner was required to appear in the Entrance Test of Diploma of Education Course.
For some reason, the said test was cancelled and he again appeared on 13111998 at Hisar.
He qualified himself for seeking admission in Diploma in Education course for the academic year 1998-2000.
The petitioner received a letter requiring him to appear for admission in the office of respondent No. 3.
At that time, the original certificates of the petitioner were checked.
He was informed that he cannot be given admission in D.Ed.
(Hindi course) because he did not pass 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana.
He was refused admission.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that this refusal of admission is illegal because he had obtained BA degree which is higher qualification as compared to 10+2 examination.
He is a Scheduled Caste candidate and has obtained more than 40 per cent marks.
Thus, he fulfils all the qualifications.
4.
The petition had been contested.
In the written statement filed, on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 it has been pointed that Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi offers an opportunity for admission to Bachelor's Degree Programme (BA, B Com.)
to the candidates who do not have 10+2 or equivalent examination and had attained the age of 18 years.
Such a candidate is required to pursue six month preparatory course which are non-credit courses and no terminal examination is held.
Such a student is promoted to Bachelor's Degree Programme to pursue his studies.
The said six months BDP Programme course is not recognised equivalent to 10+2 examination by the Board of School Education, Haryana.
Thus, the petitioner was not eligible for admission to D.Ed.
course because he did not posses minimum educational qualification.
Further, the case of the respondents was that merely because the petitioner had passed BA examination from the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi (for short `the University'), it will not make him eligible for admission to D.Ed.
Course.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner alleged and argued vehemently that petitioner is a Scheduled Caste candidate.
He did not pass 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana or any similar Board in the country.
But according to him, he passed BA examination from the Indira Gandhi National Open University.
It is a recognised degree.
Since, it is higher qualification and the petitioner obtained more than 40 per cent marks, he has a right to be admitted after having qualified in D.Ed.
course.
On the contrary, on behalf of the respondents, it was pointed that as per the prospectus which has force of law, it was necessary that petitioner should have passed 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana or its equivalent examination from any other Board.
The subsequent degree, if any, obtained is irrelevant.
6.
To appreciate the said controversy, it becomes necessary to refer to some of the facts which were not controverted.
The same are that the petitioner had passed Matriculation examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana and thereafter had passed the examination and was awarded degree of BA in third division from the University (Annexure P-1).
7.
The University offered admission to Bachelor's Degree Programme examination and had put an advertisement that it offered admission to the course (BA, BCom.)
even to students who have not pased 10+2 or equivalent examination but had obtained (atlained ?)
the age of 18 years.
Such students were required to pursue six months Bachelor's Degree Preparatory Programme.
Thereafter they were promoted to Bachelor's Degree Programme to pursue their studies.
The student is awarded the said degree on completion of all the requirements.
So far as respondent No. 2 is concerned, the prospectus pertaining to admission to D.Ed.
Diploma in Education, prescribed the following qualifications :-  "(i) Diploma in Education (D.Ed.)
A candidate should have passed 10+2 examination from Board of School Education, Haryana or its equivalent examination from any other Board, recognised by Board of School Education, Haryana, with at least 50% aggregate marks.
Note (1) : For the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Tribes, Backward Classes/Legally Divorced/Legally Deserted/Widow/Physically handicapped, the candidates will have to obtain at least 40% aggregate marks in qualifying examination as mentioned above.
The relaxation is admissible for all the training courses viz.
D.Ed./D.Ed.(Urdu)/O.T.(Hindi)/Skt./Pbi.).
Relaxation to the extent of 10% marks is also admissible to the candidates applying for five additional seats (village seats) which are for D.Ed.
course only."
During the course of arguments, it transpired that vide letter written by the Under Secretary Education, State of Haryana, the degree and diploma recognised by the Government of India shall be recognised by the Government of Haryana.
It is on the strength of this fact that it was urged that petitioner holds a BA degree from the recognised University and thus was eligible to take the admission.
8.
On behalf of the respondents, attention of the Court was drawn towards the Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Meenal Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 464 : 1994(4) SCT 493 (P&H)(DB).
The majority view was that in professional courses the Government can lay down conditions for admission.
The eligibility conditions could also been prescribed.
The Supreme Court in the case of Anant Madaan v. State of Haryana, 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 901 : 1995(2) SCT 449 (SC), also held while dealing with the decision of Full Bench of this Court referred to above that preference in admission on the basis of residence could be permissible provided there is no total reservation on basis of residential and institutional preference.
9.
Indeed this is not the controversy herein.
The prospectus prescribes the minimum qualification of 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana or its equivalent from any other Board recognised by the Board of School Education Haryana.
Thus, no preference is being given to any student on basis of the residence in the particular area, may be Haryana.
All that the prospectus prescribed was that a candidate must have passed 10+2 examination from a recognised Board.
It could be the Board of School Education, Haryana or any other Board recognised by the Board of School Education.
The purpose is to take the candidates with reasonable good record.
It is also to ensure that they have passed 10+2 examination in a competitive spirit rather than in a round about manner.
Ordinarily when minimum educational qualification is prescribed, it should be left for the discretion of the authorities.
Unless it is arbitrary, unconscionable or totally unjust, this Court will not interfere.
10.
The said qualification cannot be described to be discriminatory because it gives no preference to any particular class or individual.
It becomes unnecessary to ponder further because of Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Vidya Yadav v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, 1998(1) Recent Services Judgment 186.
In the cited case Vidya Yadav applied to Bachelor of Journalism (one year course).
She was seeking reservation as a member of Backward Class.
As per the handbook, the minimum qualification for admission to Bachelor of Journalism was a Bachelor's degree with 55 per cent marks.
Vidya Yadav did not possess 55 per cent marks in BA She had of course taken Post Graduate degree in Geography with 66 per cent marks.
It was held that merely because she was holding a higher qualification, will not be enough.
When she did not qualify for basic qualification, this Court dismissed the writ petition and held :-  "Learned counsel representing petitioner then brought to our notice a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in State of Haryana v. Shiv Datt, 1990(6) Services Law Reporter 799, to support the argument that a higher qualification than the one prescribed in the brochure should be treated as sufficient for admission to the course.
The said Division Bench decision, we are afraid, cannot apply to the facts of the case at hand.
The facts in Shiv Datt's case (supra) dealt with by the Division Bench, were the following : As per the notification, for appointment to the post of Teacher, Diploma in Education was prescribed as the basic qualification.
Then the question arose, whether a person having Bachelor's Degree in Education, is competent to apply for the post.
The higher qualification than the one prescribed in the notification for the post of Teacher, Diploma in education, was prescribed as the basic qualification.
Then the question arose, whether a person having Bachelor's Degree in Education, is competent to apply for the post.
The higher qualification than the one prescribed in the notification for the post of Teacher was treated as sufficient qualification.
In the instant case, basic qualification has been prescribed by the Handbook of Information as Bachelor's Degree with 55 per cent marks.
That basic qualification cannot be altered on the ground that the petitioner has got Post-Graduate Degree.
Consequently, the Division Bench decision in Shiv Datt's case (supra) cannot have any application to the facts of case at hand."
Even according to the petitioner, she has not secured 55 per cent marks in the Bachelor's Degree Examination.
So, as per the brochure/Handbook of Information, she is not having the minimum qualification.
We would, in this light, hold that the stand taken by the University in denying her admission to the Course is perfectly justified and it calls for no interference.
It provides the answer to the argument advanced and so much thought of by the petitioner's learned counsel.
It is not so that it is arbitrary, illegal or unjust.
Once the minimum qualifications referred to above are not so, there is no merit in the writ petition.
For these reasons, the writ petition must fail and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.