VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Smt. Suman Lata has filed the present writ petition for directing the respondents to consider the petitioner eligible for admission in Diploma (Hindi) and offer admission to her in OT (Hindi) course because the persons lower in merit than her have since been admitted.
2.
The facts alleged are that petitioner applied for the course in Diploma in OT (Hindi) as a general category candidate.
She appeared in the entrance test and qualified the same.
She stood at merit No. 103.
There were 42 candidates shown to be below in merit than the petitioner because the total seats to be filled up were 145.
Even she was called for an interview.
At the time of allotment of centre, the petitioner was informed that she did not have the prescribed qualifications namely she did not have the degree of Parbhakar (Honours) in Hindi with atleast 50 per cent aggregate marks from the University duly recognised by Universities in Haryana.
The petitioner informed the respondents that she had passed BA (Honours Sanskrit) and MA Hindi from Kurukshetra University and is possessing higher qualification than the minimum prescribed.
She states that her candidature can be considered.
The request has not been accepted.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that since she is possession higher qualification namely MA Hindi, she should be considered for admission because she has secured higher position in merit and is at No. 103 and is entitled to be admitted.
4.
In the reply filed, the respondents has pointed that the qualification prescribed for admission to OT Hindi course as per the prospectus is that candidate should have passed matriculation examination from the Board of School Education Haryana or any other equivalent examination from any other Board recognized by the Board of School Education Haryana and should have passed Parbhakar (Honours) in Hindi with atleast 50 per cent aggregate marks from the University duly recognized in Haryana.
The petitioner did not possess qualification of BA (Hindi) and, therefore, was not eligible to be taken in course.
5.
The short question that came up for consideration and agitated was as to whether the petitioner was eligible to the considered for admission in Diploma in Hindi (OT Hindi) course or not ?
As is apparent from the facts narrated above, the contention raised is that the petitioner possessed higher qualification than the minimum prescribed and, therefore, had the right to be admitted once she has passed other entrance examination.
On the contrary the respondents urged that once the petitioner did not possess the minimum prescribed qualification, the above said contention of the petitioner is totally devoid of any merit.
6.
The minimum qualification for admission to the course (OT Hindi) is :-  "The minimum educational qualification for admission to these courses is as follows :- (iii) OT Hindi Candidate should have passed matriculation examination from Board of School Education, Haryana or any equivalent examination from any other Board (recognised by Board of School Education Haryana) and should have passed Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi) examination with atleast 50% aggregate marks from a University duly recognised by Universities in Haryana."
During the course of the writ petition, the respondents have filed the additional affidavit.
The report of the Committee of the experts which has been constituted had been considered.
It has been pointed that for joining MA Hindi, a person who even is a science student or a commerce graduate can take up the said course.
For appearing in Prabhakar examination a candidate has to take all six papers of Hindi language alone.
7.
On behalf of the petitioner reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Anuj Yadav v. State of Haryana) and another, 1995(3) Recent Services Judgments 1.
In the cited case the advertisement required the qualification to be "Graduate from Recognized University with Business Administration as a subject".
Anuj Yadav was holding the degree of Master of Business Administration from Kurukshetra University.
Business Administration and Business Management were interchangeable and synonymous.
It was held that the said person would be eligible for consideration to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
It is abundantly clear that facts were totally different from the one in hand.
The cited decision, therefore, does not come to the rescue of the petitioner.
8.
In that event reliance further was placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Bimla Devi v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(1) Recent Services Judgments 263 : 1999(3) S.C.T.
178.
Herein the post was of Hindi teacher.
It was denied to the petitioner on the ground that she had not passed Prabhakar.
She had passed BA with Hindi as elective subject.
She had done MA in Hindi.
This Court had held that she was eligible to be considered for the said post.
But perusal of the cited judgment clearly shows that it is distinguishable on facts.
The reasons are obvious.
The facts reveal that petitioner in the cited case was selected.
Her name was included in the list of candidates found eligible for appointment as Hindi Teachers.
It was held that admission could not be refused against a post which has remained unfilled.
Not only that the Court also had found that there was violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
This is for the reason that it had been noted that certain other persons possessing Qualifications of BA with Hindi and B.Ed.
had been appointed to the post of Hindi teacher.
It is this important fact which prevailed with this Court in allowing the writ petition.
That is not so in the present case in hand.
There is not even a whisper of discrimination in the petition on similar grounds.
9.
In fact reference with advantage can be made to the decision of this Court in the case of Vidya Yadav v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra and another, 1998(1) Recent Services Judgment 186.
In that case Vidya Yadav applied for the seat for Bachelor of Journalism.
She was seeking reservation as a member of Backward Class.
As per the handbook, the minimum qualification for admission to Bachelor of Journalism was Bachelor's degree with 55% marks.
She did not possess 55% marks in BA but had Post Graduate degree in Geography.
It was held that merely because she was holding higher qualification will not be enough.
She should have the basic qualification.
This Court held :-  "Learned counsel representing petitioner then brought to our notice a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in State of Haryana v. Shiv Datt, 1990(6) Service Law Reporter 799, to support the argument that a higher qualification than the one prescribed in the brochure should be treated as sufficient for admission to the course.
The said Division Bench decision, we are afraid, cannot apply to the facts of the case at hand.
The facts in Shiv Datt's case (supra) dealt with by the Division bench, were the following : As per the notification, for appointment to the post of Teacher, Diploma in Education was prescribed as the basic qualification.
Then the question arose, whether a person having Bachelor's Degree in Education, is competent to apply for the post.
The higher qualification than the one prescribed in the notification for the post of Teacher, was treated as sufficient qualification.
In the instant case, basic qualification has been prescribed by the Handbook of Information as Bachelor's Degree with 55 per cent marks.
That basic qualification cannot be altered on the ground that the petitioner has got Post-Graduate Degree.
Consequently, the Division Bench decision in Shiv Datt's case (supra) cannot have any application to the facts of case at hand.
Even according to the petitioner, she has not secured 55 per cent marks in the Bachelor's degree Examination.
So, as per the brochure/Handbook of Information, she is not having the minimum qualification.
We would, in this light, hold that the stand taken by the University in denying her admission to the Course is perfectly justified and it calls for no interference."
Similarly, in Civil Writ Petition No. 2946 of 1999 titled Dharam Veer v. State of Haryana & others, decided on 24.8.1999 a similar question had cropped up.
Petitioner Dharam Veer in the said case was seeking a right to be admitted in Diploma in Education (Hindi).
The minimum qualification was that candidate should have passed 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education Haryana with atleast 50% aggregate marks.
He had passed BA examination from Indira Gandhi National Open University but had not passed 10+2 examination.
It was held that when the petitioner did not possess the minimum qualification, he had no right to be so admitted in the said course.
10.
The facts of the present case are identical.
The petitioner did not have minimum qualification namely BA (Honours) in Hindi with 50 per cent marks.
Therefore, once the petitioner did not possess the minimum qualification, she did not have the right to claim that she must be admitted to the above said course.
11.
As a result of the reasons given above, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.