KK Srivastava, J - The petitioners (Mrs. Renu Bala, Mrs. Kaushalya Devi and Ms. Kailash Devi) have filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for quashing the selection made by the respondent/Haryana Staff Selection Commission (hereinafter to be referred as "Commission"), of the candidates, including respondent No. 4/Ms.
Manorama and respondent No. 5/Ms.
Shakuntla to the post of Sanskrit teachers (female).
They have further prayed for issuance of a direction to the respondent No. 3/Commission to consider their cases for appointment to the said post of Sanskrit teachers.
2.
The respondent-Commission advertised the posts of Sanskrit teachers (female) vide advertisement No. 4/96, category No. 6, which was published in the newspaper `The Tribune' dated 7111996.
The qualifications laid down for selection to the said post of Sanskrit teachers, in the advertisement, were as under :-  "(i) Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit) from a University recognized by Haryana Government.
(ii) Pass LTC (OT) in Sanskrit conducted by the Educational Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
3.
The age was required to be between 17-35 years and upto 40 years with relaxation in case of reserved categories, as per Haryana Government instructions.
The respondent No. 3 issued a corrigendum (annexure P5 dated 29111996) providing that those candidates, who have taken the examination of the last year for the prescribed qualification but their result has not been declared so far, could also apply.
The interview would, however, be taken only if the result has been declared prior to the date of the interview The case of the petitioners fell in this category.
They also applied for the post of Sanskrit teacher (female).
The respondent No. 3 issued interview letters to the petitioners.
However, the candidature of the petitioner No. 2/Mrs Kaushalya Devi was rejected vide letter dated 2131997 (copy Annexure P8) on the ground that she was not eligible as she did not either pass or appear in the LTC (OT) examination on or before 16121996.
It has been averred that the petitioner No. 2 alongwith other candidates appeared in the office of the Commission in pursuance of a public notice published by the Commission in `The Tribune' dated 2281997 (vide Annexure P11) but the petitioner No. 2 alongwith the petitioners Nos. 1 and 3 and other candidates were not interview by the Commission.
The grievance of the petitioners is that though they were eligible for selection and appointment for the post of Sanskrit teachers (female) but they were not interviewed by the Commission.
The respondent Nos. 4 and 5 who had taken their LTC (OT) examination alongwith these petitioners were, however, interviewed by the Commission and they were selected for appointment to the post of Sanskrit teachers (female).
Feeling aggrieved by the action of the Commission, the petitioners have approached this court by filing the present writ petition.
4.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents (State of Haryana through its Secretary, Department of Education, Haryana, Director of Education, Haryana, The Secretary, Haryana Staff Selection Commission and the selected candidates namely, Ms. Manorama and Ms. Shakuntla, respondent Nos. 4 and 5 respectively).
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed written statement, contending inter alia that they had only sent requisition of 403 posts to the Commission/respondent No. 3.
The Commission completed the selection process and made recommendations regarding 301 candidates and the names of the selected candidates and the names of the selected candidates were sent to the respective District Education Officers for appointment, as they were the appointing authorities.
It was also averred that most of the candidates had joined the said posts.
5.
Respondent No. 3/Commission filed a separate written statement, contending inter alia that the petitioners were not eligible for being interviewed for the post of Sanskrit teachers as they did not fulfil the essential qualifications for the said post.
The Commission averred that the advertisement date 7111996 (annexure R3/1) contained a specific Clause to the effect that "age, experience and qualifications will be determined as on last date of submission of application, if otherwise not specified".
However, the letter dated 29111996 (annexure R3/2) was received from the Director of Secondary Education/respondent No. 2, informing that a decision had been taken that the candidates, who had already taken the final year examination of the prescribed qualification and whose result had not been declared by then, be also allowed to apply subject to the condition that the result of such examination is declared prior to the date of interview.
The respondent/Commission took immediate action on this letter and issued a corrigendum notice, published on 2.12.1996, informing the candidates accordingly that those candidates, who had already appeared in the final year examination of the prescribed qualification, but whose result had not been declared by then, may also apply for the posts of Master/Mistresses, Classical and Vernacular Teachers (Men and Women), advertised on 7111996.
It was stipulated in the notice that such candidates would be interviewed only if the result of the said examination is declared before the date of interview and that they shall have to bring with them the proof of having passed the examination on the date of interview.
In view of this position, the last date for submission of application forms was also extended upto 16121996.
The case of the respondent/Commission is that vide notice dated 291119966 (annexure R3/3), those candidates could also apply who had already taken the final year examination by the closing date i.e. 16121996.
It was contended that it meant that those who had taken the examination of the prescribed qualification by 16121996 were not at all eligible and such candidates could not apply.
On scrutiny of the applications of the petitioners, the application form of the petitioner No. 1/Mrs.
Kaushalya Devi was rejected on the ground of her being ineligible.
She had enclosed a certificate dated 3121996 from the head of her institution to the effect that she was likely to appear in the Shiksha Shastri (OT) Sanskrit examination to be conducted by the Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997.
It was further mentioned that evidently petitioner No. 2 had not taken the Shiksha Shastri (OT) Sanskrit examination prior to 16121996 and consequently she was held ineligible for being interviewed for the said post.
Regarding petitioner Nos. 1 and 3, it was averred by the Commission that they had made a wrong statement in their application forms to the effect that their OT Sanskrit examination result was not yet declared.
On the basis of the said particulars furnished by the petitioner Nos. 1 and 3, the Commission drew an assumption that they had taken the examination prior to 16121996 and consequently, they were issued roll Nos. 961 and 816 respectively and were called for interview.
It was, however, detected at the time of interview that they submitted the certificate of having passed OT Sanskrit examination, showing that they had taken the examination in April 1997, which was much later than the cut off date, i.e. 16121996.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 were also not allowed to participate in the interview.
6.
The respondent-Commission referred to the similar controversy having been settled by a Division Bench of this Court, comprising of Hon'ble Mr. Justice GS Singhvi and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Amar Dutt in Civil Writ Petition No. 11365 of 1998 (Satya Sudha v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(1) SCT 203 (P&H)).
In that case the Division Bench repelled the contention of the petitioner that she had not taken the OT Sanskrit examination prior to the prescribed date, i.e. 16121996 and held that it was immaterial that her result had been declared prior to the date of interview.
The respondent/Commission while refering to the selection of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 averred (at internal page 7 of the written statement) inter alia as under :-  "In the present writ petition the petitioners have stated that private respondent Nos. 4 and 5 also had taken their OT Sanskrit examination conducted by Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997 (after 16121997) but they were allowed interview, selected and recommended.
This is correct.
The private respondents No. 4 and 5 happened to be inadvertently allowed interview under Roll No. 1184 and Roll No. 1180 respectively, they also happened to be considered eligible at the time of preparing result.
They made grade under the criteria and were selected and also recommended.
But the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were patently ineligible having taken the prescribed examination after the prescribed date 16121996.
On receiving complaints against them, they were issued show-cause notice to the effect that they were ineligible and as to why their candidature and consequent selection and recommendation should not be cancelled.
But respondent Nos. 4 and 5 submitted their respective reply to the said show cause notice and stated that since they had been appointed, only the Education Department could take any action against them and the Haryana Staff Selection Commission could not initiate any action against them at this stage.
Meanwhile, the notice of the present writ petition was received, wherein the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 have been impleaded and their selection has been challenged.
In view of this position the action on the said show cause notice was dropped to avoid multiplicity of litigation.
Now, since the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 are before this Hon'ble Court, this Hon'ble Court may pass appropriate orders qua these private respondent Nos. 4 and 5 after hearing them in accordance with law.
They were not impleaded in Satya Sudha case (supra)."
7.
Despite service of notice, respondent No. 5/Ms.
Shakuntla did not appear to contest the writ petition, which proceeded ex parte against her.
8.
Respondent No. 4/Smt.
Manorama filed separate written statement taking the preliminary objection that the petitioners by raising the question that the Commission was not competent to frame the criteria, have, as a matter of fact, challenged the whole selection and since all the selected candidates have not been impleaded in the petition, no decision can be taken behind the back of such selected candidates and as such the petition was liable to be dismissed on that score.
9.
On merits, it was contended by respondent No. 4 that she was eligible on the crucial date when the eligibility was to be considered and as such her selection is valid, legal and there is no infirmity in her selection.
10.
The controversy involved in the instant case is identical with the controversy involved in the case of Satya Sudha (supra).
Initially Smt. Manorama/respondent No. 4, who was impleaded as respondent No. 5 in the writ petition filed by Ms. Satya Sudha, but she was ordered to be deleted vide order dated 23.7.1999.
The Division Bench while deciding the aforesaid case settled the controversy by holding inter alia as under :-  "......A bare reading of Annexure P1 dated 29111996, which constitutes the foundation of the petitioner's claim, shows that after the issuance of advertisement, the Board decided to consider the candidature of those who had already appeared in the final examination of the prescribed qualification but whose result had not be declared.
The petitioner, as per her own showing, appeared in the final examination of Shiksha Shastri held by the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997.
It must, therefore, be held that she is not entitled to take benefit of the notice Annexure P.1.
As a logical corollary, it must be held that she is not eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher on the basis of application submitted in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure R.1.............." 11.
The case of Ms. Satya Sudha arose out of the same advertisement and selection as is in the instant case of these petitioners and also respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
The petitioners as well as respondent No. 4 and 5 and Ms. Satya Sudha, writ petitioner of the aforesaid case had taken Shiksha Shastri examination conducted by the Educational Department of Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997.
As such, the present case is squarely covered by the decision rendered in Satya Sudha's case (supra).
12.
So far as the selection of respondent No. 4/Ms.
Manorama is concerned it may be relevant to note that the Division Bench in the case of Satya Sudha (supra) took notice of her selection and observed as under :-  "The plea of discrimination raised by the petitioner with reference to the case of Smt. Manorama appears to be attractive but, in our opinion, consideration of candidature of Smt. Manorama or for that reason of Smt. Shakuntla about whom a mention has been made in Para 5 of the reply filed on behalf of the Commission, cannot entitle the petitioner to claim consideration, notwithstanding the fact that she did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility specified in the advertisement and her case is not covered by the notice Annexure P.1.
From the facts brought on record, we are prima facie of the view that if Smt. Manorama and Smt. Shakuntla had not appeared in the final examination held after 29111996, the consideration of their candidature will have to be regarded as violative of the terms and conditions of the advertisement but on the basis of an illegal order passed by the official respondents, we cannot entertain the petitioner's plea that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to commit another illegality.
The doctrine of equality in the matter of employment enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India cannot be invoked for compelling the public authorities to pass illegal orders on the premise that in other cases such orders have been passed by the administrative authorities.
For this proposition, we may refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and another, 1995(2) RRR 291 (SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 445 and M/s. Faridabad CT Scan Centre v. Director General Health Services and others, JT 1997(8) SC 171 : 1997(4) SCT 463 (SC)."
13.
The plea of discrimination raised by the petitioner/Ms.
Satya Sudha with reference to the case of Smt. Manorama (respondent No. 4 in the instant petition) was repelled by the Division Bench.
Learned Counsel for respondent No. 4 could not show from the material on record that she was eligible for being considered for selection and appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher (female) on the cut-off date.
The factual position of the case was not disputed inasmuch as Smt. Smt. Manorama had also taken Shiksha Shastri (OT) Sanskrit examination conducted by the Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997 alongwith the petitioners as also Ms. Satya Sudha (writ petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 11365/1998).
The case of the present petitioners is identical with that of Ms. Staya Sudha regarding their appearing in Shiksha Shastri (OT) Sanskrit examination aforesaid, which was conducted by the Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997.
It, thus, follows that the petitioners as well as respondent No. 4/Smt.
Manorama and respondent No. 5/Ms.
Shakuntala were ineligible on the cut-off date, viz, 16121996 for being considered for selection and appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher (female), as per advertisement read with the corrigendum notice issued by respondent No. 3/Commission.
In this view of this mater, the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4/Smt.
Manorama and respondent No. 5/Ms.
Shakuntla was illegal.
The respondent No. 3/Commission has taken a categorical stand regarding respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and it has been averred that they were ineligible for appointment but the action against them could not be taken so far due to issuance of notice of motion in this writ petition.
It will appear from the stand taken in the written statement filed by the respondent/Commission (in para 7, quoted above) that on receiving complaints against respondent Nos. 4 and 5, they were issued show-cause notices to the effect that they were ineligible and as to why their candidature and consequent selection and recommendation should not be cancelled.
It has also been averred further that both these respondents submitted their respective reply to the said show cause notice and stated that since they had been appointed, only the Education Department could take any action against them at that stage.
Since the notice of the present writ petition had been received by the Commission and further since the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 have been impleaded in this petition and their selection had been challenged, hence, action on the said show cause notice was dropped to avoid multiplicity of litigation.
The stand taken by the respondent No. 3/Commission shows that the action was being taken by them against respondent Nos. 4 and 5 on the ground of their being ineligible for selection and appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher (female), but the Commission decided to drop action on the show cause notices because of the filing of this writ petition in which they had been impleaded as respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and their selection to the said post had been challenged.
In the case of Ms. Satya Sudha (supra), the Division Bench has expressed the view that merely because the respondents committed illegality in the case of respondent/Smt.
Manorama and Ms. Shakuntala, the court would not direct the respondents to commit another illegality by considering the case of the petitioner for selection and appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher.
It has also further been held that the doctrine of equality in the matter of employment enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India cannot be invoked by compelling the public authorities to pass illegal orders on the premise that in other cases such orders have been passed by the administrative authorities.
The Division Bench has also noticed the decision of the Apex Court on this proposition (as already reproduced above).
14.
Once we are of the view that the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were ineligible for appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher (female) and their selection and appointment was not in accordance with law, their appointment cannot be upheld merely because they have joined their duties on the post of Sanskrit teacher (female) and are working on that post.
The initial selection and appointment of respondents No. 4 and 5 was contrary to law even according to the stand taken by the official respondent No. 3/Commission.
15.
Resultantly, this writ petition succeeds to the extent that the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 to the post to Sanskrit teacher (female) in pursuance to the advertisement No. 4/96 (copy Annexure P4) is set aside.
In other respects, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.