JL Gupta, J - The petitioner-bank had appointed the respondent-workman as a Secretary on a consolidated salary of Rs. 797/- per month vide order dated February 28, 1990.
The appointment was periodically extended upto November 24, 1991, when the workman was relieved of his duties.
He raised a demand.
The dispute was referred to the Labour Court.
Vide its award dated August 26, 1996 the Labour Court has held that the order of termination was violative of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the termination was illegal.
Consequently, the bank has been directed to reinstate the workman with full back wages.
Aggrieved by the order, the Management has filed the present writ petition.
2.
Mr. Sood, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the respondent had been appointed for a fixed term and his services were terminated on the expiry of the said period.
As such, the provisions of Section 25-F were not attracted.
It has been further submitted that the services of workman were actually terminated as selected candidates were appointed.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been contested by the learned counsel for the respondent.
3.
Perusal of award shows that the Court has recorded a finding of fact that workman had completed 240 days' service.
His services were terminated without compliance with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
It has been further found that the work was still continuing.
The post was also available.
In this situation, the plea raised on behalf of the management that the appointment was for a fixed term and the services of the respondent were terminated thereafter, has been rejected.
We find no ground to take a different view.
It is true that the appointment was initially temporary and for a period of 89 days.
However, it was periodically extended.
It was not a case where the work was of a temporary nature and the appointment had been made for the execution thereof.
The post of Secretary in a bank is a regular post.
It is still continuing and the temporary appointment cannot be used as a device to exclude the application of the industrial law.
In such a situation the petitioner cannot be permitted to take advantage of the helplessness of the respondent.
4.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that regular selection has been made and persons who were found suitable have been appointed.
Learned counsel is unable to show that the petitioner was replaced by a regularly selected person on November 24, 1991 when he was relieved of his duties.
It has not even been shown that the petitioner's application was duly considered for appointment when others were selected and appointed.
5.
Mr. Sood has also referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan and others v. Rameshwar Lal Gahlot, AIR 1996 SC 1001 : 1996(2) SCT 600 (SC), to contend that the award given by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
In this case it was held that when the appointment is for a fixed period, it cannot be said that the termination is illegal unless it is found that the power was misused or was vitiated by its mala fide exercise.
There is no quarrel with this proposition.
However, in the present case it is clearly established that the work was not of a temporary nature.
The appointment was being extended from time to time.
Even when the petitioner was relieved of his duties, the work was available and the post was in existence.
In such a situation the provisions of Section 25-F cannot be excluded by merely saying that the appointment is made for "89 days on daily wages".
If the purpose is only to exclude the benefit available to workman under the law, the relief cannot be denied to the workman.
Such appears to be the position in the present case.
6.
No other point has been raised.
7.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere with the award of the Labour Court.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.