VS Aggarwal, J - State of Punjab, hereinafter described as "the petitioner" assails the award of the Labour Court dated 2071995.
The respondent-workman was employed as a Beldar on 6.8.1980 by the petitioner.
He worked upto 3171981.
The respondent's case was that his services were terminated without any notice, charge-sheet or retrenchment compensation.
He served a demand notice and the Labour Court had made the reference.
This reference was dismissed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, due to lack of jurisdiction.
Subsequently, the Supreme Court held that Public Works Department was an industry.
It was followed by another demand notice and reference was made by the Labour Department.
The petitioner's claim was that Public Works Department is not an industry; the respondent had not completed 240 days; the workman was engaged for a specific period and for specific job and, therefore, the reference was bad.
2.
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Hoshiarpur, formed the issues and held that the Public Works Department was an industry.
It was further held that no retrenchment compensation had been given.
It was not shown that the respondent was employed on work-charged basis.
The findings were that the worked for more than 240 days in the preceding 12 months.
It was, therefore, directed that the respondent be reinstated in service with continuity of service but without benefit of any increment.
He was not allowed the wages prior to 27101988.
3.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner urged that retrenchment had been made because the work for which the workman had been engaged was completed.
Otherwise also, it has been contended that the respondent was engaged for specific period and for specific job and, therefore, reference was bad.
4.
So far as latter argument is concerned, the learned Court on facts had recorded that no material has been placed on the record to show that the respondent-workman was engaged for a specific job which was no more available.
In the absence of any evidence in this regard, the contention so raised has rightly been repelled by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court.
5.
In that event, it was urged that the Public Works Department is not an industry.
But this question was considered by this Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Hari Dass, 1999(1) Service Cases Today 489.
The answer provided was that it would be an industry.
6.
No other argument was raised.
7.
Keeping in view the aforesaid, the writ petition must be held to be without merit.
It fails and is consequently dismissed.
Petition dismissed.