SJ Mukhopadhaya, J - Both the cases relate to reservation and promotion in the Bihar Engineering Service and were heard together, they are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
In the State of Bihar, the Engineering Service (in the civil side) known as "the Bihar Engineering Service Class-1" and the "Bihar Engineering Service Class-II" (B.E.S.
for short).
In the B.E.S.
Class-II, there is only one cadre of Assistant Engineer whereas, in B.E.S.
Class-I, there are different cadres such as Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and Chief Engineer.
They are guided by Statutory Rules as the Rule framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
In the Rules no post with Selection Grade Scale has been carved out.
3.
However, the State of Bihar while accepted the recommendation of 3rd Pay Revision Committee, for the first time provided Selection Grade Scale in the cadre of Assistant Engineer of B.E.S.
Class-II.
4.
So far as reservation of posts is concerned, the statutory B.E.S.
Class-II Rule is silent and in the B.E.S.
Class-I Rule no specific provision has been made for such reservation though under Rule 15 therein, certain advantages have been provided in favour of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Mohamadans at the time of recommendation.
The State of Bihar issued guideline from time to time laying down policy of reservation.
In the year 1992, under "the Bihar Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and Services (for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1991" (Bihar Act 3 of 1992) no reservation of posts has been made in favour of OBCs.
In the matter of promotion.
However, for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe, reservation of posts has been made both at the time of direct recruitment and promotion (Scheduled Castes 14% and Scheduled Tribes 10%).
A circular relating to roster for reservation was issued on 21st of March, 1991 which fell for consideration before this Court in the case of Bijay Kumar Sinha and others, 1995 BBCJ 300.
Relying on a decision of Supreme Court in the case of RK Sabharwal and others, v. State of Punjab, 1995 Vol. 2, SCC 745 : 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC), this Court held the said circular dated 21st March, 1991 as illegal in respect of keeping the roster alive on completion of quota.
The promotion beyond permissible limit was also held to be illegal and without jurisdiction.
The decision aforesaid was followed by a circular letter No. 117 dated 30th September, 1995 issued by the respondents by which the State government cancelled the earlier circular dated 21st March, 1991 making the roster in- applicable in case the quota is full.
5.
The petitioners of C.W.J.C.
No. 1430/96 are Assistant Engineers appointed in between the year 1976-1980, who have shown the strength of different cadres in B.E.S.
(Class I and II) as follows :  Post Deptt.
Permanent Temporary Total Engineer-in-Chief/Chief Engineer Road and Building 7 6 13 R.E.O.
1 3 4 Suptd.
Engineer Road and Building 72 21 53 R.E.O.
0 21 21 Executive Engineer Road and Building 130 103 233 R.E.O.
1 143 144 Assistant Engineer Road and Building 562 772 1334 R.E.O.
61 619 680 Total: 794 1689 2482  They alleged that a number of scheduled castes members have been promoted in excess to their quota as shown at Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
According to them, after the decision in the cases of Bijay Kr.
Sinha (supra) and RK Sabharwal (supra), the Bihar Engineering Service Association represented before the State on 24th April, 1994 to push down those promoted in excess to their quota but no action having been taken, the petitioners had to prefer the present writ application.
6.
The Counsel for the petitioners referred to notification dated 18th January, 1996, 27th August, 1996 and 18th November, 1996 in support of petitioners to show that the even after filing of the present writ petition, promotions have been granted to scheduled caste members to the post of Executive Engineer in excess to their quota.
According to them, the scheduled caste members are entitled for 53 posts but 115 scheduled caste members have already been promoted as Executive Engineers.
7.
According to the petitioners, the post of Assistant Engineer being solitary post in PES-II and there being no separate posts or strength of selection grade having been made, the reservation policy cannot be made applicable to grant Selection Grade Scale to an Assistant Engineer.
8.
In a counter-affidavit filed in the present case and analogous C.W.J.C.
No. 4/96, the respondents have shown the total strength of the cadre of Executive Engineer.
According to them, thee are only 502 posts in the cadre of Executive Engineer and 31 other posts are Ex-cadre posts.
9.
The stand of the private respondent No. 84 and others is that the total strength of the cadre of Executive Engineer is 533, out of which 24% post are reserved for amongst SC/ST members which comes to total 128 posts of Executive Engineer.
In absence of one or other eligible reserve category member, eligible members of the corresponding reserve category are to be promoted to such posts.
For example, if a post is reserved for ST category, in absence of eligible ST category members such post is required to be carried forward for three consecutive recruitment years and even thereafter if no eligible ST member is available then such a post can be filled up by promotion of eligible SC members.
On calculation it will be evident that no excess promotion was made against the post of Executive Engineer from amongst SC/ST category.
They have also challenged the locus standi of the petitioners to claim promotion against reserved posts, who are belong to general category.
Further according to them, the promotions granted earlier on 28th February, 1992 and 24th July, 1993, being not under challenge, the Court should not interfere with such promotions in absence of those who have already been promoted.
10.
The petitioners of C.W.J.C.
No. 4/96 are Assistant Engineers who belong to SC category, they have prayed for a direction on the State to consider their cases for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer (58 posts for the present) which were reserved for ST category but could not be filled up for three consecutive years in absence of eligible ST members.
11.
According to these petitioners, against the total of 534 of the cadre of Executive Engineer, only 24 ST members are working.
Number of times, posts reserved for ST category could not be filled up by promotion in absence of eligible ST members and carried forward for more than three years, but still kept vacant.
Their stand in the present case is that the aforesaid carried forward post of Executive Engineer which could not be filled up from the ST members for three consecutive years in absence of eligible persons, should be filled up from amongst eligible SC members.
In this connection, they have relied on Section 4(6)(a) of 1991 Reservation Act, wherein it is stipulated that in absence of eligible SC/ST category, the posts are to be carried forward for three years and after three years, if eligible person is not available then to fill up the same from amongst the corresponding ST/SC category on exchange.
12.
The details of posts of Executive Engineer which were reserved for promotion of ST category, but could not be filled up in absence of eligible persons have been shown, as mentioned hereunder.
In the year 1987, total 5 posts of Executive Engineers were reserved for ST Category but could not be filled up in absence of eligible persons.
In the year 1988, again total 8 posts were reserved for ST category but again could not be filled up in absence of eligible members.
Similarly in the year 1989, further 3 posts were reserved for ST category but could not be filled up in absence of eligible members.
In the year 1992, again 5 posts were reserved for ST category but only 2 Assistant Engineers were promoted as Executive Engineers, there being no other eligible ST member.
In the year 1993, only 3 ST Assistant Engineers were promoted.
Again in the year 1995, about 5 posts were made available for promotion of ST category but no promotion was granted in absence of eligible ST members.
13.
It was submitted that the petitioners being eligible SC members, in terms with Section 4(6)(a) of 1991 Reservation Act, their cases should have been considered for promotion against the aforesaid posts of Executive Engineers which were meant for ST category but could not be filled up for three consecutive years in absence of eligible ST members.
14.
In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State, they have shown the strength of Executive Engineer as 502.
According to State, 70 posts are meant for SC candidates but 79 SC members have already been promoted as Executive Engineer which comes to 15%.
So far as ST category is concerned, it is stated that only few persons are occupying the post of Executive Engineer in absence of eligible ST members.
Recently 7 officers belonging to ST category have been recommended by the Departmental Promotion Committee for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and cases of 3 ST category members have been kept pending for such promotion.
In near future, further 12 ST category Assistant Engineers will become eligible for such promotion.
15.
The Respondent-State has accepted the plea of the petitioners of C.W.J.C.
No. 4/96 that in terms with sub-section (6)(a) of Section 4 of 1991 Reservation Act, in absence of eligible ST members, such posts are to be carried forward for three years and thereafter if no ST members is available the same is to be filled up from amongst the SC category, by exchange.
According to the State, for the present 9 SC members are in excess to their quota who are to be adjusted against the posts which were earlier reserved for S.T members and remaining 15 posts, earlier reserved for ST category and carried forward for three years are to be filled up by exchange from amongst the SC category.
Request has already been made to the Bihar Public Service Commission in this respect and the petitioners and others, if otherwise found eligible and come within the zone of consideration, their cases will be considered in accordance with law.
16.
One Rajendra Prasad Mandal, a ST member of B.E.S.
Class-II intervened in the present case.
According to him, he has already completed seven years as Assistant Engineer and is eligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer since 10th December, 1994.
His grievance is that irrespective of availability of vacancy of Executive Engineer for ST category, and recommendation made by B.P.SC, no notification of promotion has been issued because of pendency of the present case.
He has also opposed the prayer of petitioner in C.W.J.C.
No. 4/96 for their promotion against the posts which were reserved for ST category.
According to the Intervener, there are total 377 posts of Executive Engineer of which 38 posts are meant for ST category (10%) and 53 posts meant for SC category (14%), but already 90 SC members have been promoted as Executive Engineer.
On the other hand, only 26 ST members have been promoted as Executive Engineer and irrespective of availability of more than 15 eligible ST members (Assistant Engineers), their notification of promotion has not been issued whose names are appearing at Sl.
Nos. 2618 to 2629, 2755, 2780, 2812, 2824, 2839, 2850 and 2854 of the gradation list.
17.
In these cases, the questions arise for determination are :  (a) Whether SC members in excess to the quota, already promoted as Executive Engineer, if any, are to be pushed down to the lower posts or in the matter of seniority or not ?
(b) Whether the posts meant for ST category, but could not be filled up for three consecutive years because of non-availability of eligible ST members are to be filled up from amongst SC members, by exchange or not ?
and (c) Whether reservation can be made in the matter of grant of selection grade scale of Assistant Engineer or not ?
18.
Under the Reservation Act, 1991, Section 4 stipulates reservation in direct recruitment which has been made applicable in the matter of promotion of SC/ST category under the 2nd proviso thereto.
Total 14% of the posts are to be reserved for SC members and 10% posts for ST members in the matter of promotion.
The aforesaid provision of sub-section (6)(a) of Section 4 reads as follows :  "Section 4(6)(a): In case of non-availability of suitable candidates from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for appointment and promotion in vacancies reserved for them, the vacancies shall continue to be reserved for three recruitment years and if suitable candidates are not available even in the third year, the vacancies shall be exchanged between the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the vacancies so filled by exchange shall be treated as reserved for the candidates for that particular community who are actually appointed."
Thus, in case of non-availability of SC/ST members, the vacancies are to be carried forward for three recruitment years hereinafter, in absence of eligible candidate, the posts are to be exchanged between SC/ST category and on such exchanged vacancies are treated to be reserved for other category.
In a similar case of Superintending Engineer, Public Health, Union Territory, Chandigarh v. Kuldip Singh, 1997(2) SCT.
72 : 1997 Vol. IX, Supreme Court Cases 199, the Supreme Court held that in absence of one or other SC/ST candidates, the posts are to be carried forward for three recruitment years and not merely three years and it can be filled up from other category.
19.
Thereby, it can be safely stated that in absence of eligible ST members, the posts are to be carried forward for three recruitment years whereinafter in absence of eligible ST members, such posts are to be filled up from amongst eligible SC members, by exchange, and vice versa.
20.
So far as the first question relating to excess promotion of SC members and to follow the push down theory, below the direct recruits is concerned, no relief can be granted in this case for the following reasons :  There are disputed questions of fact, including the cadre strength of Executive Engineer.
While according to the petitioners the total strength of Executive Engineer is 533, according to the State and the Respondents of CWJC No. 1430/96, the total strength of the Executive Engineer is 502.
On the other hand, in the chart and the intimation sent to the AG only 377 sanctioned posts of Executive Engineer have been shown to be available.
Similarly, while petitioners of C.W.J.C.
No. 1430/96 have stated that 102 SC members have already been promoted as Executive Engineer, according to the Respondents only 79 SC members were so promoted.
The private respondents of C.W.J.C.
No. 1430/96 have given total strength of B.E.S.
Class-I as 675 of which 159 posts are reserved for SC/ST members and according to them only 128 SC/ST members have been promoted to the Class-I service, thereby there is no promotion in excess to their quota granted.
21.
Apart from the aforesaid disputed facts, it will be evident that the promotions alleged to have been made in excess to quota by their notifications issued on 28th August, 1992 and 24th of July, 1993, but neither such notification of promotions have been challenged, nor any individual has been impleaded as party-respondent to the writ petition.
22.
So far as petitioners of C.W.J.C.
No. 4/96 are concerned, the State has accepted that the cases of SC members are to be considered against the vacant posts which were earlier reserved for ST category, but could not be filled up for three consecutive years in absence of eligible ST members.
However, according to this Court, before consideration of such cases of SC members, the respondents are bound to consider the cases of eligible ST Assistant Engineers who are already available, like Intervener Rajendra Prasad Mandal and others.
23.
Admittedly, the notifications of promotions to the post of Executive Engineer from amongst reserved category members were not issued because of the pendency of the present case.
Accordingly, respondents are directed to issue notifications of promotions of such eligible ST members, who are eligible and have been recommended by D.P.C./B.P.SC for such promotion, immediately.
Thereafter, if any reserved vacancy for ST category remains vacant in absence of eligible ST members, and such vacancy earlier carried forward for three recruitment years, then such vacancy be filled up from amongst eligible SC members in accordance with Section 4(6)(a) of 1991 Reservation Act.
24.
So far as the question relating to reservation in the matter of grant of Selection grade to the post of Assistant Engineer is concerned, there being no specific pleading made in this respect and in absence of any cause of action, I refrain from giving any finding on this issue.
25.
Accordingly, the writ petition C.W.J.C.
No. 1430/96 is dismissed and the writ petition being C.W.J.C.
No. 4/86 is disposed of in terms with the observation and direction as made above with further direction to the authorities to complete the process of selection for promotion of ST members and then SC members to the higher post of Executive Engineer preferably within a period of four months.
26.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.