VS Aggarwal, J - Sanjay Mehndiratta petitioner was admitted in BA Part I in the year 1993-94 as a regular student of Government College, Tigaon, District Faridabad.
He for the first time appeared in BA Part I examination held in April, 1994.
In April 1996, he appeared in BA Part II compartment examination in English and Hindi.
He passed in English but failed in Hindi.
In BA Part III examination, he failed.
Thereafter, the petitioner appeared in BA Part III (supplementary) examination as a private candidate under Roll No. 6253.
This supplementary examination was to be held in September, 1996, but was postponed to December, 1996.
On 22121996, an unfair means case was registered against the petitioner in history subject.
The petitioner was summoned by the Committee On Unfair Means case constituted by the respondent-University on 14.2.1997.
Respondent No. 3, Controller of Examinations, Maharishi Dayanand University, issued an order dated 331997.
The petitioner was informed that the Committee had found him guilty of using unfair means and, therefore, it has been decided to cancel the entire examination in which the petitioner appeared in Supplementary Examination 1996.
He was debarred from appearing in university examination for a period of one year uptil Supplementary Examination, 1997.
2.
Aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner submitted an appeal-cum-representation to the Vice Chancellor of the respondent-university.
Personal Assistant to Vice Chancellor is alleged to have made an order, "the candidate met the worthy Vice Chancellor today on 1231997.
The worthy Vice Chancellor has desired that the matter be dealt with as per rules."
3.
The petitioner's case is that thereafter his representation was dealt with by the office of respondent No. 3 who assured him that the petitioner would be issued the Roll No. to appear in BA Part II examination in Hindi subject.
The petitioner appeared in BA Part II examination in the paper of Hindi because he was issued the Roll No. to appear in the said subject.
He had passed.
The petitioner was issued the Result-cum-Detailed Marks Card.
Thereafter, the petitioner joined BA Part III in Govt. College, Faridabad and deposited fee.
He submitted his examination form through the college and he was even issued on Admit-cum-Identity Card.
He took the examination in April, 1998 without any hindrance.
In the meantime, the petitioner received a letter from the Directorate of Distance Education that while checking the cut list of BA Part III candidates, it was found that the registration number of the petitioner was wrong and, therefore, his result has been withheld.
Thereafter, the respondent-University quashed the result of the petitioner in BA Part II examination held in April, 1997 and BA Part III examination held in April, 1998 as he was debarred to appear in any University examination including supplementary examination of 1997.
4.
By virtue of the present writ petition, the petitioner assails the said order to be discriminatory alleging that the punishment awarded to the petitioner had already been imposed.
He was debarred to appear in University examination for a period of one year.
Subsequently, vide second notification dated 1671998 the petitioner has been debarred to appear in any University examination upto and including Supplementary, 1997 in BA Part III examination.
No opportunity of being heard has been given to the petitioner.
It has further been asserted that, as per Ordinance, the petitioner was entitled to appear in BA Part II (compartment/reappear) examination in Hindi.
It is claimed that a student is entitled for two additional consecutive chances for passing compartment.
The petitioner had appeared in BA Part II examination in April, 1995 in which he got two compartments (English and Hindi).
The first chance thereafter to pass the aforesaid compartment in two subjects was available to the petitioner in April, 1996, wherein he appeared but failed in Hindi.
The petitioner could appear in BA Part II compartment in Hindi in April, 1997.
By cancelling the said examination, the petitioner has been deprived of passing BA Part II examination and this belated action of the respondent has deprived the petitioner of his valuable rights.
On the same ground it is claimed that though the petitioner failed in BA III examination held in April, 1996, he is entitled to pass the same in six years.
The petitioner in this manner can appear in BA Part III examination till April, 1999 and result could not be cancelled in this process.
5.
In the written statement filed, the petition has been contested.
It was pointed out that a case of use of unfair means in the paper of history of BA Part III was registered against the petitioner.
Thereupon, the University had decided to cancel the entire examination and he was debarred from appearing in any University examination for a period of one year ie upto and including supplementary examination of 1997.
It is denied that any assurance claimed by the petitioner was given to him.
Subsequently, the petitioner misrepresented in his form of BA Part II for appearing in the compartment paper of Hindi and stated that no unfair means case was pending against him.
This was an incorrect version.
The case of use of unfair means was decided by the Standing Committee of Unfair Means whereby the entire supplementary examination was cancelled.
He was debarred from appearing in any University examination upto and including supplementary examinations of 1997.
The petitioner even concealed the fact of use of unfair means by him.
In the application form of BA Part III examination April, 1998, by using such means, he managed to appear in BA III examination.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner urged that while debarring the petitioner vide the order dated 1671998, copy of which is Annexure P-9, no opportunity of being heard had been given and in any case by passing the said order, the petitioner has been deprived from appearing in BA Part II examination in Hindi and BA Part III examination though the examination could only be taken within two years of the supplementary examination of BA Part II and within six years of his joining the BA course.
According to the learned counsel, these acts were illegal and not sustainable.
7.
To appreciate the said controversy, some of the salient facts can conveniently be mentioned.
While the petitioner took the supplementary examination in the paper of History, he was found to be using unfair means.
An order was passed by the Controller of Examinations which read as under :-  "As you are aware an unfair means case was registered against you in the examination as cited above in the subject of History.
The Standing Committee constituted for the purpose has considered the report of the Centre-Supdt., relevant material and other attending circumstances and found you guilty of using unfair means/misconduct in the above examination.
In terms of ordinance relating to use of unfair means/misconduct, the committee has decided to cancel the entire examination in which you appeared in Supp 96 and in addition debarred you from appearing in any University examination for a period of one year ie upto and including the examination of Suppl.
97" In this process, the petitioner was debarred from appearing in any University examination for a period of one year upto and including supplementary examination of 1997.
The petitioners had filed the appeal.
The same had not been accepted.
The contention of the petitioner that he had been assured that he would be allowed to take the examination for supplementary BA Part II in the subject of Hindi is without any basis.
There is a specific denial that no such assurance had been given.
In the absence of any other material fact on the record, it cannot be termed that any assurance had been given to the petitioner.
8.
Unmindful of what had taken place and the punishment awarded, the petitioner filled up the form for BA Part II in the subject of Hindi and in the column as to if he has ever been disqualified, the answer given by the petitioner was in negative.
He suppressed the material fact that he has been debarred from taking any examination including the supplementary examination for a period of one year.
Photo copy of the said form is Annexure R-1.
Not only that, he filled up the form for B.A Part III and once again under the column whether he has been disqualified from any examination or any unfair means case is pending against him, he left the column blank.
But in column No. 10, he had indicated that he is not appearing in any other examination simultaneously.
9.
It is true that Roll No. had been issued.
But if Roll No. had been issued because of misrepresentation of facts by the petitioner, then as soon as the mistake is detected, there is no harm in correcting the same.
No person like the petitioner can be given the advantage of his own wrong.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that while order was passed on 1671998, no opportunity of being heard had been given and principles of (natural) justice were violated.
It is true that the principles of natural justice have made deep inroads into day-to-day working.
The rule of Ridge v. Baldwin, 1964 Appeal Cases 40, has been recognised but it cannot be termed to be an absolute rule.
When the facts are admitted as have been shown that the petitioner has been misrepresenting, then serving a notice to show cause would be an idle formality.
Reference can be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, (1980) 4 Supreme Court Cases 379, wherein the Supreme Court has held as under :-  "Linked with this question is the question whether the failure to observe natural justice does at all matter if the observance of natural justice would have made no difference, the admitted or indisputable facts speaking for themselves.
Where on the admitted or indisputable facts only one conclusion is possible and under the law only one penalty is permissible, the court may not issue its writ to compel the observance of natural justice, not because it approves the non-observance of natural justice but because courts do not issue futile writs.
But it will be a pernicious principle to apply in other situations where conclusions are controversial, however, slightly, and penalties are discretionary."
11.
More recently, the Supreme Court in the case of MC Mehta v. Union of India and others, VI (1999) Supreme Laws Today 177 : 1999(1) SCT 561 (SC), reiterated the same principle and held as under :-  "It is, therefore, clear that if on the admitted or indisputable factual position, only one conclusion is possible and permissible, the Court need not issue a writ merely because there is violation of principles of natural justice."
Identical is the position herein.
It has been shown from the photo copies of the forms filled up by the petitioner that despite having been debarred earlier he filled up the form giving incorrect facts.
It is in pursuance of those incorrect facts that Roll Nos. were given.
But, admittedly, he had misquoted because he had been debarred from taking supplementary examination in BA Part II.
Once it is so, no useful purpose would be served by insisting on the doctrine of audi alteram partem.
The Court has no hesitation in rejecting the same.
12.
Confronted with that position, it has been urged that by passing order dated 1671998 the petitioner was debarred from taking BA Part II examination within the stipulated period and also BA Part III examination.
The order passed by the Controller of Examinations reads as under :-  "The Vice-Chancellor in exercising his powers under Clause-32 of the University Calendar 'General Rules for Examination' the result of the following candidate has been quashed as he stands debar to appear in any University examination upto and including Supplementary, 1997 in BA III examination held in Oct 1996 under Roll No. 6253.
The DMC already issued vide Sr. No. 2031 has also been cancelled.
BA - II, April, 1997 Roll No. Regn.
No.  Name/Father's Name  212118 93-SS-62  Sanjay Mendiratta s/o GR Mendiratta.
BA - III, April, 1998  260213 93-SS-62  Sanjay Mendiratta s/o GR Mendiratta.
It is obvious from the aforesaid that the order has been passed by the Vice-Chancellor in exercise of the powers under Clause 32 of the University Calendar.
By virtue of Clause 32 of the University Calendar, Vice-Chancellor can quash the result if mistake is found in the result.
Mistake was detected and, therefore, Vice-Chancellor could pass appropriate order.
This order is a fresh order passed and if the petitioner is debarred from taking BA Part II supplementary examination in Hindi or BA Part III examination, it is because of his own act and conduct.
It was a fresh act and, therefore, fresh punishment could be awarded debarring him from taking the examination.
13.
One is pained to observe that earlier the petitioner was found using unfair means in the examination.
Unmindful of the same, he was unrepentant and kept on repeating the same one after the other.
He is not entitled to any discretion.
For these reasons, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.