D Raju, C.J (Oral) - The above writ petition has been filed seeking for the issue of a writ of certiorari to quash the order dated 25101989 passed by the second respondent filed as Annexure P-2, the order dated 27.2.1998 passed by the first respondent filed as Annexure P-13 and the order dated 13.5.1998 passed by the 4th respondent and filed as Annexure P.15 and consequently holding that the petitioner is entitled to disability pension with effect from 23.6.1989 also with a direction to pay arrears with interest due thereon.
2.
The short and relevant facts necessary for dealing with the grievance of the writ petitioner and the contentions of both parties before us may be culled out even from the reply filed by the respondent.
It is stated therein that No. 6597148 ex-Sep Roshan Lal was enrolled in the Army on 6121957 and was invalidated out of service on 1331962 in medical category `EEE' on account of "PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS".
He was initially brought before the invalidating Medical Board conducted at Military Hospital, Aundh Camp Pune on 621962 and that it was approved by the Additional Directorate of Medical Services M & G Area on 1331962.
He was said to have served for four years three months and seven days in the Army and the claim of disability pension of the petitioner was said to have been submitted to the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad for adjudication.
The petitioner was said to have been granted temporary disability pension at Rs. 3635 per month with effect from 1431962, initially to 521963 under the orders filed as Annexure R-C and the said disability pension was also continued upto 22.6.1989 in terms of the orders passed and filed in this proceeding as Annexure R-D, on the basis of the assessment made by the Resurvey medical board from time to time.
According to the respondents, finally the petitioner was brought before the Resurvey Medical Board held at 167 Military Hospital on 22.6.1989 and the proceedings of the said Resurvey Medical Board were stated to have been submitted to the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad for final adjudication on 1081989 and thereupon the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad on examination of the papers submitted ordered that the petitioner's disability was re-assessed at less than 20 per cent by the proceeding dated 2891989 filed as Annexure R-F with an advice to the petitioner to prefer an appeal against that decision within six months.
The petitioner appears to have not immediately preferred the appeal within the stipulated period but thereafter the belated appeal appears to have been entertained and the same was forwarded to the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad for onward transmission to the higher authorities to deal with the appeal on merits though the Chief Controller appears to have returned the same on the view that the appeal has not been preferred within the time stipulated and, therefore, stood barred.
When the petitioner re-submitted the appeal, the Chief Controller forwarded the appeal to the Government of India and the Government of India while waiving the time bar, but considering the appeal rejected the same on the reason that the appellate medical authority has found that the disability has been cured and assessed his disablement at less than 20 per cent (15-19%) for life vide Annexure R-O It is in such circumstances that the petitioner has come up before this court challenging the orders dated 25101989, 27.2.1998 and 13.5.1998 whereunder the petitioner was asked to pay a sum of Rs. 23,370/- which amount was said to represent the service pension paid upto 3/1992 and which was also considered to be over-payment so far as the petitioner is concerned.
This appears to be on the basis of the stoppage, on account of the alleged non-entitlement of the petitioner to the disablement pension.
3.
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Ramakant Sharma and Mr. Rahul Mahajan, the learned counsel for the respondents.
While the learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the stand taken in the writ petition and contended that the second respondent could not have arrived at its own assessment of the percentage of the disability de hors the assessment made by the Review or Resurvey Medical Board on 22.6.1989 and that, therefore, the order rejecting the claims made by the second respondent which has been confirmed by the respondent's orders are liable to be set aside.
Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents, while reiterating the stand taken in the reply contended that the petitioner was granted only temporary disability pension with effect from 1431962 for the period upto 521963 and the said disability pension was continued upto 22.6.1989 by arranging the Resurvey Medical Board from time to time and inasmuch as when finally the petitioner was brought before the Resurvey Medical Board held on 22.6.1989 the second respondent, after examination of the materials placed before him, has re-assessed the disability of the petitioner at less than 20 per cent finally for life, the impugned proceedings are not in any manner illegal.
It was also contended that as per rule 27(c) of entitlement rule for casualty pensionary award, 1982, the medical board shall give findings and recommendations on entitlement and assessment in case of all disabilities and that inasmuch as they are not statutory bodies their recommendations could be reviewed and revised by the Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Service and, therefore, on a question as to whether the disability is attributable to or aggravated by Military Service, the Directorate General of Ahmed Forces Medical Service attached as Medical Advisor (Pension) in the office of the second respondent ensured consistency in the assessment of disability and consequently the said authority is entitled to have its own assessment by altering or modifying the recommendations of the invalidating medical board, release medical board or the resurvey medical board and reliance for this is placed on proceedings dated 2161996 of the Government of India filed as Annexure R-R  4.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on either side.
The facts set out supra would go to show that the parties are at variance with each other only with reference to the assessment made by the survey medical board held on 22.6.1989 and the power and authority as also the competency of the second respondent and the Medical Advisor (Pension) as well as the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad to take a view different from the one or to arrive at an assessment of disability other than the one fixed and assessed by the re-survey medical board.
In our view, on this issue the matter is not res-integra and is covered by a decision of their Lordships of the apex Court and also of this court passed in implementing the orders passed by the apex Court.
In Civil Appeal No. 164/91 arising out of S.L.P.
(C) No. 4233 of 1993 (Ex Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India), their Lordships of the apex Court by judgment dated 14.1.1993 held as follows :  "We have examined the relevant materials and we do not feel satisfied with the plea taken in the counter affidavit.
No details of the consultation has been disclosed by the respondent nor it is claimed that the appellant has been re-examined by the higher medical authority.
We are not prepared to act on this vague allegation in the counter affidavit referred above.
In view of all the relevant circumstances of the case we are of the opinion that the Disability Pension assessed at the rate of 40% by Medical Board, which had examined the appellant, should be respected until a fresh Medical Board examines the appellant again and comes to a different conclusion.
Accordingly we direct that for the period 181989 to 3111993 the appellant shall be paid the Disability Pension at the rate of 40% and it will be open to the authority concerned to have the appellant re-examined by a properly constituted Medical Board for re-assessment of the disability with effect from 111993."
5.
An almost similar view has been taken though for slightly different reasons in the decision reported in 1995(2) S.L.J 991 (Ram Singh Jaggi v. Union of India ) by a Division Bench of this Court to which one of us (Lokeshwar Singh Panta, J) was a party.
In 1999(1) Shim.
LC (sic) (Prem Singh (Ex-Sepoy) v. Union of India and others), while following the decision of their Lordships of the Apex Court, a Division Bench of this Court also held on the same lines.
We have also held in a decision in C.W.P.
No. 857 of 1998 (Bhajan Lal v Union of India) rendered on 21.5.1999, after referring to the earlier decisions, as follows :  "When the Medical Board or Re-survey Medical Board after personally examining the person concerned, assessed the disability in a particular manner, it is not given, in our view, to the second respondent to merely to has its own assessment, de hors the medical opinion on file, to arrive at a contra conclusion and make its own assessment with obtaining any second medical opinion, even if the second respondent has its own doubts about the credibility or veracity of the medical assessment.
Applying the ratio of the decision of the earlier Division Bench, the order of the second respondent confirmed by that of the first respondent, denying the petitioner the benefit of the disability pension sanctioned to him earlier and continued till 20121994 for the period subsequent thereto and w.e.f 21.12.1994, is hereby quashed."
6.
In the light of the overwhelming authority of the above noticed decisions it is futile for the respondents to take a stand like the one projected on their behalf that the second respondent or the Medical Advisor (Pension) in his office could claim to have such a right to decide on their own and in the absence of the materials found by the concerned Medical Board and if we may say so, in the air, without any basis of any material whatsoever and without getting the person concerned re-examined by the appropriate Medical Board to differ from the assessment made by the competent Medical or review Medical Board or Re-survey Medical Board.
Consequently, the stand taken for the respondent cannot have our acceptance or approval.
7.
The petitioner's claim, therefore, has to be considered in the light of Re-survey Medical Board's assessment filed by the respondents themselves as Annexure R-W It is seen from the above, particularly from the materials disclosed in column 16 under caption `previous assessment' which is said to be attributable to the Military service, the disability and assessed percentage for the various periods from 1431962 to 22.6.1989, that it stood from 10121967 to 22.6.1989 at 20%.
In part (II) of the report under column 2(c), as to whether the Board anticipated improvement within 2-3 years of the present Board, the entry made was "No" meaning thereby that there was no scope for improvement.
As against column 6 also it has been noticed to be static and as against column 8 pertaining to assessment of disablement it has been not only fixed at 20%, but it has been noticed to be a final one.
Column No. 10 also contains an entry that the disability appears to have reached its finality.
In the teeth of the above fact-situation, we are of the view that there was nothing concrete or sufficient for the second respondent or the Medical Advisor (Pension) attached to the office of the second respondent to come to a different conclusion except by way of conjectures and surmises which cannot be allowed to be made in the teeth of the judgments of the courts noticed above.
8.
For all the reasons stated above, the petition is entitled to succeed.
The impugned orders are quashed and there shall be a direction to the respondent to continue the disability pension even for the period beyond 23.6.1989 and onwards and continue to pay the same till there is any proper reassessment in accordance with law on the basis of personal examination of the petitioner by the competent Medical Board concerned.
The arrears shall be paid by the respondents to the petitioner within three months from this day with interest at 12% per annum.
No costs.
CMP No. 858/98  In view of the disposal of the writ petition as above this application shall stand disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly