Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 19396 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court whereby and whereunder the writ application filed by the appellant herein questioning the award dated 24th December, 1991 has been dismissed.
2.
The basic fact of the matter, is not in dispute.
3.
The first respondent herein was working in Kendra Colliery under M/s Swadeshi Mining & Mfg.
Co. Ltd.
The management of the said Colliery was taken over by reason of the provision of Coal Mines (Takingover of Management) Act, 1973.
Subsequently the Parliament enacted the Coal Mines (Notionalisation) Act, 1973, in terms whereof all the coal mines mentioned in the Schedule appended thereto including the Kendra Colliery stood vested in the Central Governemnt free from all encumbrances.
Although the said Act received the assent of the President of India on 3151973, but the same was given retrospective effect with effect from 1.5.73, the petitioner along with two others on various charges inclduding the charge of theft were dismissed from service and an F.I.R. was lodged.
At the relevant point of time, a reference involving the workmen of the said coal mine in general being Reference No. 15 of 1971 was pending.
The then management of the said colliery filed an application on 12.11.71 for approval of the order of dismissal.
However no approval had been granted and the application which was registered as Misc. Case No. 7/71 was ultimately dismisssed on 4283.
After the petitioner was acquitted in the criminal case, an industrial dispute was raised in the year 1988 resulting in a reference by the Central Government which is to the following effect :  "Whether the action of the Management of Kendra Colliery of M/s EC Ltd, PO Kendra, District Burdwan in dismissing Sri Swadhin Kr.
Pal, Store Mazdoor w.e.f 12.11.1971 is justified ?
If not to what relief the workman concerned is entitled ?"
4.
The Tribunal below by reason of an award dated 24.12.91, inter alia, held that the order of dismissal passed against the first respondent was illegal but in exercise of its power conferred upon it under Section 11-A of the Industrial Dispute Act directed reappointment of the first respondent with prospective effect without any back wages.
Against the said award the appellant herein filed a writ application.
By reason of the impugned judgment dated 19396 the learned trial Judge not only dismissed the writ application but also modified the Tribunal Award to the extent that instead of fresh appoinhtment, the respondent No. 1 concerned was directed to be reinstated in service with back wages from the date of nationalisation i.e. 1st May 1973.
5.
Mr. Majumdar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellnat has raised a number of contentions in support of this appeal.
The learned cousnel submits that in view of the amendment made in Section 14 of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, the reference was not maintainable.
It has further been submitted that the appellant having not been dismissed the first respondent, the reference itself was not maintainable.
6.
The learned cousnel for the first respondent on the other hand submits that the first respondent continued to be workman.
7.
This case depicts a sordid state of affairs.
The reference made in the year 1988 by the appropriate Government was not a correct one.
The parties unfortuantely had not produced the records of Misc. Case No. 7 of 1971 nor raised any plea in relation thereto.
Even the appellant did not raise the question as to whetehr the reference was maintainable or not.
8.
In the aforementioned situation, the learned Tribunal below proceeded on the basis that the reference is maintainable and passed its Award.
Even before the learned trial Judge, it appears, this question raised herein had not been raised.
Although the question raised by the appellnt is a substantive one, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case we are of the opinion that the same may not be decided at this stage, in view of the fact that the order of dismissal was passed by the erstwhile management of the colliery and in view of the fact that the approval, sought for in report thereof had not been granted; in law the respondent No. 1 continued to be a workman.
According to him he made an attempt to raise an industrial dispute from 1971 but no action was taken thereon until 1988.
Despite the fact that no step was taken by the authorities under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 he did not approach this court for directing the Appropriate Government to make a reference.
The reference was made in the year 1988 and that too on a wholly wrong premise.
9.
Furthermore, as indicated hereinbefore, even the proceedings of the aforementioned Misc. Case No. 7 of 1971 had not been brought on records before the learned Tribunal below.
A review application was filed on behalf of the wrokman for bringing the said fact on the records of the Tribunal only after the Award was passed but the said application was dismissed.
No writ application was also filed by the first respodnent questioning the said order.
As question had been raised that the writ court can in an appropriate case modify the award.
Be that as it may, we are of the opinion that it is not a fit case in which this court should exercise its discretion in reopening the entire award and ask the parties to start a lis afresh.
It stands admitted that the respondent No. 1 is not in employment since 1971.
Only an order under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act has been passed asking the appellant to pay the wages at the current rate.
10.
In this situation, we are of the opinion that it does not appear to be a fit case in which this court should exercise its discretion under Article 226 of the Constitution of India either in favour of the Management or in favour of the workmen.
This court cannot lose sight of the fact that the first respondent has not worked for a long time and he was guilty of delay and laches.
In this situation, we are of the opinion that the interest of justice shall be subserved if the Award of the Tribunal is directed to be implemented.
11.
It goes without saying that any amount already paid to the respondent No. 1 pursuant to the order of this court shall be adjusted from the amount of back wages to be paid to the first respondent in terms of the award.
12.
In view of our aforementioned order, we are of the opinion that the contentions raised by the parties herein may be decided in an appropriate case.
13.
With the aforementioned direction, this appeal is allowed in part.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Order accordingly.