VK Jhanji, J - This is defendant's second appeal directed against the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court whereby on appeal preferred by the plaintiff, her suit for mandatory injunction directing defendant No. 1 to declare the result of compartment examinations in English and Mathematics taken by the plaintiff in September, 1995, has been decreed.
Trial Court had dismissed the suit.
2.
In brief, the facts are that the plaintiff (respondent herein) took the Matriculation Examination in March, 1995 as a regular student under roll No. 348423 and her result was declared in June, 1995.
She was failing on two papers i.e. English and Mathematics.
As per regulation of the Board, a candidate failing in two subjects/papers is eligible to qualify the same in the next two successive supplementary chances.
In supplementary examination held in September, 1995, plaintiff appeared in two subjects/papers i.e. English and Mathematics.
Before her result could be declared, another candidate under roll No. 348426 who had appeared in Matriculation Examination in March, 1995 applied for rechecking of his paper in Social Science.
During the course of rechecking of his paper, it was revealed that result of March, 1995 pertaining to roll numbers 348423 to 348427 including that of the plaintiff was wrongly posted.
On rechecking, it was found that the plaintiff was failing in one more paper i.e. Social Science meaning thereby that she was failing in three subjects/papers and, therefore, notice was given to the plaintiff as to why her result be not cancelled.
Vide notification dated 1011996, revised result was declared showing her failing in the Matriculation Examination.
Plaintiff challenged the action of the Board by filing a civil suit.
Upon contest by the defendants, trial Court dismissed the suit but on appeal preferred by the plaintiff, her suit has been decreed.
Hence this second appeal by the Board.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that no case for interference in second appeal is made out.
4.
It is no more in dispute that on declaration of result in June, 1995, plaintiff was shown to be failing only in two papers i.e. English and Mathematics and as per regulation of the Board, she took examination of these two papers in September, 1995.
It is only after she had taken examination of these two papers that it was brought to her notice that she was failing in Social Science paper as well.
It is not the case of the defendant that there was any fraud on the part of the plaintiff.
In fact, it was on the basis of mistake committed by the examiner of the Board that instead of showing plaintiff to be failing in Matriculation Examination, she was shown to have obtained compartment in two papers.
It would have been different matter in case the mistake had been pointed out to her before she had taken examination of two papers in September, 1995.
In Similar circumstances, a Division Bench of this Court in Krishan Lal v. State of Haryana etc. in Civil Writ Petition No. 3506 of 1997 decided on 1951997, held that if the applicant has got admission, in higher class on the basis of certificate issued by the Board showing the applicant as having passed his examination, then it is not open to the Board to cancel the certificate issued to the applicant.
In this case, plaintiff on the basis of certificate issued to her as a result of examination held in March, 1995, applied for admission to 10+1 class and she was given admission subject to her clearing the compartment examination.
She was permitted to pursue her study in 10+1 and take examination of 10+1.
Later, under the orders of the Executing Court, she also appeared in 10+2 examination.
Results of 10+1 and 10+2 examinations have not been declared because of the pendency of this appeal.
In these circumstances, I am of the view that the first Appellate Court has not committed any illegality in directing the Board to declare the result of the compartment examination held in September, 1995 by considering the plaintiff to be eligible to appear in that examination.
I also find no ground to interfere with the direction given by the first Appellate Court that if need arises, the defendant-Board would grant grace marks in Social Science paper so as to make the marks to be 33 showing the plaintiff to have passed the Social Science paper also.
5.
Accordingly, this second appeal is dismissed and the defendant (appellant) is directed to declare the result forthwith.
No costs.
6.
Copy of this order be given dasti.
Appeal dismissed.