Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner, Sub Inspector of Jammu and Kashmir Police, was S.H.O.
of Police Station, Gool the month of June, 1993.
On 2861993 at 15 Hrs.
a group of armed men attacked the Police Station Gool with sophisticated weapons.
At this time, SHO, Petitioner, was outside the Police Station, lodged in a rented room.
It was not possible for him to reach the Police Station due to heavy firing.
The Police personnel of the Police Station were over-powered and the Sentry on duty received injuries.
The gunmen ransacked the Police Station and looted the arms and ammunition.
The Respondents have initiated process for dismissal of the petitioner from service and for the purpose Inspector General of Police, Jammu (Respondent No. 3), has on 21.12.1993, recommended issuance of dismissal orders of the Petitioner under Section 126, Sub-section (2) of the Constitution.
2.
The petitioner is aggrieved of this recommendation and has challenged the communication No. CB-NGO/896 dated 21.12.1993 of Respondent No. 3 addressed to Respondent No. 2, for the purpose, on the ground, that the petitioner apprehending attack and having in mind the deficiency in man-power at Thana, vulnerability and topographical position of the place in the given situation, did approach higher authorities of the Police Department and flashed four signals Annexures P1-(a), P1(b), P1(c) and P1(d) requesting urgently for deployment of additional force to prevent possible attack on the Police post.
There was lack of response from the higher authorities of the department.
The attack as anticipated took place.
The Police personnel at the Police Station were chased and disarmed.
The arms were looted and the Police Station ransacked.
Though aware of the attack and hearing the gun shots, it was not possible for petitioner to reach the Thana, in so far except the Sentry, all other personnel on duty in Thana fled to save their lives.
The action on this count of the Police Department of initiating process to remove him, is illegal and ultra vires of Section 126(2)(c) of the Constitution.
3.
The above recommendation of Respondent No. 3 dated 21.12.1993, is prayed to be quashed with further direction of holding Departmental Inquiry as solicited.
4.
Respondents have filed reply.
5.
The case has been admitted to hearing.
Respondents have not denied that at the relevant time, the petitioner was S.H.O.
Police Station, Gool, and that the gunmen had attacked the Police Station and looted the arms and ammunition.
It is also not denied that the action against the petitioner is being contemplated under Police Rules and that the recommendation of Respondent No. 3 has been received.
The conduct of the petitioner is averred to be prejudicial to the security of the State.
Petitioner, a member of the Police force has shown cowardness and serious breach of discipline by allowing the militants to loot the Police Station and has even surrendered Service Revolver before the militants.
In such circumstances to restrain initiation of action contemplated under section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, by throwing challenge to the recommendation of respondent No. 3, in the facts and circumstances of the case, is not permissiable under law and in any case the Writ petition is pre-mature and liable to be dismissed on this count alone.
6.
Mr. MI Qadri, Sr. AAG, submits that in the face of dereliction of duty and breach of discipline as member of the Police force of the State, communication of Respondent No. 3 vide UO No: CB-NGO/896 dated 21.12.1993, recommending the Director General of Police to take up the matter with the Government for dismissal of the petitioner under Section 126(2)(c) of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, is not without basis.
The communication is the recommendation of Respondent No. 3, after the facts and circumstances of the case came to his notice and he had an occasion to opinion on the subject, suggesting initiation of the proceedings and taking action against the petitioner.
Petitioner has been neither removed nor dismissed, nor reduced in rank, therefore, he has no case and cause of action to challenge the action recommended to be taken against the petitioner in terms of Police Rules and the Constitutional provisions.
No fundamental or statutory right of the petitioner has been violated.
In recommending the action, Respondent No. 3 has in fact acted in discharge of his duties, within the sphere of his legal obligations.
It is neither final order nor the decision of the Government, so as to attract the provision of Article 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, corresponding to Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
The petition thus seen is premature and not maintainable.
7.
The counsel for the petitioner, submits, that as the action on the face of the communications and signals flashed to high ups against the petitioner, is not warranted and the recommendation cannot be made without holding an inquiry against the petitioner therefore, any action of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of petitioner contemplated by Respondents can be challenged by him in the Writ and this is exactly what he has done in this case.
8.
Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir (corresponding to Article 311 of the Constitution of India), in terms provides, that the doctrine of pleasure of the Governor in the matter of holding of office in the Government Service shall be subject to the exercise of the pleasure on the conditions as laid down in the Section.
The conditions are that:-  (i) the employee shall not be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank by any authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed, and, (ii) that the dismissal or removal or reduction in rank cannot be ordered without inquiry into the charges against the employee and without affording him an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
The dismissal or removal or reduction in rank of the Government employee, in whose case the Governor is satisfied that, in the interest of security of the State, holding of an inquiry is not expedient, has been expressly excluded from the applicability of the above mandatory conditions.
In other words, in case of a Government employee, where the Governor is satisfied that, in the interest of security of the State, the holding of inquiry is not expedient, dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of such member of civil service of State or the employee holding a Civil post under the State, is dispensed with.
9.
No member of the service of the State or a person holding the Civil post under the state, can be dismissed or removed, except in accordance with the above constitutional provision, where dismissal or removal or reduction in rank has to be after an inquiry in which the person has to be heard and afforded reasonable opportunity after being informed of charges against him.
But all the same, proviso to Sub-Section (2) of Section 126 of the Constitution has made this inquiry provision not applicable to cases where dismissal or removal or reduction in rank is based on conduct which has led to his conviction on criminal charge, or where the competent authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry, in which case, the satisfaction of the said authority has to be recorded in writing or where the Governor is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient, to hold such inquiry.
10.
It is for the State to take a decision as to whether the inquiry as contemplated by Sub-Section (2) of Section 126 of the Constitution is to be dispensed with, within the ambit of incorporated exceptions (a) to (c) of Sub Section (2) of this Constitutional provision.
11.
The satisfaction referred to in Sub-clause (2) of the proviso, is not circumscribed by any condition.
The satisfaction of the Governor in the matter of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank within the ambit of proviso (c) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 126 of the Constitution, besides not being justiciable, falls wholly within the satisfaction of the Governor, meaning thereby, satisfaction of the Government.
The Governor in exercise of the Executive powers has every power to take disciplinary action against the Government servant(s).
12.
In this case, what is challenged, is the recommendation of the IGP, Jammu, in terms recommending the Government for dismissal of the petitioner in exercise of the powers under Section 126(2)(c) of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir State, for the reasons of security of the State (Annexure P2).
The Government has not taken any view, nor taken any decision thereto.
13.
The recommendation can be said to be inchoate stage in the process initiated at the level of IGP, for removal/dismissal of the petitioner.
This recommendation at the most can be a formative opinion of an officer of the State.
It cannot be said to be a decision culminating in an action contemplated by Section 126(2)(c) of the Constitution.
It is open to the State Government to take action inconformity with the recommendation or decline the recommendation, depending on the view of the matter taken by the Government.
As no punitive action has been taken in the matter, therefore, there is no present grievance for which the petitioner can approach the Court for its ventilation.
14.
In Mrs. Kunda S Kadam and others case (AIR 1980 SC 881), where appellant was recommended by the Public Service Commission for the post of Deputy Municipal Commissioner, Bombay and neither the Municipal Corporation nor the Government in confirmatory powers had taken any action, filing of writ on the ground of lack of qualification for the post of Deputy Municipal Commissioner, was held to be premature and dismissed.
15.
The Supreme Court further observed, that it was open to the Municipal Corporation to accept the recommendation or not to accept the recommendation.
Further, it was still open to the Government to confirm or not to confirm the action of the Municipal Corporation depending on the view the Government took of the matter.
Therefore, it was too early for the petition to be entertained and decided on merits.
16.
In Chanan Singh's case (AIR 1976 SC 1821) where an employee was issued a fresh show-cause notice against his dismissal, after the earlier disciplinary proceedings were dropped by an Inquiry Officer, who was not competent to impose the punishment, the Court dismissed the writ petition, challenging revival of proceedings as pre-mature on the ground that no punitive action had been taken against the employee.
17.
In the instant case also, as observed, the Government has not taken any action of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank or for that matter any punitive action against the petitioner to date, therefore, the Writ petition challenging the recommendation simpliciter of Respondent No. 3, recommending dismissal of the petitioner from the Police force in terms of provisions of Section 126 of the Constitution, is pre-mature.
The petitioner has no present grievance to ventilate.
18.
In result, the Writ Petition is dismissed as pre-mature.
Connected C.M.P.
shall also stand dismissed in terms as above.
Interim direction dated 2281994 is vacated.
Petition dismissed.