TS Doabia, J - The petitioners submit that so far as Executive Officers in the Notified Area Committees and the Town Area Committees are concerned, they should be treated at par with each other.
For this submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioners, it is urged :  (i) That the two local bodies are being governed by the same administrative department; (ii) That the posts are transferable; (iii) That the duties which are performed by the Executive Officers are the same.
It be seen that the Executive Officers so far Notified Area Committees are concerned, they are being appointed under the J&K Municipal Act of Samvat- 2006, and so far as Executive Officers of the Town Area Committees are concerned, they are appointed in terms of the Town Area Committee Act.
The two Executive Officers are therefore appointed under different statutory provisions.
If this be the situation, and if they are not being given the same grade, it cannot be said that they have been discriminated in a manner which is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be same but there may be difference in degrees in the performance of their duties.
The Supreme Court in the case of Kishori Mohan Lal Bakshi v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SCC 1139 and State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh, AIR 1963 SC 913 was held that the abstract principle of Equal pay for Equal work has nothing to do with equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 the Supreme Court taking note of the Preamble to Constitution of International Labour Organisation which recognised the concept of "equal remuneration for work of equal value" came to a conclusion that the concept of equal pay for equal work is deducible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(d).
This concept assumed concrete shape when in Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, 1993(3) SCT 137 (SC) the Court observed that "....... although the doctrine of equal pay for equal work" does not come within Article 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine, but if any classification is made relating to the pay scale and such classification is unreasonable and or if unequal pay is based on no classification, then Article 14 will at once be attracted and such classification should be set at naught and equal pay be directed to be given for equal work.
In other words where unequal pay has brought about a discrimination within the meaning of Article 14 of the Constitution, it will be a case of `equal pay for equal work' as envisaged by Article 14 of the Constitution.
If the classification is proper and reasonable and has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, the doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' will not have any application even though the persons doing the same work are not getting the same pay.
In short, so long as it is not case of discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution, the abstract doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' as envisaged by Article 39(d) of the Constitution, has no manner of application nor is it enforceable in view of Article 37 of the Constitution.
Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP 1986(1) SC 637 may be cited as a case of `equal pay for equal work' as envisaged by Article 14 and not of the abstract doctrine of `equal pay for equal work'.
Where differentiation is sought to be justified on ground of dissimilarity of responsibility, confidentiality and relationship with public there may be some rational nexus.
Thus in Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 1291, where the stenographers (Grade-1) who were attached with officers sought parity with the pay scale of stenographers attached to the joint Secretaries and Officers above that rank, the claim was negatived.
It was observed :  "In this case the differentiation has been sought to be justified in view of the nature and the types of the work done, that is, on intelligible basis.
The same amount of physical work may entail different quality of work, some more sensitive, some requiring more tact, some less - it varies from nature and culture of employment.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
If it has a rational nexus with the object to be sought for, as reiterated before a certain amount of value judgment of the administrative authorities who are charged with fixing the pay scale has to be left with them and it cannot be interfered with by the Court unless it is demonstrated that either it is irrational or based on no basis or arrived at mala fide either in law or in fact.
In the light of the averments made and in the facts mentioned before, it is not possible to say that the differentiation is based on no rational nexus with the object sought for to be achieved."
Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental right.
But equal pay must depend upon the nature of the work done.
It cannot be judged by the mere volume of work, there may be qualitative difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
Functions may be the same but the responsibilities make a difference.
One cannot deny that often the difference is a matter of degree and that there is an element of value judgment by those who are charged with the administration in fixing the scales of pay and other conditions of service.
So long as such value judgment is made bona fide, reasonably on an intelligible criterion which has a rational nexus with the object of differentiation, such differentiation will not amount to discrimination.
It is important to emphasise that equal pay for equal work is a concomitant of Article 14 of the Constitution.
But it follows naturally that equal pay for unequal work will be a negation of that right."
In State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, AIR 1989 SC 19, the Supreme Court negatived the claim of Bench Secretaries for equal pay for equal work on the basis of reasonable classification based on merit, experience and seniority though both sets of employees were performing the similar duties and having similar responsibilities.
In Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, AIR 1989 SC 1256 the Supreme Court refused to grant relief to the petitioner for parity in pay on the application of the principle of `equal pay for equal work' on the ground of reasonable classification on the basis of educational qualifications.
In Municipal Corporation, Amritsar v. Des Raj, 1986(1) Legal Reports and Statute (Pb) 215 it was held that various municipal committees incorporated under the same statute can take a decision at their own level as to whether bonus is to be given or not.
The concept of equal pay for equal work cannot be invoked in the present case when two Executive Officers have been appointed under different statutory provisions.
This petition is found to be without any merit and is dismissed.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition dismissed.