THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was working as a Conductor in the Haryana Roadways.
On 81088, the bus was checked and it was found that he had not issued tickets to three passengers after taking fare from them amounting to Rs. 159/-.
On the ground that he embezzled the Governmental money, an enquiry was ordered to be held.
When the enquiry was pending, the General Manager Haryana, Roadways, passed the following order:-  "That against Shri Ram Dev Conductor No. 141 the following case of fraud has been received:- Date of Fraud 8-10-88 Amount of Fraud 171/- Description of Fraud After Collecting full amount from passengers, ticket had not been issued Any other description Charge sheet supplied  The departmental enquiry was being held against you when you filed a letter that you admit the guilt in the abovesaid cases and that whatever punishment is awarded will be accepted and no legal action shall be taken.
Keeping in view the apology letter and taking a sympathetic view in the matter of Shri Ram Dev Conductor No. 141, I order stopping of one annual increment without cumulative effect."
2.
Thereafter, the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, by the impugned order dated 17-3-93 imposed a punishment of dismissal on the petitioner.
The petitioner filed this writ petition for quashing the order of the Transport Commissioner vide Annexure P-7.
In similar circumstances, the Supreme Court in SLP No. 24152/95 dated 9-2-96 held as follows:-  "Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having examined the plea bargaining made by the appellant, we think that in the facts and circumstances, action under Rule 14 of the Service Rule ibid, was not called for.
The plea had been accepted by as high as the authority of the General Manager of the Haryana Roadways.
The punishment already imposed on the appellant was not small one; but a major one and that too, without a formal inquiry.
The General Manager, Haryana Roadways, could have nipped the whole affair in the bud by not encouraging the appellant making a bargaining plea.
There is always some meeting of minds before such plea is put forth.
Therefore, in the peculiar circumstances, the plea of the appellant need not entrap him to his guilt altering the highest punishment.
We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the impugned order of dismissal and order the appellant to be reinstated to service.
The order of reinstatement may now be issued to the appellant within two weeks.
We make it clear that appellant shall not be entitled to any back wages from and on the day he left charge till 12 weeks hereafter or reinstatement whichever is earlier."
3.
I am of the opinion that the present case is similar to the case disposed of by the Apex Court.
This petition can also be disposed of in the same terms.
4.
I accordingly allow this petition, set aside the order of dismissal and order the petitioner to be reinstated within two weeks.
It is also made clear that the petitioner shall not be entitled to any back wages from the date of his dismissal till two weeks from the date of the receipt of the order of this Court by the respondents.
Petition allowed.