Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Did the respondents (State of Haryana and others) act fairly in denying appointment to the appellants to the posts of Forest Rangers ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
In December 1982, the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, advertised 15 posts of Forest Rangers.
11 of these posts were reserved for members belonging to the categories of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-servicemen.
Four posts had to be filled up purely on the basis of merit.
However, it was specifically stipulated in the advertisement that if "suitable candidates belonging to these three reserved categories are not available, then 10 out of these 11 posts will be filed up by candidates belonging to general category."
The petitioners applied for these posts.
They competed.
They were placed to Sr. Nos 5, 7, 11 and 13.
They were not appointed.
They filed CWP No. 3239 of 1983.
The State of Haryana took the position that the petitioners had no right to be appointed against the posts reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes etc.
This claim was upheld.
The writ petition was dismissed.
3.
In the year 1986, one Sohan Lal approached this court through CWP No. 4716 of 1986.
He was at Sr. No. 8 in the merit list.
He prayed for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him.
His claim was upheld.
In compliance with the directions given by the court, the respondents issued the letter of appointment to Sohan Lal.
In fact, it is conceded that all the selected candidates including the one who had been placed at Sr. No 15 in the merit list were given letters of appointment.
Since the present appellants had not been offered appointment, they approached this court for the second time through a fresh petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The learned Single Judge observed that the petition "has to be dismissed applying the principle of constructive re judicata ..." Aggrieved by this decision, the appellants have filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
4.
On behalf of the appellants, it has been contended that the decision in CWP No. 3239 of 1983 cannot operate as res judicata as persons who were below one of the other appellant had been appointed by the respondents in the years 1986 onwards.
Since the claim of the appellants had not been considered at the time of offering the appointments to those below them in order of merit, they had a fresh cause of action and the bar of res judicata could not be invoked.
5.
It is not disputed on behalf of the respondents that the Subordinate Selection Board had forwarded the names of 14 persons for appointment from the general category.
Only one person had been found suitable for appointment against the posts which had been reserved for different categories.
It is also conceded that all selected persons except the present appellants had been appointed to the various posts which were available for being filled up by direct recruitment.
It is also not disputed that at least 10 posts were filled up after August 2, 1983 when CWP No. 3239 of 1983 had been decided.
In view of this admitted position, it is apparent that when the appellants had approached the court in January 1987, they had an entirely new cause of action.
The plea which was raised at the time of the hearing of the second writ petition was not available to them in the year 1983 when they had initially come to the court.
In such a situation, the bar of res judicata could not have been invoked.
6.
It is undoubtedly correct that the principle of res judicata involves a public policy.
It ensures that a party is not vexed twice on the same cause of action.
It is also calculated to avoid multiplicity of litigation.
However, it cannot be invoked to throw out the claim based on a fresh cause of action.
In the present case, we are satisfied that the claim of the appellants was wrongly ignored by the State of Haryana and, thus, the bar of res judicata could not have been invoked.
If the appellants had approached the court on the second occasion with the grievance that they had a right to be appointed merely because they had been selected, it may have been possible for the respondents to plead that the claim was barred.
However, the respondents themselves having made offers of appointment to various candidates some of whom were even below all the appellants in order of merit, it was only fair that they should have disclosed the factual position to the court.
They had not done so.
By with holding the factual position from the court the respondents gained an advantage and were successful in defeating the claim of the appellants.
To say the least, this was not fair.
7.
Whatever be the technicalities, we find that the appellants were wrongly denied their rightful due.
Even though, a considerable period has elapsed, it would not be just to deny relief only on account of the lapse of time.
This is all the more so in view of the facts that the appellants are not to blame for the lapse of time.
If at all, it is the inherent fault of the system.
8.
It is admitted by Mr. Bishnoi, on instructions from the departmental representative that the promotees are holding posts in excess of their prescribed quota.
Those posts had in fact to be filled up by direct recruitment.
9.
In this situation, we consider it appropriate to allow this appeal.
We do so.
We further direct that the respondents shall consider the claim of the appellants for appointment as Forest Rangers on the basis of their position in the merit list.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Unless something is found to be wrong with the antecedents etc. of the appellants, they shall be appointed.
Mr. Hooda, counsel for the appellants has very fairly stated that if the appellants are appointed within two months, they will not claim any back wages.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.