Shobha Dikshit, J - The short question which falls for consideration in this writ petition is as to what is the relevant date for the purpose of determining inter se seniority amongst the teachers in the lecturer's grade i.e. whether the date of joining the post in the grade or the date of approval of the order of appointment or promotion in that grade is the relevant date.
In the present case, the teachers Sarva Sri JN Dwivedi, SN Shukla and SP Tripathi were duly selected for the subjects Economics, Geography and Hindi and their selection was also approved by the concerned District Inspector of Schools vide orders dated 11.7.1973.
The appointment of Sri JN Dwivedi and Sri SN Shukla was by way of direct selection whereas Sri SP Tripathi was approved for being promoted to teach the subject of Hindi in lecturer's grade.
Pursuant to the aforesaid approval the Committee of Management issued appointment letters and delivered them personally to Sri JN Dwivedi and Sri SN Shukla on 23.7.1973.
Sri JN Dwivedi claims that he joined the post immediately thereafter on 2371973 in the afternoon at 130 pm whereas Sri SN Shukla joined the post at 10 am on 2471973.
Sri SP Tripathi also joined the post on 2471973.
Since Sri JN Dwivedi joined the post in the afternoon, his salary for the said post was paid with effect from 2471997 as per rules.
Other two teachers were also paid their salary with effect from 2471973.
2.
The District Inspector of Schools who initially approved the promotion of Sri SP Tripathi in the lecturer's grade vide orders dated 11171973, subsequently on coming to know that he did not possess the minimum experience of 5 years continuous service in LT Grade and was lacking in the essential qualifications for being promoted from LT grade to lecturer's grade, cancelled the same vide orders dated 2471973.
The post of lecturer in Hindi was advertised afresh through direct recruitment.
Sri SP Tripathi applied for this post and was selected in this direct selection held on 681973.
The District Inspector of Schools approved this selection and appointment of Sri SP Tripathi on the post of lecturer in Hindi vide his order dated 7111973.
It is in the aforesaid background that the aforesaid three lecturers are claiming seniority over each other and this triangular contest has resulted into filing of the above noted writ petitions by each one of them.
Sri Jagat Narain Dwivedi has filed writ petition No. 11517(SS) of 1990 as also writ petition No. 4899(SS) of 1994, Sri SN Shukla writ petition No. 7669(SS) of 1992 and Sri SP Tripathi writ petition No. 12097(SS) of 1990 along with Committee of Management of the Institution in question.
3.
The question of seniority assumed greater importance when the occasion arose for officiation or ad hoc appointment to the post of Head of the Institution i.e.
Principal.
Section 16-E of UP Intermediate Education Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act) provides the manner and mode for making appointment on the post of Head of the Institution and teachers of an Institution.
The Committee of Management has been vested with the power to make such appointments in the manner provided in the sub-section (2).
Sub- section (3) provides that no person shall be appointed as Head of the Institution or teacher in an Institution unless he possesses the prescribed minimum qualifications.
Regulations have been framed under the Act for the purpose of this (sic) Sections 16-E, 16-F and 16FF and are contained in Chapter II.
Relevant Regulation 3 dealing with determination of inter se seniority is quoted herein below for reference :  "3.
(1) The Committee of Management of every institution shall cause a seniority list of teachers to be prepared in accordance with the following provisions:-  (a) The seniority list shall be prepared separately for each grade of teachers whether permanent or temporary, on any substantive post; (b) Seniority of teachers in a grade shall be determined on the basis of their substantive appointment in that grade.
If two or more teachers were so appointed on the same date, seniority shall be determined on the basis of age; (bb) Where two or more teachers working in a grade are promoted to the next higher grade on the same date, their seniority inter se shall be determined on the basis of the length of their service to be reckoned from the date of their substantive appointment in the grade from which they are promoted :  Provided that if such length of service is equal, seniority shall be determined on the basis of age.
(c) to (g) x x x x x x  (2) The seniority list shall be revised every year and the provisions of Clause (1) shall mutatis mutandis apply to such revision."
4.
From the perusal of the aforesaid regulations, it is clear that the Committee of Management is obliged to maintain a seniority list of the teachers in each grade separately.
In the present case, the seniority list should have been drawn for the teachers in the lecturer's grade and the seniormost teacher in this grade is entitled to officiate or to be promoted on ad hoc basis on the post of Principal against substantive vacancy till such time a duly selected candidate by the UP Secondary Education Service Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) is made available.
The relevant rules further provide that the names of two seniormost eligible teachers in the lecturer's grade shall be forwarded by the Committee of Management to the Selection Board for being considered along with the candidates who have applied directly for selection for this post.
Therefore, the determination of inter se seniority by the Committee of Management assumes relevance for both the purposes viz. officiation as ad hoc Principal and regular selection against substantive vacancy.
5.
In the light of the aforesaid legal requirement Sri JN Dwivedi addressed a letter to the Principal of the College dated 121989 calling upon him to issue a seniority list of the teachers in accordance with Regulation 3(2) of the Regulations framed under Chapter II of UP Intermediate Education Act.
The Principal in response to the aforesaid letter furnished the following seniority list of the lecturers :  1.
Sri SP Tripathi, Lecturer in Hindi.
2.
Sri JN Dwivedi, Lecturer in Economics.
3.
Sri SN Shukla, Lecturer in Geography.
4.
Sri PN Pandey, Lecturer in English.
6.
All the three lecturers, Sarv Sri SP Tripathi, JN Dwivedi and SN Shukla objected to the said list by representing before the District Inspector of Schools (DIOS).
The stand of Sri JN Dwivedi was that since he had joined the post in question in the afternoon of 23.7.1973, therefore, he should be placed at serial No. 1 whereas Sri SN Shukla who admittedly joined the post on 2471973 should be placed junior to him.
The stand of Sri SP Tripathi however was that his initial appointment through promotion which was approved vide orders dated 11.7.1973 should be treated to be a valid order as the subsequent direct selection was illegal.
The District Inspector of Schools after summoning the record and considering the objection of all the three lecturers came to the conclusion vide his orders dated 6.9.1990 contained in Annexure-14 to the writ petition that the case of Sri SP Tripathi was different as his appointment is admittedly subsequent and later in point of time to the appointment of Sri JN Dwivedi and Sri SN Shukla.
With regard to inter se seniority between Sri SN Shukla and Sri JN Dwivedi, the District Inspector of Schools held that both of them joined the post on the same day i.e. 2471973 and Sri SN Shukla being older in age should be treated senior to Sri JN Dwivedi as per sub-clause (bb) of Regulation 3.
The Committee of Management also furnished the same information that both Sri JN Dwivedi and Sri SN Shukla received the appointment letter on 23.7.1973 but that joined the post on 2471973 and their salaries were also paid with effect from 2471973.
The seniority position as per order of the District Inspector of Schools dated 6.9.1990 is as follows :  1.
Sri SN Shukla.
2.
Sri JN Dwivedi.
3.
Sri SP Tripathi.
Sri SP Tripathi and Sri JN Dwivedi being aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 6.9.1990 challenged the same by filing appeal/representation before the District Inspector of Schools.
Simultaneously they also filed writ petitions before this Court being Writ Petition No. 12099 of 1991 preferred by Sri SP Tripathi along with Committee of Management as the Committee of Management perhaps by then had changed and writ petition No. 11517 of 1990 by Sri JN Dwivedi.
7.
While the aforesaid writ petitions were pending before this Court, the District Inspector of Schools reviewed his earlier order dated 6.9.1990 and quashed the same and passed a fresh order dated 2971992 contained in Annexure-18 and placed Sri JN Dwivedi at serial No. 1 accepting his contention that he had joined the lecturer's post in the afternoon of 23.7.1979, Sri SN Shukla at serial No. 2 who joined the post on 2471973 in the forenoon and Sri SP Tripathi at serial No. 3 as he was directly appointed subsequently on 7111973.
Aggrieved by the same, Sri SN Shukla moved an application for recall of the aforesaid order on the ground that the same is illegal and is violative of principles of natural justice because he was not heard before the aforesaid order was passed by the District Inspector of Schools.
However, this application was rejected vide orders dated 2991992 contained in Annexure-20.
Aggrieved by the same, Sri SN Shukla filed writ petition No. 7669(SS) of 1992.
Sri SP Tripathi being aggrieved by the said order dated 2971992 again preferred a representation before the Regional Deputy Director of Education who had by then been vested with appellate powers in place of the District Inspector of Schools.
While the aforesaid dispute regarding the determination of the inter se seniority between these three teachers was under consideration, the post of Principal fell vacant on 3061993 when Sri Shyam Sunder Shukla, the permanent incumbent retired.
The changed Committee of Management at this time once again passed an order dated 2861993 contained in Annexure-22 treating Sri JN Dwivedi as seniormost teacher and directed him to take over the charge of the post of Principal.
Sri JN Dwivedi accordingly took the charge on the post of Principal on 3061993 itself on ad hoc basis.
The Committee of Management also passed a resolution approving the aforesaid ad hoc promotion of Sri JN Dwivedi and intimated the same to the District Inspector of Schools vide its letter dated 26-7-1993 contained in Annexure-25.
The District Inspector of Schools vide its letter dated 241994 contained in Annexure-27 also approved the ad hoc promotion of Sri JN Dwivedi on the post of Principal till a regularly selected candidate from the Selection Board is made available.
After Sri JN Dwivedi assumed charge on the post of ad hoc Principal, the Regional Deputy Director of Education before whom the representation/appeal preferred by Sri SP Tripathi was pending decided the same vide its order dated 2651994 contained in Annexure-29 quashing the order dated 29.7.1972 earlier passed by the District Inspector of Schools after reviewing its earlier order dated 6.9.1990 meaning thereby that the said Deputy Director upheld the order dated 6.9.1990 thereby restoring the seniority of Sri SN Shukla at serial No. 1 and Sri JN Dwivedi at serial No. 2.
This reversion of seniority position resulted into filing of writ petition No. 4899 of 1994 by Sri JN Dwivedi.
The consequential order dated 381994 passed by DIOS contained in Annexure 1 has also been challenged.
It is in the aforesaid facts and circumstances that this Court has to decide the controversy with regard to inter se seniority between the aforesaid three teachers.
8.
I have heard the learned Counsel for all the parties and have perused the writ petitions and affidavits filed by the contesting parties.
Parties have agreed to treat writ petition No. 4899 of 1994 as the leading case and all the annexures referred to herein above are from this writ petition.
I have also perused the original service record of all the three contestants produced by the Committee of Management through its Manager for the purpose of ascertaining, if necessary, the date and time of joining the post of lecturer by these contestants.
9.
Dr. LP Misra who appeared for Sri JN Dwivedi assailed the orders dated 6.9.1990 passed by the District Inspector of Schools and the order dated 2651994 passed by the Regional Deputy Director of Education inter alia on the ground that Sri JN Dwivedi had since joined the post in lecturer's grade in the afternoon of 23.7.1973, hence he became senior to Sri SN Shukla who admittedly joined the post in the forenoon of 2471973.
Therefore, Sri SN Shukla cannot claim the benefit of sub-clause (bb) of Regulation 3(1) of the Regulations.
The whole argument is based on the premises that by joining the post in the afternoon of 23.7.1973 Sri JN Dwivedi becomes senior to Sri SN Shukla and, therefore, the aforesaid sub-clause (bb) shall not be applicable to his case.
It has further been contended by him that Sri SP Tripathi has no claim at all for seniority over him as his appointment was subsequent to him; that the order dated 2651994 passed by the Deputy Director of Education is non est having been passed by an authority not vested with the power to decide the appeal/representation preferred by two others; lastly, inter se seniority amongst the teachers of the lecturers' grade having been settled long back on 1711974, therefore, the prevailing position as such could not be unsettled after about two decades.
10.
Sri IB Singh, learned Counsel appearing for Sri SN Shukla disputed that Sri JN Dwivedi joined the post in the afternoon of 2271993.
He alleged tampering in the records.
Sri HGS Parihar, appearing for Sri SP Tripathi attempted to justify his earlier appointment by way of promotion dated 11.7.1973 as valid and subsequent cancellation dated 2471973 as illegal.
He, therefore, contended that he should be treated to be seniormost teacher in this grade.
11.
The whole controversy has arisen because the petitioners are treating the date and time of joining the post in lecturer's grade as the determining factor, whereas a critical analysis of provisions of law and various decisions of this Court leaves one with no doubt in mind that the determining factor for the purpose of fixing inter se seniority is not the date of joining the post but it is the date of accord of approval of appointment by the approving authority.
In a somewhat similar situation, a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Smt. Omi Bala Nigam v. Regional Inspectress of Girls Schools, Jhansi Region, Jhansi, 1986 UPLBEC 69 dealt with the identical issue in the following manner and held that it is the date of approval alone which is relevant for the purposes of fixing inter se seniority.
The findings are in following terms :  "Appointment letters clearly indicated that the service could be joined either on 171964 or immediately thereafter.
It did not mention that the petitioner was required to join on 171964 itself.
It was on account of this fact that the petitioner joined on 671964.
It appears to us that merely because the petitioner joined the service on 671964 she would not lose her right of seniority, particularly when the date of approval in both the events was the same i.e. 1591964.
Joining of service had to be considered in the light of the approval also."
"The date of substantive appointment spoken of in clause (b) of Regulation 3 of Chapter II of the Act should be construed as the date after approval has been accorded by the District Inspector of Schools under Section 16-G. Inasmuch as requirement is to obtain prior approval to the appointment, a date on which a teacher joins before approval would not be considered a date of substantive appointment.
As stated above, approval is a condition precedent to appointment.
Without approval, there could be no appointment and joining of service would be in contravention of the provisions of the Act and Regulations framed thereunder.
Accordingly, seniority could not be counted with effect from that date."
12.
In yet another case, a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Bahadur Singh Gaur v. District Inspector of Schools, 1995(3) UPLBEC 71 while discussing the scope of Section followed the ratio of above noted decision i.e. the date of approval is the relevant date and where it is same, the age factor will be the relevant factor for determining inter se seniority.
13.
Learned Single Judge in the aforesaid decision held as follows :  "The date of birth of the petitioner is 111937 and date of birth of respondent No. 3 is 2691945 admittedly, the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3.
The relevant date is the date of approval of appointment by the District Inspector of Schools.
The date of joining is not the determing factor for deciding the seniority unless it is shown that the candidate did not join the institution within the time prescribed for joining given in the appointment letter.
The Committee of Management under Regulation 16 is bound to issue appointment letter within two weeks of receipt of approval to selected candidates for appointment."
14.
"The date of birth of petitioner is 111937 and the date of birth of respondent No. 3 is 2691945.
Admittedly, the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3.
The relevant date is the date of approval of appointment by the District Inspector of Schools.
The date of joining is not the determining factor for deciding the seniority unless it is shown that the petitioner did not join the institution within the time prescribed as given in the appointment letter within 2 days to the selected candidates for appointment."
15.
In both the decisions, it has been discussed that in case the date of joining is treated to be the relevant date then it would become the discretion of the Committee of Management to issue an appointment letter to some candidates earlier and to some other candidates later and the result would be that a person who receives the appointment letter earlier would start functioning earlier and the other may join later on would become junior for no fault of his.
Even where letters are issued simultaneously and no date is fixed for joining then merely because a candidate chose to join earlier then and there on receipt of the letter, cannot certainly be granted seniority over the person who takes some joining time and joins the post specially when no fixed date has been mentioned in the letter of appointment for joining.
In this regard, some more cases can be referred to where the principle that the date of approval is the relevant date for determining inter se seniority has been laid down.
Prabhu Narain Singh v. Deputy Director of Education, Varanasi, 1977 All LR 381, IS Tome v. District Inspector of Schools, Meerut, 1993 A.W.C.
1752 ; Lalit Mohan Misra v. District Inspector of Schools, 1979 All LJ 1025.
16.
In the present case, it is not disputed that the appointment of both Sri JN Dwivedi and Sri SN Shukla in the lecturer's grade was approved by the District Inspector of Schools vide its order dated 1171993 and Sri SN Shukla is older in age to Sri JN Dwivedi.
Even otherwise, joining the post in the afternoon of 23.7.1973 is to be treated joining in the forenoon of the next succeeding day i.e. 2471973.
It is not disputed that the salary was paid to both the lecturers with effect from 2471973.
Hence, even assuming that the claim of Sri JN Dwivedi, his signatures, entry in the service book showing joining in the afternoon of 23.7.1973 is correct, beyond any kind of doubt whatsoever, he shall be deemed to have joined the post on the next succeeding day i.e. 2471973.
In this situation too, the person who is elder in age will get precedence in the matter of inter se seniority pursuant to Regulation 3(1)(bb) and shall be treated to be senior to the other teachers whose appointment has also been approved on the same day.
I, therefore, find no merit in the arguments raised by the petitioner Sri JN Dwivedi and reject the same.
In my considered opinion, the view taken by the District Inspector of Schools in its order dated 6.9.1990 is the correct view and the same is upheld.
The subsequent orders dated 2971992 and 241994, both passed by the District Inspector of Schools are liable to be quashed not being sustainable in law.
All other resolutions passed by the Committee of Management from time to time dated 2451991, 2861993 and 25.7.1993 are therefore, liable to be held illegal and ineffective.
17.
Now, coming to the other ground of challenge raised on behalf of Sri JN Dwivedi that the inter se seniority having been determined by the Committee of Management as early as in the year 1974 should not have been unsettled after a lapse of such a long period as the law is settled on this aspect of the matter not to unsettle the said legal position.
This ground is also not available to the petitioner Sri JN Dwivedi for two reasons; firstly, the earlier list dated 1711974 contained in Annexure-5 appears to be the seniority list drawn under Regulations 1, 2 and 4 of Chapter I drawn by the Committee of Management for the purpose of rotational representation of the teachers in the Committee of Management based on date of initial appointment of the teachers in any grade in the College and is not under Regualtion 3 of Chapter II as required for the purpose of promotion/officiation etc. to be prepared separately for each grade based on date of approval of the appointment.
Secondly, it is the petitioner Sri JN Dwivedi himself who had vide his letter dated 121989 called upon the Committee of Management/the Principal to furnish him the requisite information about the seniority position or to draw a fresh seniority list under Regulation 3(2).
He, therefore, cannot be permitted to urge that the seniority list as envisaged under Regulation 3 alleged to be dated 1711974 existed and the same did not require any review under Regulation 3(2) after the amendment in the Regulations.
In these circumstances, the grounds raised by the petitioner Sri JN Dwivedi being without any merit are rejected.
18.
Sri SP Tripathi has no case.
His earlier promotion dated 11.7.1973 on the post of lecturer in Hindi and subsequent approval dated 23.7.1973 having been cancelled being illegal cannot be treated to be legal and valid as contended by the learned Counsel.
It is not disputed that Sri Tripathi himself applied and appeared subsequently in response to a fresh advertisement for direct selection for this post and accepted his selection, appointment orders dated 7111973.
This position having become final and conclusive cannot be permitted to be reopened indirectly in the present proceedings with regard to determination of inter se seniority.
The writ petition preferred by Sri SP Tripathi is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
19.
During the pendency of these writ petitions, while the petitioners were claiming seniority over each other and the post of Principal fell vacant on 3061993, therefore, in view of a very hot contest between all the three petitioners, this Court by way of interim arrangement passed a detailed order dated 1311995 and directed the Committee of Management as well as the District Inspector of Schools to permit the lecturer at serial No. 4 to officiate as Principal till this dispute is resolved.
In these circumstances, one Sri PN Pandey, lecturer in English whose name is at serial No. 4 was handed over the charge of the post of Principal by way of interim arrangement and it is informed that said Sri Pandey is working on the post of Principal on pure by ad hoc basis.
It is, therefore, directed that he shall forthwith hand over the charge of the post of Principal in question in favour of the seniormost lecturer Sri SN Shukla and make way for him to work as such till a duly selected candidate is available by the Commission.
It is however made clear that if Sri Pandey has drawn the salary of the post of Principal for the period he has worked as such under the interim directions of this Court then it shall not be recovered from him.
Similarly, salary already drawn by Sri JN Dwivedi for working as Principal with effect from 3061993 till he continued as such shall also not be recovered from him.
20.
It is likely that because of the present dispute and pendency of these writ petitions, the Committee of Management might not have forwarded the names of two seniormost teachers along with relevant records to the UP Secondary Service Education Board.
Hence, the Committee of Management is directed to forward the same afresh, if necessary, in the light of this judgment with relevant records without any further delay at its earliest and the Commission shall also complete the process of selection for the post of Principal in the Institution in question in accordance with law as expeditiously as possible.
21.
In the light of the aforesaid findings, Writ Petition No. 7669(SS) of 1992 preferred by Sri SN Shukla is allowed and the resolutions/orders dated 2451991, 2861993 and 25.7.1993 passed by the Committee of Management are declared illegal and inoperative.
The orders dated 2971992 and 241994 passed by the District Inspector of Schools are hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to give the charge of the post of Principal (adhoc) to Sri SN Shukla forthwith on receipt of the certified copy of this judgment.
Sri SN Shukla shall however be entitled to salary of this post from the date he assumes charge.
Writ Petition Nos. 11517(SS) of 1990, 12097(SS) of 1990 and 4999(SS) of 1994 are accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.