VK Bali, J (Oral) - Petitioner takes strong exception to re-advertising the post against which he had been selected.
Through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, he thus seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as quash the decision of the respondent-Panjab University not to appoint him to the post of Professor in Physics and instead to readvertise the post.
2.
The facts as projected in the writ reveal that the Panjab University, Chandigarh, vide advertisement dated September 22, 1997 invited applications for certain posts of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and Research Associates in various subjects.
Petitioner, being interested in the post of Professor in Physics, obtained "Detailed Instructions" containing qualifications, specializations etc. from the respondent University and applied for the post.
In response to the application sent by him, he received an interview letter dated January 23, 1998 vide which he was asked to appear before the Selection Committee on February 13, 1998.
He appeared before the Selection Committee on February 13, 1998 and was subject to a rigorous interview by the members of the Selection Committee and he was selected as Professor of Physics.
Despite proper selection having been made, respondent University, in a wholly illegal manner, had readvertised the post, thus, constraining him to file the present petition.
3.
On the facts, as have been stated above, the Court issued notice to the respondent University, which, after service, entered defence and contested the claim of the petitioner.
It has, inter-alia, been pleaded in the written statement filed on its behalf that five Readers of the Department of Physics, Panjab University, vide their joint representation dated March 16, 1998 represented that the Screening Committee, as per their understanding, had made a mandatory requirement of experience of at least five years as Reader or equivalent, in addition to other requirements for the candidates to be called for interview and no exception to this requirement was made by the Committee.
It was represented that the petitioner did not complete five years experience either as Reader or on equivalent post.
Giving the details of his service experience as Reader or equivalent, they represented that the total experience of the petitioner as Reader or equivalent comes to 4 years, 8 months and 22 days and there was no reasons for him to be shortlisted by the Screening Committee because the Committee screened out candidates even with a continuous Readership experience of as high as 4 years and 10 months.
They requested that this should be looked into carefully before taking any final decision about appointing him in case he is selected.
Petitioner had also sent a letter dated March 28, 1998 as also another letter dated April 27, 1998 requesting the Vice Chancellor to protect his legitimate interest in regard to his appointment as Professor of Physics.
Giving details of his teaching experience in the said letters, he maintained that his total experience as Reader/Professor exceeded five years.
The matter regarding verification of petitioner's experience as Reader, as per the Syndicate's decision dated March 21, 1998, was referred by the Vice Chancellor to the Screening Committee for consideration and opinion since it was on the recommendation of the Screening Committee that the petitioner had been called for interview.
The Screening Committee met for the purpose of April 28, 1998 and it examined the case and found that the total experience of the petitioner as Reader or equivalent comes to 4 years, 8 months and 21 days as on October 27, 1997, the last date for receipt of applications for the post of Professor in Physics as detailed below :  "1.
Reader, Physics Deptt., HP University, Shimla., 2761990 to 10.4.1992, (1 year, 9 months) 2.
Reader, Physics Deptt., Panjab University, Chandigarh., 211194 to 29101995, (11 months 9 days) 3.
Professor, Physics Deptt., Panjab University, Chandigarh., 301095 to 27101997, (1 year 11 months 28 days)".
4.
The said minutes were placed before the Vice Chancellor and after considering the same, the Vice Chancellor passed orders on the file on April 30, 1998 that the post be re-advertised.
5.
Mr. Rajan Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, without disputing the details of experience of the petitioner, as detailed above, has only contended that the petitioner had completed the requisite experience as on the date of interview and that being the position, his experience upto the date, as mentioned in the advertisement was not relevant.
For his afore-stated contention, learned counsel relies upon a judgment of the Apex Court in Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekher and Anr., 1993(4) RSJ 562 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
208 wherein it was held as under :-  "The fact is that the appellants did pass the examination and were fully qualified for being selected prior to the date of interview.
By allowing the appellants to sit for the interview and by their selection on the basis of their comparative merits, the recruiting authority was able to get the best talents available.
It was certainly in the public interest that the interview was made as broad based as was possible on the basis of qualifications.
The reasoning of the learned Single Judge was, thus, based on sound principle with reference to comparatively superior merits.
It was in the public interest that better candidates who were fully qualified on the dates of selection were not rejected, notwithstanding that the results of the examination in which they had appeared had been delayed for no fault of theirs.
The appellants were fully qualified on the dates of interview and taking into account the generally followed principle of rule 37 in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, we are of the opinion that the technical view adopted by the learned Judges of the Division Bench was incorrect and the view expressed by the learned Single Judge was, on the facts of this case, the correct view."
6.
Mr. Anupam Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent University relies upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Sharma & Anr. v. Chander Shekher & Anr., JT 1997(4) SC 99 wherein it has been held that "eligibility of the candidates will be judged with reference to the date by which application is to be filed and any person who acquires prescribed qualification subsequent to such prescribed date cannot be considered at all".
The view earlier expressed by the Supreme Court in 1993(4) RSJ 562 has been reviewed by it in JT 1997(4) SC 99.
7.
In view of what has been said above, we find no merit in the only contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner and dismiss the writ petition in limine leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.