VS Aggarwal, J - Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana (hereinafter described as the petitioner) has filed the present petition invoking Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the award dated January 18, 1996 of the Labour Court, Ludhiana.
2.
The relevant facts are that respondent-Kishan Singh was appointed as a carpenter by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana in July 1972.
In the year 1980, he was transferred to the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana and was placed under suspension on February 4, 1981 by General Manager, Municipal Corporation, Nigam Transport, Ludhiana.
A charge-sheet was issued to him.
The services of respondent were terminated on June 24, 1982.
3.
Respondent-Kishan Singh raised a dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act.
He alleged that charge-sheet was given to him on wrong facts.
The domestic enquiry was not conducted in accordance with rules of natural justice and further that he was appointed by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana, only he could take disciplinary action against him and not the petitioner.
Before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana the petitioner took the preliminary objection that reference was barred by time.
It was not denied that respondent had been appointed by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana.
It was further contended that he was not on deputation with the petitioner.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana vide the impugned order held that no enquiry had been held and termination order was passed by the Authority who was not competent to do so.
Accordingly, the Presiding Officer, Labour Court set aside the order terminating the services of the respondent.
He was allowed 25% backwages with reinstatement to the post.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner assails the award and contends that even if there was no enquiry that was held, since, evidence was led before the Labour Court, it was incumbent on the said Court to consider the evidence and arrive at a conclusion.
He further alleged that the action of the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana was in order.
5.
In the facts of the present case, it becomes wholly unnecessary to consider the first contention because the petition is liable to fail on the second contention that was raised.
6.
It is not being disputed that respondent had been sent on deputation to the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
The respondent had been appointed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana.
There was nothing shown that services of the respondent had been transferred to the petitioner-Corporation.
Once, he was sent on deputation, indeed, his services could only be terminated by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana.
To this extent, thus there is no ground to interfere in the order passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ludhiana in question.
7.
During the course of arguments, it was pointed that on similar pleas other awards had been passed and the Municipal Corporation had challenged the same.
Therein, the respondent's counsel had agreed to take Rs. 20,000/- in lump-sum and that respondent should be allowed to join duty forthwith.
The respondent's counsel had no objection, if similar order is passed.
8.
Accordingly, the present petition fails and is dismissed, but keeping in view the concession of the respondent's counsel, the award is only modified to the extent that with respect to the back-wages respondent shall be awarded Rs. 20,000/- in lump-sum.
The petitioner is directed to direct the respondent to join duty forthwith.
He would be entitled to full salary from the date of the award.
It is further clarified that if respondent is not to be permanently absorbed, his services may be transferred back to the Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana.
Petition dismissed.