SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioners in these writ petitions are the employees of the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana Society at Ludhiana (hereinafter referred to as `the Society').
The Society is registered under the Societies Registration Act No. XXI of 1860.
The Society has its service regulations which contain the rules and conditions governing the appointment, employment and other matters incidential to and connected with such employment, of all staff members of the Society Regulation No. 29 is regarding the age of retirement.
Before the amendment in the year 1978 which is with effect from 161978, the provision for retirement age was as follows :  (i) All staff members shall retire on attaining the following ages of retirement :- Man Woman Group I 65 years 60 years Group II 65 years 60 years Group III 60 years 55 years 2.
From 161978, the regulations were amended and the retirement age for all the staff members, both male and female was fixed at the age of 60 years.
However, it was also provided that Group I and Group II male staff members who are already in employment and who in the ordinary course of events would retire at the age of 65 years will continue to do so.
It was also provided by the said amendment that woman of Group III who were retiring at the age of 55 may have the option to retire at the age of 60 years according to the new rules.
3.
In 1993 another change was brought about and the retirement age for all staff members both male and female was fixed at the age of 60 years with effect from 9.10.93.
The petitioners being aggrieved by the 1993 amendment, have challenged the same alleging that it has retrospective effect and retrospective effect cannot be given so far as the age of retirement is concerned.
4.
The writ petitions are contested by the respondents by filing their written statement in C.W.P.
No. 15423 of 1993.
Among the other defence, it is contended by the respondents that the Society is a private owned and privately managed institution and that it has been established by the minorities and is being administered by a minority community, that is Christians.
It is also contended that it does not receive any aid and that it is a non-statutory institution and that being a non-statutory and unaided institution, it does not come within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution, and, therefore, the writ petition is not maintainable.
It is also contended by the respondents that the amendment made is proper and legal and cannot in any way be treated as a retrospective one.
5.
We have heard Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
The following points require to be considered in this case :  i) Whether the writ of mandamus can be issued against the respondent-Society ?
ii) Whether the act of the respondent-Society amending the regulations in the year 1993 as above, is without jurisdiction, contrary to bye-laws and regulations, arbitrary and violative of the principle of natural justice and discriminatory ?
7.
The petitioners have quoted certain parts of the judgment in the case of Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Survarna Jyanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust and others v. VR Rudani and others, A.I.R. 1989 SC 1607 wherein it has been held that if the rights are purely of a private character, no mandamus can issue and that if the management of the college is purely a private body with no public duty mandamus will not lie.
These are two exceptions of mandamus.
It has also been held that once these are absent and when the party has no other equally convenient remedy, mandamus cannot be denied.
In that case it has also been observed by the Supreme Court in paragraph 14 that it has to be appreciated that the appellant-trust was managing the affiliated college to which public money is paid as Government aid.
Public money paid as Government aid plays a major role in the control, maintenance and working of educational institutions.
The aided institutions like Government institutions discharge public function by way of imparting education to students.
They are subject to the rules and regulations of the affiliating University.
Their activities are closely supervised by the University authorities.
Employment in such institutions, therefore, is not devoid of any public character.
Therefore, it was held that the service conditions of the academic staff are not purely of a private character.
It was also held that it has super-added protection by University decisions creating a legal right-duty relationship between the staff and the management and when there is existence of this relationship, mandamus cannot be refused to the aggrieved party.
8.
In Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others, A.I.R. 1981 SC 487, it has been held that the Regional Engineering College, Srinagar is sponsored by the Government of India and is established and its administration and management are carried on by a Society registered under the Jammu and Kashmir Registration of Societies Act, 1898.
The monies required for running the college are provided entirely by the Central Government and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and even if any other monies are to be received by the Society, it can be done only with the approval of the State and the Central Government.
The rules to be made by the Society are also required to have the prior approval of the State and the Central Government.
Considering these and various other similar aspects it has been held by the Supreme Court in that case that the Society is an instrumentality or the agency of the State and the Central Government and it is an `authority' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
9.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram has relied on the case of KI Shephard and others v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1988 SC 686.
It was a case of amalgamation of banks where action was initiated under Section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for the amalgamation of three banks namely Hindustan Commercial Bank, The Bank of Cochin Limited and Lakshmi Commercial Bank with Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank and State Bank of India respectively.
In the said amalgamation some employees of the Banking companies were excluded and their services were not taken over by the respective transferee banks.
The Supreme Court in that case allowed the writ petitions and appeals and set aside the impugned judgments of the Single Judge and Division Bench of the Kerala High Court and directed that each of the three transferee banks should take over the excluded employees on the same terms and conditions of employment under the respective banking companies prior to amalgamation.
In that case one of the arguments advanced was that the transferee banks which are `State' and RBI which has monitored the operation being admittedly `State' their action in excluding some of the employees of the banking company and taking over the services of others who are similarly situated is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution  10.
In view of the above citation before us, we have to decide whether respondents can be treated as `State' for the purpose of entertaining this petition or not.
11.
In the case of Shri Anadi Mukta Satguru Shree Muktajee Vandasjiswami Suvarna Jayanti Mohotsav Smarak Trust and others' case (supra) it has been held that if the management of the college is purely a private body with no public duty, mandamus will not lie and if these two exceptions are absent and when the party has no other equally convenient remedy, mandamus cannot be denied.
In Ajay Hasia's case (supra) the Regional Engineering College was sponsored by the Government and its management and administration are carried on by a Society.
It has also been held that the monies required for running the college are provided entirely by the Government and that even if any other monies are to be received by the Society, it can be done only with the approval of the Government.
In the case of KI Shephard and others' (supra) it has been held that the transferes banks are `State' and the RBI which monitored the operation is also admittedly `State'.
12.
In the case in hand, the respondent is the institution which of course is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
However, if we see the service regulations it is nowhere specified that there was any control of the Government over the Society Moreover, nothing has been shown to us from either memorandum of association, bye-lays or from the service regulations that the finance is provided by the State.
13.
Document Annexure P/1 has been shown to us.
By the said document, the Principal was informed that the Vice Chancellor has approved the appointment of Dr. Jatindra Chandra Saha as Professor Anatomy for teaching MBBS and MS Classes on the staff of the College.
The respondent-College is affiliated to Panjab University, Chandigarh as can he seen from the document annexure P/1.
Section 27 of the Panjab University Act deals with affiliation of Colleges.
For the purpose of affiliation, the College has to apply to the university and amongst other particulars, it has to furnish the qualification of the teaching staff, their grades of pay and conditions governing tenure of office etc.
Regarding the service conditions nothing as such is shown to have been prescribed.
The requirements as per Section 27 of the Act, as mentioned above, do not in any way show that the service conditions of the staff of the college are governed by the rules of the university.
The appointment of the petitioners of course is approved by the University and beyond this, the University has no control over the staff of the college.
The funding of the college is not shown to be from any Government or public body.
Considering the principles laid down in the above mentioned judgments and above mentioned particulars of the respondent-College, we are not inclined to accept the argument that the respondent-College can be treated as `State' for the purpose of maintainability of the writ petition.
14.
This being so, the first point has to be answered in negative.
The second point, therefore, is not necessary to be considered and if the petitioners want to avail any other remedy as advised, they may do so.
We do not want to give our finding on that point which may prejudice the rights of the parties in some other proceedings.
15.
In view of the above facts, these writ petitions deserve to be dismissed.
Consequently, the same are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.