BA Khan, J - Petitioner, a police constable, was dismissed from service by Govt order No. Home-144/PSA of 1993 dated 241993 passed by the Governor in exercise of the powers under S. 126(2)(c) of the State Constitution.
He assails this order but advances a curious thesis which makes no sense at all.
According to him be had gone to see his brother at Hari Niwas and thereafter when he reported for duty as was told that his services were terminated.
2.
Petitioner's case is that he was dismissed from service without any inquiry which could not be done because he was neither found guilty by any Court of law for any alleged activity prejudicial to the security of the State nor had he indulged in any such activity.
It is submitted by him that the impugned order was bad as it was not speaking one and as no grounds were disclosed in this for reaching the requisite satisfaction.
It is also alleged that the action taken against him was mala fide and whimsical and that the respondents had not discharged the obligation cast on them under S. 126 of the State Constitution because respondent No. 1 was required under law to peruse the material relevant to the cases and consider the entirety of allegations against him which was not done in the present case.
Lastly, it is urged that the impugned order was violative of the principles of natural justice.
3.
In the reply filed by the respondents it is submitted that the petitioner had been indulging in gross indiscipline and had organised an armed revolt along with his associates in April, 1993 and had incited the people to join it.
He had also participated in processions, dharnas and holding of the high ranking police officers as hostages for some days.
So much so that Army had to be called out to disarm him and his associates.
As such respondents had not committed any error in removing him from service keeping in view the "magnitude of his activities".
Lastly, it is pointed out that no reasons were required to be given for the impugned action and that such reasons find place in the intelligence reports submitted to the Governor on which satisfaction was drawn by him.
4.
The case of both parties makes no head and tail.
Both petitioner and respondents have strayed into irrelevance missing the crux on the matter in the process.
On his part, petitioner has also made averments in his writ petition in generalised terms without specifically alleging that the satisfaction reached by the Governor for discarding the inquiry lacked in basis.
On the contrary, he had dished out a cock and bull story and had indulged in hyper-bole.
5.
The respondents have matched the petitioner in equal measure through their reply.
They seem to have concentrated more on the nature and gravity of his alleged activities rather than indicating the circumstances which had made it inexpedient for the Governor to hold the inquiry.
6.
It is well settled that the gravity of the activities of the delinquent do not furnish a justification for taking away the constitutional guarantee of enquiry for removing him from service.
The severity or the gravity of the allegations against him may warrant removal from service.
But, all that becomes important is whether the constitutional safeguard of an inquiry against him could be taken away merely because of the seriousness of the allegations against him.
7.
It is no more res integra that the gravity and seriousness of the allegations do not furnish basis for doing away with the constitutional guarantee of inquiry.
A delinquent employee may be accused of a most heinous offence or the nature of his activities may be grave or serious warranting the extreme punishment against him, but that by itself does not constitute the basis for dispensing with the inquiry which can be done only where circumstances suggest that it would be either impracticable to hold it for the given reasons or inexpedient to hold it in the interests of the security of the State.
It is also well established that the interests of the security of the State are distinct and different from the magnitude of a law and order situation or the proportions of a public order situation.
But the interests of the security of the State may be affected even when the law and order situation or the public order situation may be good.
8.
The Supreme Court also dealt with a serious situation that had arisen out of the agitation launched by the ClSF unit at Bokaro Steel plant in Tulsi Ram Patel's case, AIR 1985 SC 1416.
But, it ruled that even in such cases when Army had to be called to quell an armed rebellion, the dismissed rebels could still seek judicial review of the action.
This position was reiterated in Satya Vir Singh's case, AIR 1986 SC 535:  9.
Viewed thus, both the petitioner and respondents had failed in making out their respective cases.
As noticed elsewhere, while the petitioner had failed to specifically allege that the Governor had no basis for discarding the inquiry, respondents had equally missed to disclose the circumstances that had rendered it inexpedient to hold the inquiry against the petitioner.
As it is and if the matter was to be decided on a technical approach, the writ petition was liable to be dismissed straightaway.
But I find support from the judgment of Brother Bhawani Singh, J (as he then was) in identical writ petitions (SWP 145/90 etc. etc) and reiterate the directions passed by his Lordship to dispose of this petition on the same analogy to meet the ends of justice:  "Government order No. Home-144/PSA of 1993, dated 241993 is hereby quashed.
But, the disciplinary authority may start department proceedings against the petitioner afresh in accordance with law and conclude these within six months from the date of receipt of this order.
Failure to take such proceedings would entitle the petitioner to reinstatement in service on the expiry of the prescribed period of any extension granted therein by the Court.
In that event it shall be open to the Competent Authority again to place him under suspension and to launch inquiry against him, if desired.
But should he succeed in the inquiry, he shall be reinstated in service without any back wages.
And, if the charges are brought home to him in such enquiry, he shall be liable to any action including his removal from service."