Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a Judgment and Order dated 23rd February 1994, passed by a learned Single Judge of this court whereby and whereunder the said learned Judge directed as follows :-  "I find that the Sub-Inspectors have been singled out in the matter of their maintenance in pay scale of class 9 without any just or reasonable cause.
Refusing them relief and permitting the respondents so to continue to single them out would be a breach of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petitioners and the Sub-Inspectors of Excise in general must, therefore, forthwith be accorded Pay Scale of Class 10 along with arrears as mentioned below.
There shall also be a writ absolute in terms of prayer (a) of the Writ Petition.
The Excise Sub-Inspectors shall each be paid monthly with effect from February 1994, an office maintenance allowance of Rs. 100/- and shall also be paid a travelling allowance of Rs. 300/- per month.
There shall be in addition to the benefits directed to be accorded to them hereinbefore.
The arrears in accordance with the said pay scale, but not for office maintenance or travelling allowance, shall be paid to the Excise Sub- Inspectors with effect from May 13, 1998 as if the pay scale had already been made effective in regard to them from prior to that date.
The arrears shall be cleared on or before the 30th June, 1994."
2.
The Writ Petitioners/respondents filed the aforementioned writ application inter alia on the ground that although the Third Pay Commission had recommended grant of scale of pay of Scale No. 10 but they have been granted scale of pay at Scale No. 9.
Although the writ petitioners as also the learned Trial Judge proceeded on the basis that the Inspectors were working in different departments including the Commercial Tax Department and Agricultural Income Tax Department perform similar functions and duties and they were entitled to the same scale of pay on the doctrine of equal pay for equal work as envisaged under Article 39(d) read with Article 14 of the Constitution of India the question raised in this appeal is very limited.
3.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that keeping in view the fact that the classification of duties and functions of Inspectors of the other department being not the same to that of the writ petitioners the question of invoking the doctrine of equal pay for equal work did not arise.
This aspect of the matter has been considered recently by a Bench of this Court in A.P.O.
No. 180 of 1997 (WBFC & Ors. v. WBFC Employees Association) which was disposed of on 23rd February, 1998.
The learned Trial Judge therefore committed a gross error in giving the aforementioned direction on the basis that the petitioners had been performing similar nature of duties as those of Inspector of Commercial Taxes Department and that of Agricultural Income Tax Department.
4.
However, before us Mr. Bikas Bhattacharyya, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners/respondents drew our attention to the statements made in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the writ application and submitted that they were entitled to payment of Scale No. 10 in view of the recommendations made in that regard by the Third Pay Commission.
The learned Counsel further submitted that without assigning any reason it was not permissible for the State to grant scale of pay to them in Scale No. 9.
In this connection our attention has been drawn to an order passed by the State Administrative Tribunal dated 1731997 in the case of Calcutta Police Investigating Officers' Forum v. State of West Bengal & Ors. and it appears that the said decision has been affirmed by the Supreme Court by dismissing a Special Leave Petition taken therefrom by the State of West Bengal by an Order dated 9198 wherein it was further directed that the order of the Tribunal be complied within a period of six months from the date of the said order.
Before the learned Trial Judge despite opportunities granted to the appellants they did not file any affidavit-in-opposition.
They had also not placed any record to justify the decision taken by them.
Curiously enough before this court the appellants in their grounds of appeal categorically submitted that the learned Trial Judge ought to have directed grant of scale of pay in the light of the recommendation of the Pay Commission and/or the Review Committee.
5.
It further appears that even in the said application it has been stated that the matter has been pending before the Review Committee and no final decision has been taken.
The writ petitioners did not question the grant of scale of pay as recommended did into question the grant of scale of pay as recommended in their favour by the Third Pay Commission.
It was for the State to assign reason as to why the recommendation had not been accepted and the matter was referred to the Pay Review Committee.
6.
It is further evident that for implementation of the Ropa Rules in 1981, the Inspectors working in the entertainment Tax Department filed a writ application and the application was allowed on consent.
Thereafter a representation has been made by the writ petitioners.
Similar representations appear to have been made by the Inspectors working in the Police Department.
7.
Keeping in view the stand taken by the appellant in the ground of appeal as also the fact that all those Inspectors who had been recommended to have the scale of pay at Scale No. 10 and were in fact granted scale of pay at Scale No. 9 having obtained relief from different courts, justice demands that the same scale of pay should be paid to the appellants with effect from 13th May, 1988 as has been directed by the learned Trial Judge.
There cannot however be any doubt that this does not mean that the appellants shall get automatically the enhanced scale of pay in terms of the recommendation of the 4th Pay Commission.
If any recommendation had been made in their favour by the 4th Pay Commission, the same unless these exists any cogent reasons should be implemented in their case also.
However, that part of the Judgment of the learned Trial Judge, whereby and whereunder allowance had been granted at particulars rate cannot be upheld inasmuch as this court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can direct issuance of Writ of Mandamus directing the respondent to implement the scale of pay recommended by an expert body like Third Pay Commission such a direction cannot be given in respect of the allowances wherefor no such recommendation had been made.
Only because the writ petitioners had claimed such allowance that does not mean that the same would automatically be granted only on the ground that the appellants had not filed any affidavit-in- opposition before the learned Trial Judge.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned, the appeal is allowed in part and to the extent mentioned hereinbefore but in the facts and circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
9.
This judgment of this court may be implemented within a period of six months from date.
10.
Parties will be at liberty to have the Xerox copy of the operative part of this judgment.
Appeal partly allowed.