G Bikshapathy, J - This writ petition is filed challenging the appointment of the Respondent No. 3 as Record Assistant in Ist Respondent college on the ground that he procured the employment by producing forged Employment Exchange Registration Card and for a consequential direction to the Respondents to consider the petitioner's claim for the appointment of petitioner.
2.
The facts leading to the case are that a newspaper notification was issued by the Ist Respondent on 121995 calling for the applications for appointment to the post of Record Assistant which is an aided post.
One of the conditions specified in the notification is that the candidates should have registered their names in the Employment Exchange.
The petitioner's claim is that he is a registered candidate of Employment Exchange and he made an application along with others for the post of Record Assistant.
The 3rd Respondent was selected.
It is the case of the petitioner that the 3rd Respondent did not possess the necessary requisites for making an application for the post of Record Assistant.
He was not a registered candidate at the relevant time and he produced a false and forged Employment Exchange Registration Certificate.
Therefore, he submits that the 3rd Respondent ought not to have been selected and appointed as the Record Assistant as he obtained the appointment by misrepresentation and playing fraud on the authorities.
3.
In the counter filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent, it is stated that the applications were received in pursuance of the notification issued by the management for appointment to the post of one SGBT teacher and one Record Assistant.
Written test and oral interview was conducted for all the candidates and the 3rd Respondent was selected for the post of Record Assistant.
The 3rd Respondent possessed the requisite qualifications and he also produced the Registration Certificate No. L2/1991/06556, dated 1971991.
It is submitted that the Employment Registration Certificate expired in July, 1994, but it was renewed upto 2271995.
It is also submitted by the management that the admission was approved by the Regional Director, who is the competent authority in his proceedings dated 1921996.
It is further stated that by virtue of the recent Supreme Court judgment, the registration is not necessary.
4.
The 3rd Respondent also filed counter stating that initially he registered his name in the year 1991, but, however, the same was not renewed subsequently, but on 2721995, the Card was renewed by the Employment Exchange.
Therefore, there is no illegality or irregularity in the process.
lt is also submitted that he was selected in the merit.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that as on the date of submitting the application, the 3rd Respondent had no valid employment registration and therefore the certificate produced by him subsequently was forged one.
On this, the District Employment Officer was directed to enquire into and submit a Report.
After verification of the Reports, the District Employment Officer submitted that the Original Card had expired on account of non-renewal.
But, however, a fresh card was issued on 2271995 which was duly signed by the then Employment Officer.
However, the necessary records in support of the renewal were not available in the file.
6.
The issue that arises for consideration is whether the selection of 3rd Respondent is valid ?
7.
The Supreme Court has now made it clear in Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam, Krishna District v. KBN Visweshwara Rao, (1996) 6 SCC 216, that the selection of the candidates need not be restricted to the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange in order to give more opportunities to the citizens thereby rewarding the merited candidates.
Such a process will be in conformity with the principle of fairplay and equal opportunities in the matter of employment.
In view of this, it becomes irrelevant whether the 3rd Respondent was having valid Registration Certificate or not.
Submitting a forged Employment Registration Card itself is sufficient to deny the appointment to the 3rd Respondent, but in view of the fact that the 3rd Respondent has already been selected on merit and he was appointed, I am not inclined to go into the aspect whether the Employment Exchange Card produced by the 3rd Respondent was fabricated or it was obtained with a view to misrepresent the authorities.
In view of the latest verdict of the Supreme Court in Excise Superintendent's case (cited supra), when the insistence of sponsorship by the Employment Exchange is not necessary, insisting on the valid registration of Employment Card also becomes irrelevant.
Under these circumstances, I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.