RL Anand, J - M/s Bandhu Machinery Private Ltd, carrying on business at Gurgaon (Haryana) has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents praying for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for the quashment of award passed by respondent No. 1 on 2061981, Annexure P-5.
2.
It has been averred by the petitioner that respondent No. 2 Madan Lal joined the company on 481976 as a helper.
He was promoted as planner man w.e.f.
171978 and he worked on this post till his services was terminated on 13111978.
This dispute between the petitioner and respondent No. 2 was referred to the Labour Court by the appropriate Govt.
The parties submitted their pleadings before the Labour Court and vide award Annexure P5 the Labour Court held that the management terminated the services of respondent No. 2 in an illegal manner and accordingly, respondent No. 1 reinstated respondent No. 2 into service with full back wages and also gave him the benefit of continuity of service vide award Annexure P.5 dated 2061981.
In the present writ petition, the award of the Labour Court has been challenged on the ground that Labour Court took an erroneous view that the standing orders which came into force w.e.f.
1711979. would be applicable to the facts of respondent No. 2.
According to the petitioner, the standing orders would come into operation prospectively and not with regard to those employees who have been appointed prior to 1711979.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed on 481976.
He gave a wrong information about his qualification and for this reason his services were terminated by way of simplicitor discharge and this act on the part of the management did not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
All these factors have not been considered by the Labour Court and, therefore, the award Annexure P.5 is liable to be set aside.
3.
The writ petition has been contested by respondent No. 2 who has justified the award and stated that he did not supply any wrong information to the management.
No enquiry was conducted.
The management did not comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Even otherwise, the Model Standing Orders are applicable.
Since he had been terminated without proper enquiry and without complying the provisions of Section 25-F, therefore, the award of the Labour Court was perfectly justified.
4.
I have heard Shri MS Rakkar, Sr. Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri SK Aggarwal, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The only submission which was raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner challenging the award Annexure P.5 was that the Labour Court adopted an erroneous view by holding that certified standing orders had the statutory force and were applicable to the management and the employees irrespective of their date of appointment and in these circumstances, the action of the management in terminating the services of the workman on the ground mentioned in the written statement of the management was against the standing orders.
Learned counsel submitted that standing orders which were approved on 18121978 came into force on 1711979.
Respondent No. 2 Madan Lal joined the services of management earlier to it and therefore, it was not incumbent on the part of the management to conduct any domestic enquiry.
Since the workman concealed a material information with regard to his qualification and when this fact came to the notice of the management, it discharged the services of respondent No. 2 workman simplicitor and it does not amount to retrenchment.
The submission raised by Shri Rakkar is devoid of any merit.
Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act defines retrenchment which means the termination by the employer of the service of workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not include:  (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf;  (bb) or, termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health.
6.
It has been fairly conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioner at the bar that the act on the part of the management when he terminated the services of the respondent No. 2 does not fall in any of all the three exceptions added to Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The plain reading of section 2(oo) suggests that if the employee has been terminated by the employer for any reason, whatsoever, it will still amount to retrenchment.
It is also a retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) irrespective of the fact that management had tried to exercise the powers while discharging the workman under the garb of letter of appointment.
Once the action on the part of the management falls within ambit of section 2(oo), Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act would come into play.
Admittedly, in this case, neither any domestic enquiry was conducted nor any retrenchment compensation was paid to the respondent No. 2 by the management at the time of termination of his services.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any illegality in the impugned award dated 2061981 Annexure P.5, even if it is held that standing orders Nos. 30 and 31 upon which the management has placed reliance would come into force w.e.f.
1711979.
7.
In the light of above discussion, I do not see any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismised.