Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - The petitioner is seeking quashment of order dated June 2, 1983 (Annexure P-4) whereby the respondents have denied to regularise her services as a Sanskrit Teacher on the ground that she does not fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner is MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
She also passed her BA examination from Panjab University in the year 1969 with Sanskrit as one of the subjects.
She was appointed Sanskrit Teacher on ad hoc basis on January 10, 1972 in Government Girls School, Bawani Khera.
She worked upto April 30, 1977 on ad hoc basis in different Government schools with breaks.
She was appointed stipendiary teacher on April 30, 1977 and upto December 31, 1978 she worked as Sanskrit Teacher.
In pursuance of the policy of Government of Haryana of December, 1978, service of the petitioner was regularised with effect from January 1, 1979.
Later on, as regularisation of Stipendiary Teachers was challenged in various writ petitions in the High Court, the petitioner's services as a Stipendiary Teacher were deregularised vide letter Annexure P-2.
3.
In July, 1980, the Government of Haryana again issued a policy decision that service of all teachers who completed two years of service between November 1, 1966 to December 31, 1979 and were in service on December 31, 1979 be regularised.
Accordingly, the petitioner's services were again regularised from January 1, 1980 vide letter, Annexure P-3.
She was working in the Education Department sincerely, diligently and honestly for the last 11 years.
On August 2, 1983, the petitioner came to know that the Department was going to deregularise her services.
She actually got a letter to this effect, which is Annexure P-4.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 are deregularising her services on the ground that she does not possess the minimum prescribed qualification for the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition, petitioner filed Civil Misc. No. 20335 of 1997, wherein she has averred that the Haryana Government has obtained report of Expert-committee to the effect whether a person possessing the qualification of MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
is qualified for the post of Sanskrit Teacher or not.
The Expert-committee gave its opinion that a candidate possessing MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
qualification is better than Shastri and OT in all respects.
This report of the Expert-committee was duly accepted by the Government of Haryana and the candidates possessing the qualification of MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed were duly considered as qualified for the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
The decision to this effect is at Annexure P-8.
A candidate possessing qualification of BA with Sanskrit and B.Ed was ignored for regularisation with effect from January 1, 1980, on the ground that she was not qualified for the post of Sanskrit teacher.
That candidate filed civil writ petition No. 5470 of 1982, which was allowed by a Single Judge of this Court vide judgment, Annexure P-9.
Hence the petitioner prays that in view of that judgment, her writ petition be also decided.
5.
Respondent's learned counsel also agrees that it is a covered case.
6.
From the Expert-committee's report, Annexure P-7, it is evident that a candidate having qualification of MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
is better qualified for the post of Sanskrit Teacher than a candidate who is Shastri and OT The report of the Expert-committee is already accepted by the Haryana Government vide Annexure P-8.
In the last but one para of letter, Annexure P- 8, it is mentioned, "So far as the qualification for the post of Sanskrit Teachers are concerned, in this connection it is stated that apart from the above mentioned qualifications, if a candidate is in possession of the qualifications of Shastri, BEd, MA in Sanskrit, B.Ed.
and has filed a Court case and the Court has rendered decision in his favour and produced copy of decision, then he may also be treated as eligible for the post of Sanskrit teacher."
In CWP No. 5470 of 1982, the report of the Expert-committee and the order passed by the Haryana Government were also placed on record and they were considered by the learned Single Judge and he has observed as under :-  "The departmental committee having taken the view that the persons possessing the qualifications of BA/B.Ed, with Sanskrit as one of the subjects during BA Classes are suitable for appointment as Sanskrit teachers and the department having accepted this recommendation, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for regularisation of her services.
Even otherwise, even if there was some deficiency, she having worked for the last about 20 years cannot be said to be ineligible especially when it is not even alleged that she had not performed her duties satisfactorily."
In this case also, the petitioner has put in more than eleven years of unblemished service.
She is an MA in Sanskrit and B.Ed.
and is working as a Sanskrit Teacher for the last so many years.
Thus, as per the Expert- committee's report, Annexure P-7, she is even better qualified teacher than a teacher with qualifications of Shastri and OT  Thus, taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the respondents are hereby directed to consider the petitioner's claim for regularisation of her service as Sanskrit teacher in accordance with the Expert-committee's report, Annexure P-7, and Haryana Government's letter, Annexure P-8.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed and order, Annexure P-4, is quashed but with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.