Bilal Nazki, J - Pleadings in the case are complete.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Admit.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that vide an advertisement notice, applications were invited for recruitment to the post of Senior Co-operative Supervisor.
Petitioner submits that he is a Post Graduate having Master's Degree in Urdu, and is also trained in the Co-operatives.
He was sent on training by the Jammu Central Co-operative Bank in the year 1981.
He completed his training in Co-operatives in the year 1984.
He further submits that he applied for the post of Senior Co-operative Supervisor, and was selected by the J and K Services Selection Board for the said post.
He has annexed a copy of letter dated 29-1-1990 written by Director, Command Area Development Jammu to the petitioner, whereby the petitioner had been informed about his selection.
This letter is very important, therefore, its contents are reproduced here-in-below :  "You have been selected as Co-operative (supervisor) vide above- mentioned reference by the Service Selection Board.
As such you are directed to report to this office along with the following testimonials (in original) for further necessary action : 1) Qualification Certificate: 2) High Diploma Course Certificate: 3) Date of birth certificate: 4) State Subject Certificate: 5) Character Certificate."
3.
Petitioner submits that after he received the said letter, he submitted his joining report immediately thereafter, but no formal order of appointment was issued in his favour by the respondents; although appointment orders were issued in favour of others.
Then he filed this writ petition on 1-3-1993.
Petitioner also submits that although he had been selected and he was informed of his selection, no formal order of appointment was issued in his favour.
Notices were issued to the respondents and two replies were filed; one by respondent No. 2 and the other by respondents 1, 3 and 4.
In his objections, the respondent No. 2 has admitted the case of the petitioner to the extent that he had applied for the post of Co-operative Supervisor and got selected, and that there was no post of Senior Co-operative Supervisor in existence.
Respondent No. 2 also stated that since the petitioner had been selected, he was entitled to be appointed.
But respondents 1, 3 and 4 in their objections took a different stand.
They admitted that the petitioner had been selected by respondent No. 2, but stated that respondent No. 2 is not an appointing authority.
Posts are only referred to them for making selection of eligible candidates, and before a selected candidate is allowed to join or his appointment order is issued, he is supposed to satisfy the appointing authority that he possesses the minimum prescribed qualifications required for the post, and that he is otherwise eligible for appointment.
After he got selected, the petitioner was asked by the appointing authority to produce the requisite certificates in original.
He failed to produce the requisite original certificates before the appointing authority; as such, no appointment order was issued in his favour.
4.
Mrs. Seema Shekhar appearing for respondents 1, 3 and 4 submits that in each and every case of selection, appointment is not an automatic consequence.
After a candidate gets selected, the appointing authority has a right to satisfy himself that the candidate possesses the requisite certificates.
Since the petitioner failed to satisfy the appointing authority that he possessed the requisite qualifications, the appointing authority could not be forced to issue appointment order in favour of the petitioner.
She states that the requisite qualifications for appointment to the post of Cooperative Supervisor is Graduation with Higher Diploma Course.
As the petitioner did not produce his Higher Diploma Course Certificate, as such his appointment order was not issued.
In his petitioner also, the petitioner has nowhere stated that he had undergone the requisite Diploma Course.
The copy of Advertisement Notice which has been annexed with the writ petition by the petitioner, shows that the basic minimum qualification required for the post of Co-operative Supervisor was B.Sc./B.A./B.Com.
with Higher Diploma Course.
Since the petitioner has failed to show to the appointing authority as also to this Court that he had the qualification of Higher Diploma Course to his credit, this Court cannot force the respondents to issue appointment order in favour of the petitioner.
5.
Mr. Lehar appearing for the petitioner submits that the Services Selection Board in their objections have clearly stated that the petitioner had the same qualifications, which were possessed by one Rajinder Sharma, who was also selected by respondent No. 2 and has been appointed.
Mr. Lehar further submits that if Rajinder Sharma could be appointed on the basis of same qualifications which are possessed by the petitioner, there was no reason for the respondents to deny appointment to the petitioner.
To this plea, Mrs. Seema Shekhar GA has submitted that Rajinder Sharma has done Higher diploma in Cooperation from National Council for Cooperative Training, New Delhi.
She has placed a photostat true copy of the Diploma Certificate of Rajinder Sharma.
She has further stated that the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement notice in question for the post of Cooperative Supervisor were in accordance with the Jammu and Kashmir Cooperative Non-Gazetted (Subordinate) Service Recruitment Rules, as amended vide SRO No. 491 dated 14-10-1987.
She has also placed a copy of schedule to said Rules on record.
At item XI, against the entry Cooperative Supervisor, the qualifications, prescribed are Graduate with Higher Diploma Course.
Since the petitioner has failed to show that he possessed the prescribed qualifications required for the post of Co-operative Supervisor, even if he had been selected by the Selection authority, he had no case for getting appointed.
6.
For the aforesaid reasons the writ petition is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.