Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is a widow.
She prays that the respondents be directed to grant her special family pension.
The death of her husband was ``attributable to military service''.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner's husband Major GS Brar was initially commissioned in the Indian Army on September 22, 1974.
In the year 1988, he was deputed to participate in the Republic Day parade which was to take place on January 26, 1989.
He had reached Delhi on November 30, 1988.
In the early hours of January 5, 1989, he felt certain discomfort and reported to the hospital.
However, he died.
On his death, the widow was granted the ordinary family pension.
Vide letter dated March 2, 1989, she was informed that this pension was being sanctioned ``pending receipt of Government decision regarding attributability or otherwise of the cause of death ------- to military service''.
The petitioner represented for the grant of special family pension.
Her claim was rejected vide letter dated November 10, 1989, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P.2.
It was decided that ``the cause of death viz. Coronary Occlusion of the ------- officer should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his Army Service.''
On January 18, 1990, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Government of India, Vide letter dated February 20, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.5 with the writ petition, the petitioner's request was declined.
The petitioner alleges that the death of her husband was attributable to military service.
It had been so held during the inquiry conducted to ascertain the cause of death.
A copy of the opinion expressed by the Court has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
Consequently, the petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents in declining her request for the payment of special family pension is unfair and arbitrary.
She prays that the impugned orders be quashed and the respondents be directed to sanction the special family pension.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had ``first reported sick on 5 Jan, 89 at 0500 hours to the nursing assistant on duty at Republic Day Parade Camp along with Capt KGS Rathore''.
He was advised to go to Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt for treatment.
He declined to be evacuated to the Base Hospital, and returned to the Camp.
However, he again came to the MI Room and within minutes collapsed and died.
It is a constitutional disease which is neither caused nor aggravated by the conditions of service.
Consequently, the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of special family pension.
It has been further submitted that even after the rejection of the appeal submitted by the petitioner, she had submitted another appeal.
It was examined by the defence Ministry's Appellate Committee on Pensions.
There was no evidence of any exceptional physical or mental stress and strain.
Even the duties assigned to the officer for 14 days prior to his death were of routine nature commensurate with his rank and service.
Consequently, the request was declined.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the respondents have erroneously taken the view that the petitioner's death was ``neither attributable to nor aggravated by his Army Service''.
He submits that the petitioner was absolutely healthy.
He had been medically checked up on different occasions.
No problem was ever detected.
It was only on account of the stress to which he was subjected at the time of preparation for the parade that death had occurred.
Lack of medical facilities at the Camp had aggravated the situation.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has not been suggested that the petitioner had any history regarding any kind of cardiac problem.
It has also not been suggested that he had been administered any treatment for any other ailment during his service career.
In this situation, it is reasonable to assume that he was physically fit.
Still further, it has not been indicated that he was prone to high blood pressure or that his blood levels were such as to cause heart problem.
There is no reference to any kind of family history either.
In spite of this, the possibility of the problem having come suddenly cannot be ruled out.
Yet, it appears that at the Camp, there was no adequate medical help.
The respondents have actually suggested that an offer was made to the petitioner to evacuate him to the Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt which he declined.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had initially reported to the nursing assistant at 0500 hours.
Apparently, no qualified doctor was available at that time.
At 0530 he had died.
Even if the petitioner was to be moved from the Camp to the Hospital, it would have taken more than half an hour.
Besides all this, a perusal of the death certificate dated February 7, 1989, recorded by the Court of Inquiry clearly shows a categorical finding that the ``death of IC-36253 Late GS Brar is attributable to Military Service in peace''.
It has not been suggested that the Court of Inquiry had not recorded any medical evidence.
If this report has been recorded after considering the entire evidence and after holding an inquiry, then the records of the respondents establish that the death was attributable to military service.
In view of this clear evidence, the plea taken on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of special family pension as the death was not attributable to Army Service cannot be sustained.
6.
Resultantly, the order dated November 10, 1989, by which the petitioner's claim was declined as also the orders dated February 20, 1991 (Annexure P.5) and June 10, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R.1 with the written statement, are set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be paid special family pension with effect from the date of the death of her husband.
7.
Mr. Pipat points out that the petitioner has been paid ordinary family pension.
This is not disputed by Mr. Randhawa.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the arrears on account of the difference between the special family pension and the ordinary family pension.
In future, the petitioner shall be paid her pension at the rate admissible on account of the special family pension.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.