GS Singhvi, J - This appeal has been filed under clause 10 of the Letters Patent for setting aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
2.
While he was appearing in the paper of Physical Chemistry (BSc.
Part-III) on 1041989 one hand written slip was recovered from the socks of the respondent.
The Centre Superintendent submitted a report to the University on 1041989.
The case of the respondent was dealt with by Unfair Means Committee which submitted a report on 7th July, 1989 with a finding that the petitioner was guilty of violating Regulation 5 of the University Calendar Volume-II.
On an appeal filed by him, the Vice-Chancellor referred the case of the respondent back to the Unfair Means Committee for reconsideration.
After examining the case afresh, the committee submitted report dated August 4, 1989 reiterating its earlier view.
3.
On the basis of the report submitted by the Unfair Means Committee, the University disqualified the respondent from appearing in any university examination for a period of two years ie 1989 and 1990.
4.
The respondent challenged the decision of the university in C.W.P.
No. 11926 of 1989.
After hearing the parties, a learned Single Judge held that the Regulation 4 and not the Regualtion 5 is applicable to the case of the respondent.
On the basis of this conclusion, he allowed the writ petition and directed the university to declare the respondent's result of BSc.
Part-III examination.
5.
This appeal has been filed by the university against the order of the learned Single Judge.
While admitting the appeal, the court refused to stay the operation of the order passed by the learned Single Judge.
During the pendency of the appeal, the respondent has passed the following examinations :-  (i) BSc.
Part-III.
(ii) LL.B.
(Second position in the university).
(iii) LL.M.
Part-I and Part-II.
Moreover, he has been offered admission in 4 to 5 universities in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.
These facts are borne out from the CM No. 836 of 1997 filed by the respondent.
6.
Shri Nehra assailed the judgment of the learned Single Judge and argued that the case of the respondent is covered by Regulation 5 because he was found in possession of material which was relevant to the subject of examination.
Shri Nehra argued that the learned Single Judge has not only misinterpreted the regulations but also misread the report of the Unfair Means Committee and this has resulted in miscarriage of justice.
Shri JS Toor argued that irrespective of the interpretation of Regulations 4 and 5 framed by the university, the Court may kindly not disturb the direction given by the learned Single Judge at this belated stage in view of the fact that the respondent has passed several examinations during the pendency of appeal.
7.
Regulations 4 and 5 contained in Chapter-II of the Panjab University Calendar Volume-II read as under :-  ``4.
If during a University examination a candidate is found having in his possession or accessible to him papers, books or notes due to inadvertence but which papers, books or notes could be of assistance to him he may be debarred from passing in that paper as a disciplinary measure.
5.
If during a University examination, a candidate is found in mala fide possession of any material such as -  (a) Papers, books or notes; or (b) Pritten notes on any parts of the clothes worn by the candidate or on any part of his body, or table or desk; or (c) Foot-rule and/or instruments like set-squares, protractors, slide rules, etc., with notes written on them; which is relevant to the subject of the examination, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any University examination for two years, including that in which he is found guilty, if he is a candidate for an examination held once a year, or for four examinations, including that in which he is found guilty, if he is a candidate for an examination held once a year, or for four examinations, including that in which he is found guilty, if he is a candidate for an examination held twice a year.''
A careful reading of the regulations quoted above shows that the Regulation 4 can be invoked only when due to inadvertence incriminating material is found in possession of the candidate and it could be of some assistance to him and Regualtion 5 applies to a case where the candidate carries incriminating material intentionally and the same is relevant to the subject of the examination.
It can thus be said that for attracting the applicability of Regualtion 5 two things must be satisfied, namely :-  (i) the candidate had intentionally or deliberately brought the material with him or it is found on any part of his body etc., and (ii) such material is relevant to the subject of the examination.
8.
In the present case, the respondent was charged with the allegation of being in possession of incriminating material which was directly relevant to the subject of examination.
Perusal of the two reports submitted by the Unfair Means Committee shows that the piece of paper was recovered from the socks of the respondent.
That paper was referred to the subject expert who was none else than the Chairman of the Department of Chemistry.
The subject expert opined that the paper contained material which could be used for Physical Chemistry syllabus of BSc.
third year.
Relying on the opinion of the subject expert, the committee held that Regualtion 5 was attracted in the case of the respondent.
In our opinion, the conclusion recorded by the Unfair Means Committee was quite logical and justified.
We are further of the view that the learned Single Judge ought not to have interfered with the opinion formed by the Unfair Means Committee on the basis of the report of the expert because it is a well settled proposition of law that opinion expressed by the expert in matters relating to academics should be given due respect and weightage by the Court unless it is found to be patently erroneous or tainted with bias or mala fides, the Court cannot substitute its own opinion qua the one expressed by an expert on the subject.
In the present case it was not even suggested on behalf of the respondent that the opinion given by the Chairman, Department of Chemistry was tained with bias or mala fides.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge was not right in holding that Regulation 4 and not the Regulation 5 was attracted in the case of the respondent.
9.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside in so far as it relates to the interpretation of the regulations contained in Chapter-II of the Panjab University Calendar Volume- II.
However, having regard to the peculiar facts of this case, namely, that the respondent has not only passed BSc.
Part-III but he has also passed LL.B.
and LL.M.
examinations and also keeping in view the fact that restoration of the disqualification imposed on the petitioner will not serve any purpose, we refrain from setting aside the direction given by the learned Single Judge regarding the declaration of the respondent's result.
We also direct the University to issue fresh certificate to the respondent, which shall be effective from 1871990.
This shall be done within a period of 15 days of the submission of certified copy of this order.
The Registry is directed to issue copy of the order Dasti on payment of necessary fee.