THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the order vide Annexure P-4 whereby the services of the petitioner were terminated.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a peon in P.W.D.
Public Health Department in Rajpura Division on 2961971.
He was later promoted as Driver on work- charged basis with effect from 29.7.1974 and his services were regularised from 1.4.1979.
He was also found medically fit on 781981.
The petitioner was transferred to P.W.D.
Public Health Circle, Chandigarh at SAS Nagar (Mohali) in the year 1976.
On 3.10.1990 when he was driving a car bearing No. PJP 616 it met with an accident due to the failure of the brakes.
Thereafter an explanation was called from him on 431991.
The petitioner submitted his explanation and in that he requested that he be posted as Pump Operator or Pump Driver as desired by the authorities, but by an order dated 941991 (vide Annexure P-4) his services were terminated without giving any opportunity of hearing or enquiry.
Therefore, he approached this Court by way of this writ petition to quash the order of termination.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it is admitted that the petitioner joined the service as a regular Peon in 1971 and he was appointed as a Jeep Driver in 1974 and that he was transferred to Ist Public Health (GW) Division, SAS Nagar on 8.4.1976 and he worked there till the date of his termination on 941991.
The respondents supported the order of termination on the ground that the petitioner had been declared medically unfit for the post of Driver of Car/Jeep.
According to the respondents, the petitioner concealed this fact of declaring him to be unfit as Driver by the Medical Board.
They further averred that the petitioner was directed to appear before the Medical Board on 9101990 and the Principal of the Medical College and General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh certified that the petitioner was medically unfit for the post of Driver of the Car/Jeep.
They denied that they ever asked the petitioner to give his consent to be posted as a Pump Driver.
They also contended that the petitioner did not possess the requisite qualifications for the post of Pump Driver.
It is further averred that the petitioner was declared medically unfit for the post of Driver.
His services were validly terminated and there are no grounds warranting interference with the order of termination.
4.
There is no dispute about the fact that the petitioner worked in the Department for about 20 years and his services were also regularised.
Thus he is a permanent employee of the Department.
Though he was originally recruited as a Peon, he was subsequently promoted as a Driver of motor vehicle.
His services were sought to be terminated on the ground of colour blindness.
In the order of termination (Annexure P-4), it is stated as follows :-  "Subsequently it was found that the eyesight of Shri Dalip Singh was weak and as per Punjab Govt. instructions issued vide letter No. 2/4/79-PP/990 dated 2631979, Shri Dalip Singh was directed by Executive Engineer, Public Health (GW) Division No. 1, SAS Nagar vide his letter No. 4601 dated 8101990 to report to Medical Superintendent, General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh for the check up of his eyes and his over-all medical check up.
Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh after medical examination of Shri Dalip Singh sent his report to the Executive Engineer, Public Health (GW) Division No. 1, SAS Nagar vide his letter No. 1409 dated 16101990.
On the receipt of this medical report, the Executive Engineer, Public Health (GW) Division No. 1, SAS Nagar sought some clarifications from the Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh vide his letter No. 5630 dated 16111990.
In reply to this letter, Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh vide his letter No. 144 dated 1711991 sent the clarification of his earlier report to the Executive Engineer, Public Health (GW) Division No. 1, Mohali that Shri Dalip Singh, Driver is now medically unfit for the post of Jeep/Car Driver."
5.
After filing of the writ petition, a report was called for by this court vide its order dated November 25, 1991 which showed that the petitioner was suffering from colour blindness.
If a person suffers from colour blindness, it can be said he is not fit to be continued as Driver of a motor vehicle, but it does not mean that his services be completely dispensed with.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner is not fit for any other Govt. job in the Department.
The case of the petitioner should have been sympathetically considered by the authorities for any other equivalent post for which colour blindness may not be any hindrance.
In fact the petitioner was originally recruited as a Peon and he was promoted as a Driver.
Therefore, if the petitioner was found to be unfit for the post of a Driver, he should have been reverted to his substantive post of Peon.
6.
In the peculiar circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that the order of termination is bad and contrary to the principles of natural justice as no opportunity was given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order of termination and the same is, therefore, liable to be quashed.
At the same time, it is pertinent to note that if the petitioner cannot be continued in service as Driver, he should have been given either any equivalent post to which he is eligible or he should have been reverted to the post of Peon to which he was originally appointed.
7.
Accordingly, I allow this writ petition and set aside the order of termination dated 941991 (vide Annexure P-4) and direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner on any other post carrying the same scale of pay as Driver.
If it is not possible to appoint him to any other post of same scale of pay, he be appointed as a Peon as directed by this Court vide its order dated 251991.
If the petitioner is appointed in Class IV post as directed by this Court vide its order dated 251991 he shall be considered as such if it is not possible to accommodate him in the post which carries the equal pay to that of Driver.
If the authorities find that he is not fit for any other post, he should be continued in Class IV post as per the directions of this Court dated 251991.
The petitioner is also entitled to continuity in service and back wages from the date of termination till he is re-employed either by virtue of the order of this Court dated 251991 or by virtue of this order of the Court.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
However, there will be no order as to costs.