VK Bali, J (Oral) - Bhupinder Singh, a petty government officer, has been dragged into this second bout of litigation.
Earlier in point of time, he had to file Civil Writ Petition No. 2156 of 1983 wherein his prayer was to permit him to assume the charge at a place where he was transferred.
On the statement made by learned counsel then representing the respondents, he was permitted to join but he was not paid salary for the period from 2771982 to 31101983.
The present and second writ is for salary of the period, referred to above.
2.
Petitioner was posted as Sub Divisional Officer, Kurali and on 3151982 he was transferred to Gurdaspur Circle.
Before this order was implemented, petitioner was transferred from Kurali to Mohali vide order dated 571982.
It is the case of the petitioner that under the instructions governing transfer of the employees, one should be given sufficient time to give charge and enable him to join at his new place of posting.
The instructions further require that if an employees fails to render the account of the material within a reasonable period, disciplinary action shall be initiated against him under the Punjab Punishment and Appeal Rules and he shall not be permitted to draw his next increment.
If the value of the material for which accounts are to be rendered, exceeds Rs. 10, 000/- report should invariably be lodged with the police simultaneously.
Sub Divisional Officer, Sh. Gurdev Singh against whom petitioner had filed some complaints ignored the orders of transfer of the petitioner only Kurali to Mohali and relieved the petitioner only on 27.7.1982.
Copy of this relieving order has been annexed with this petition as Annexure P4.
It is pertinent to mention here that even though petitioner was transferred from Kurali to Mohali in modification of the order Annexure P1 transferring him from Kurali to Gurdaspur, Shri Gurdev Singh Gill, Sub- Divisional Officer relieved him under order Annexure P1 and not under the modification order Annexure P2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was not relieved earlier so that he could possibly join at the new place of his posting i.e. at Mohali.
Petitioner was also not permitted to hand over the charge which was another step necessary for his joining at the place of his transfer i.e. at Mohali.
As the petitioner was not permitted to hand over the charge, to enable him to report at Mohali, he was constraint to file CWP No. 2156 of 1983 in this Court wherein he complained that by this device method i.e. by not permitting him to hand over the charge, he was unable to join at Mohali, resultantly debar him his monthly salary.
The matter came up for hearing before the Division Bench of this Court on 25101983 and following order was passed :-  "Mr. Cheema states at the Bar that the petitioner shall be taken in service immediately, and that he is being posted at Ropar.
Learned counsel also states at the Bar that the arrears of salary would be paid to the petitioner in accordance with law.
In view of what is stated by Mr. Cheema, this petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
Before parting with the order, it may be made clear that the right of the department to hold enquiry or continue any pending enquiry shall not be affected in any manner."
3.
In pursuance to this order, petitioner was permitted to join on 2111983, but he was not paid arrears of salary from 2771982 to 31101983.
As mentioned above, petitioner has asked for the disbursement of arrears of salary in the present writ petition.
The petitioner has also challenged order Annexure P5.
Vide order aforesaid, it was decided to treat the petitioner on earned leave from 871982 to 31101983 or leave of the kind due.
Petitioner was not paid salary of the said period.
4.
Mr. Baljinder Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the respondents had no choice whatsoever in the matter but for permitting the petitioner to join at the place of posting and to give him arrears of salary as was stated by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents in the earlier writ petition, reference whereof has been given above.
At the most, and that if the department was of the view that the petitioner has deliberately delayed either handing over of the charge or joining at the new place of posting, departmental enquiry would be held.
It is further contended that order affecting the petitioner i.e. by treating the period from 2771982 to 31101983 as leave of the kind due was also without hearing the petitioner and on the count as well, the impugned order annexure P5 deserves to be quashed and that petitioner be paid salary for the period in question.
5.
Mr. MK Garg, learned counsel representing respondents on the basis of the pleadings made in the written statement contends that vide Annexure P3, period from 2771982 to 31101983 had to be treated as leave of the kind due to the petitioner as he had not rendered the accounts of the material.
Department was justified in passing order Annexure P5 which is in consonance with instructions Annexure P3.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
An employee is certainly entitled to the monthly pay admissible to him.
If the same is to be denied on some grounds that may be available with the department, it is the firm view of this Court that the employee has to be heard in the matter.
While passing order Annexure P5 and treating the petitioner on leave of the kind due, petitioner was not heard in the matter.
It may be recalled at this stage that the counsel representing respondents had made categorical statement that not only the petitioner be permitted to join at the place of his posting but arrears of salary shall also be paid to him.
Annexure P3 was existing when the order was passed.
The plea of the department that the petitioner had not supplied materials and for that reason he was not entitled to the salary, should have been taken in the written statement.
The fact that nothing at all was mentioned while making statements with regard to the payment of salary of the petitioner.
It is rather presumed that order withholding the salary of the petitioner could not be passed.
Even instructions Annexure P3 were not to apply without hearing the petitioner.
It is clear to this Court that it is for that process, Court while parting with the order observed that it will be open for the department to hold an enquiry or continue any pending enquiry.
Concededly, no enquiry till date has taken place.
At this stage, Mr. MK Garg, learned counsel for the respondents is unable to tell the Court that any enquiry was conducted against the petitioner when this writ petition was filed.
8.
From the facts fully detailed above, it is abundantly made out that the department had made a statement before the Court when earlier petition was filed by the petitioner that arrears of salary would be paid to the petitioner.
Having made that statement, it is not possible at this stage for the department to deny the same benefit and that too by passing an order by not associating the petitioner i.e. by not giving him any notice of hearing before passing the order.
It was possible for the department to have proceeded departmentally against the petitioner as was observed by the Division Bench of this Court while disposing of the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner.
But that course was not adopted, failing which the department had no choice but to pay to the petitioner his monthly emoluments for the period from 2771982 to 31101983.
9.
Order Annexure P5 is quashed and direction is issued to the respondents to pay the petitioner's salary from 2771982 to 31101983.
As no justifiable reason has been given for withholding the salary of the petitioner, department must be burdened with interest which is quantified at the rate of 12% per annum.
Let arrears be calculated and paid to the petitioner within a month.
Order accordingly.