THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition the petitioner is challenging the order of the Labour Court dated 26.5.1993.
2.
According to the petitioner he was appointed in the ist respondent-Company as Accounts Assistant on 6121988 for a period of 89 days initially and his services were extended from time to time and he remained in service upto September 13, 1990.
Thereafter his services were retrenched.
Subsequently, he filed an application in the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act and the said application was dismissed by the Labour Court on the ground that he was not entitled to the revised pay scales of Puntex.
According to the petitioner, he worked in the Doaba Worsted Spinner Limited, respondent No. 1.
In the said Company, the pay scales and the service conditions of the employees are governed by bye-laws of the Punjab Handloom & Textile Development Corporation Limited (for short the `Puntex') as the said Company was the Holiday Company of the Ist Respondent company.
It is further the case of the petitioner that the Punjab Government revised the pay-scales of its employees with effect from Ist January, 1986 and Puntex also adopted the revised pay scales of the Punjab Government for the employees of the Puntex.
As the Ist respondent was governed by the bye-laws of Puntex, the petitioner is entitled to the same scale of pay as was given to the employees of the Puntex which stood revised w.e.f.
111986.
According to the petitioner during the period he worked, he was given the salary in the pay scale of Rs. 510-800 and it was revised to Rs. 1200-2100.
Therefore, the petitioner claims the pay scale on par with the employees of the Puntex.
3.
It is to be seen whether the employees of the Ist respondent-Company are entitled to the pay scales given to the employees of the Puntex.
There is no dispute that the Ist respondent is a subsidiary company of Puntex.
The only point for consideration is whether the employees of the subsidiary company are entitled to the pay scales on par with the Holding namely Puntex.
There is also no disputed about the fact that the Ist respondent-Company has not adopted the pay-scales either of the Punjab Government or of Puntex.
Though the Puntex is a Holding Company, the Ist respondent is a separate, different distinct entity in the eye of law.
It is open to the Ist Respondent either to adopt the pay scale of the Government or of Puntex.
Simply because the Ist respondent-Company has adopted the bye-laws of Puntex, it cannot be said that the Ist respondent-Company is governed by the pay scales of Puntex.
Further the Labour Court acting under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot determine the status of the workman on making an investigation whether the petitioner is entitled to scale of pay on par with the employees of the Government or of Puntex.
As held by the Division Bench of this Court in Gurminder Singh and others v. The Batala Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited, Batala 1995(1) PLR 445, it is only the pre-existing rights which can be agitated before the Labour Court under section 33-C(2) of the Act and wherever it might be a question of determination of rights of the workman, necessarily a reference has to be sought under the Act.
The proceedings under Section 33- C(2) of the Act are in the nature of quasi-judicial proceedings.
Therefore, in the application under Section 33-C(2), the Labour Court cannot decide whether the petitioner is entitled to a higher scale of pay as was given to the employees of the Punjab Government or Puntex.
In the light of the above discussion, I do not find any illegality or infirmity in the order passed by the Labour Court.
The writ petition, therefore, deserves to be dismissed and it is, accordingly, dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.