THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed to quash the order of the State Government declining to refer the industrial dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court vide Annexure P-17 dated March 26, 1995.
2.
The petitioner was originally appointed in the company of respondent No. 2 as Apprentice on trial for one month on December 1, 1972.
Thereafter he was taken as a Skilled Grade-I Workman with effect from January 1, 1977.
Then he was appointed as Assistant Foreman from April 25, 1978, and he was transferred to Amritsar on November 1, 1979.
He was again transferred to Jammu Service Depot from April 3, 1986.
Thereafter he was appointed as Assistant Service Engineer on June 6, 1988.
Then he was appointed as Deputy Engineer Quality Control at Ballabgarh on June 18, 1991.
Thereafter the management terminated the services of the petitioner on May 10, 1994 on the ground that the petitioner had voluntarily resigned from the job and according to the management he was also paid all the amounts to him.
But according to the petitioner, he did not resign from the job and resignation letter was obtained from him by respondent No. 2 under duress and threat to his life on May 5, 1994, and respondent No. 2 Company also obtained such letter of resignation by some other employees also.
Then the petitioner served a demand notice on respondent No. 2 for reinstatement and requested the State Government to refer the industrial dispute for adjudication.
Vide impugned order Annexure P-17 the State Government declined to refer the matter for adjudication on the ground that after making enquiry, it has been found that the petitioner himself submitted his resignation to the management and received the amount of gratuity by way of cheque.
Challenging this order the petitioner has approached this Court.
3.
It is settled law that the State Government has no power to make enquiry and decide the dispute question of fact.
According to the management the petitioner voluntarily submitted his resignation which had been accepted.
But according to the petitioner he did not resign from the job voluntarily and a letter of resignation was obtained from him under duress and threat to his life.
It is also the case of the petitioner that resignation of some other employees was also obtained by the company by adopting unfair labour practice.
The question whether the resignation is voluntary or not is undoubtedly a question of fact to be decided only be the Tribunal and not by the State Government.
Therefore, the order of the Government declining to make a reference of the dispute is not correct.
The Government has to see whether there exists an industrial dispute which can be referred to the Labour Court for adjudication under Section 10 of the Act.
On the facts of the case, there exists an industrial dispute which has to be adjudicated only by the Labour Court.
It is open to the management as well as the workman to take all such pleas as are open to them before the Labour Court including the question that the petitioner does not fall within the category of workman.
4.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I am of the opinion that the order of the State Government declining to refer the dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court is liable to be set aside.
5.
I accordingly allow the Writ Petition, quash the order of the State Government Annexure P-17 dated March 26, 1995 and direct the State Government to make a reference of the dispute to the appropriate Labour Court/Tribunal for adjudication, within two months from today.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.