VK Bali, J (Oral) - Short controversy that needs adjudication by this Court and that has been raked though present petition filed by Tirath Singh under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is as to whether petitioner is entitled to the benefits of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, even if he had not served Army in any of its fighting wings but was employed as Superintendent (Building and Roads) Grade-I in the services of General Reserve Engineering Force, commonly known as GRPF  2.
Concededly, petitioner came to occupy the post of Superintendent (B&R) Grade-I in the service aforesaid on November 2, 1996 from which post he was discharged on October 28, 1970.
After his discharge from Army, he successfully applied for service in Punjab Service of Engineering Class-II, PWD, Public Health and was selected and appointed on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on October 17, 1970.
He actually joined on November 2, 1970.
After he came to occupy the post aforesaid, he clamoured for the military service benefits as envisaged under the 1965 Rules.
Whereas, he was given the benefits of pay fixation and increments, benefit of seniority was denied to him.
However, when his repeated entreaties did not evoke any interest with the authorities to grant him the deemed date of appointment so as to give him seniority, he came to this Court through present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India so as to claim benefit of military service towards seniority in the department where he is presently working.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed on the sole ground that the service put in by the petitioner on the post of Superintendent (Building and Roads) Grade-I is not a military service as he has not served in any of the three wings of the Army.
It is also the case of the respondents that petitioner was not allowed the benefit of seniority as a similarly situate person, who had claimed benefit of seniority through civil suit, was not allowed the said benefit.
It is also stated that petitioner for the desired relief relied on judgment rendered in RSA, No. 2922 of 1988 decided on October 30, 1995, wherein the benefit was limited to increments and pay fixation.
4.
This Court would have gone into all the details as also the rules governing the field but there does not appear to be any use to take this exercise in hand for the reason that as on today the matter is not res- integra and in fact by a recent decision of the Apex Court in P Chandra Mouly v. Union of India and another, 1996(2) SCT 196(SC) : 1996(1) SLR 181, General Reserve Engineers Force has been held to be part and parcel of Armed Forces to which Army Act is applicable.
Further Single Bench of this Court in RSA.
No. 2922 of 1988 (Malkeet Singh v. State of Punjab and others), decided on October 30, 1995, held that:-  ``A bare perusal of rule-2 clearly brings out that the expression ``military service'' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces.
This definition when read in the light of the decision of the Apex Court in R Visawan's case (supra), makes it amply clear that G.R.P.F.
is an integral part of the Armed Forces and so its personnel are also entitled to the concession given by the Punjab Government in the Rules referred to above.''
Learned Single Judge, while holding so, relied upon judgment of the Supreme Court in R Visawan and others v. Union of India and others, 1983(2) SLR 193.
5.
Following the dictum of law laid down in R Visawan's case (supra) and P Chandra Mouly's case (supra), as also Single Bench decision of this Court in RSA 2922 of 1988, I allow this petition.
A direction is accordingly issued to the respondents to give the petitioner benefit of seniority i.e. to record in his service book the date of his joining the present service that he is holding from the deemed date i.e. by counting therein years, months and days that he had put in any service on the post of Superintendent (B&R) Grade-I His seniority vis-a-vis others, who may be affected, shall be fixed in the manner indicated above.
If for doing so, a notice is required to be given to the affected persons, the same shall be given.
Petitioner shall be entitled to all benefits which might accrue to him on account of his fixation of seniority in the manner indicated above.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.