Surya Kumar Tiwari, J - This appeal arises out of an order passed by the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ajit Kumar Sengupta in Matter No. 2418 of 1993 dated 16th March, 1994.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Computer on 28.2.1964.
On 2111969 he was promoted to the post of Investigator.
In 1979 a writ petition No. CR 7497(W) of 1979 was filed by some members of Subordinate Labour Service determination of their seniority.
The petitioner was not originally joined as a party to the said proceedings.
The petitioner applied for being joined as a party and the prayer was granted in the year 1987.
3.
The writ petition was decided on 2031989.
The court directed the State Government to consider the petitioner's case for promotion.
An appeal was filed against the said order wherein the Division Bench directed the State Government to consider the case of the petitioner's promotion without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties.
The petitioner had already been superseded by his juniors once in April 1983.
In June 1993 also some candidates junior to the petitioner were promoted and he was by-passed.
All these facts are not in dispute.
4.
The case of the petitioner is that the Public Service Commission did not find him fit because of the adverse remarks recorded in the annual confidential reports.
The said remarks were never communicated to the petitioner and he was kept in the dark about them.
Those remarks could not be taken into consideration without affording an opportunity to petitioner to make representation against them.
5.
It may be noted that the Supreme Court in case of Union of India v. ME Reddy, (1980) 2 SCC 15 has observed "....it is not every adverse entry or remark that has to be communicated to the officer concerned.
The Superior Officer may make certain remarks while assessing the work and conduct of the Subordinate Officer based on his personal supervision or conduct.
Some of the these remarks may be purely innocuous, or may be connected with general reputation of honesty or integrity that a particular officer enjoys.
It will indeed be difficult, if not impossible, to prove by positive evidence that a particular officer is dishonest but those who have had the opportunity to watch the performance of the said officer from close quarters are in a position to know the nature and character not only of his performance but also of the reputation he enjoys."
In the light of these observations the entries relating to the average annual performance of the writ petitioner, even if not communicated, could certainly be taken into consideration at the time of evaluating his suitability for promotion.
6.
The respondents have denied the contentions raised by the petitioner in the Affidavit-in-Reply.
It has been stated on behalf of the State that an average score of 180 was required for promotion during the last 5 years.
The Public Service Commission did not find the petitioner suitable for promotion because his average score fell short of 180.
Hence his name was not approved.
7.
The learned Judge came to a finding that since that adverse remarks were not communicated, they could not be used against the petitioner.
The learned Judge relied on the case reported in AIR 1988 SC 2060 (Vijay Kumar v. State of Maharashtra).
In fact the petitioner had not raised the issue relating to non-communication of the adverse remarks in his writ application.
Only in his Affidavit-in-Reply, the petitioner vaguely raised a ground that the adverse remarks were never communicated to him.
In fact, it was not a subject matter of enquiry but the learned Judge took it to be an admitted fact in his judgment printed at page 50 of the Paper Book.
This is really unfortunate.
If the learned Judge wanted to ascertain whether the remarks were actually communicated to the petitioner he ought to have directed the State Government to produce the records.
But the record was never sent for.
It has already been stated in the Judgement that the petitioner was allowed to cross efficiency bar.
hence the so-called adverse entries could not come in the way of his promotion.
The learned counsel for the appellant has stated at the bar that in the present cadre of the petitioner, there is no efficiency bar.
Hence the petitioner made misleading submissions before the learned Judge.
8.
The learned counsel for the appellant has also urged that the Judgment of Division Bench in F.M.A.T.
No. 1356 of 1987 created bar of res judicata since the judgment directed the State Government to consider the petitioner's case along with others as and when further vacancies for promotion arise.
Hence the Trial Court's directions that the petitioner should be promoted retrospectively with effect from 1641983 was not correct as it was hit by principles of res judicata.
9.
The principles of res judicata applies to writ proceedings also but in this case, the learned Judges of the Appellate Bench had directed the State to consider the suitability of the petitioner along with others while finalising the list of promotion.
Since petitioner was not selected for promotion, he challenged his supersession by filing the writ petition.
Hence the plea of res judicata has no force.
10.
At page 50 of the Paper Book, it has been observed by the learned Judge that it is surprising that no reason has given as to why the case of the petitioner was not considered along with other candidates who were promoted in April 1983 pursuant to the leave granted by this court ?
11.
It has been laid down by a 3 Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. H Mukherjee v. Union of India, 1994 Supp.
(1) SCC 250 : 1993(4) SCT 822(SC), that the decision for not promoting an officer on higher post should be taken only after recording the reasons for disapproval on the file and if the action is questioned in the court, the file must be produced in the court, if called upon to do so.
The learned Judge did not send for the record nor perused the said records and yet recorded the finding that no reasons were recorded.
12.
As observed above, the learned Judge ordered that the promotion of the petitioner will take effect from 16.4.1993.
This is really strange.
It has been laid down by the Supreme Court in case Union of India v. KK Vadera, AIR 1990 SC 442 that the promotion can take effect only from the date when the Government passes an order promoting an officer and not from an earlier date.
13.
In any view of the matter, this appeal deserves to be allowed with the observation that the State Government shall consider the case of the petitioner afresh in consultation with the Public Service Commission, as and when any further vacancy arises in the cadre of Assistant Labour Commissioner.
14.
The appeal is allowed.
The writ petition is dismissed with costs throughout subject to the observation made above.
Learned Counsel for the Respondent prays for stay of operation of this Judgment and order, there will be a stay for a period of fortnight from date.
Ordered accordingly.