Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioners who are working in the Haryana Armed Police as Tailor Masters at Madhuban, District Karnal in the State of Haryana have filed this petition for issuance of a direction to the respondents to fix their pay in the scale of the post of Tailor Masters working in other departments of the Haryana Govt. with effect from the date of their joining as Tailor Masters with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioners joined as Tailor Masters in Haryana Armed Police (hereinafter referred to as H.A.P.)
between 1973 to 1976 on ad hoc basis.
Their services were later on regularised.
Post of Tailor Master in H.A.P.
carried the pay scale of Rs. 70-2-80-3-95 whereas the pay scale of Tailor Masters working in other departments of the Govt. of Haryana was Rs. 140-240; in the further revision of pay scales which took place in the later years the difference between the pay scales given to the Tailor Masters working in H.A.P.
and other departments of the Government was maintained.
Petitioners filed representations claiming partity in pay with Tailor Masters working in the other departments which were not decided.
Last pay revision took place on 111986.
Petitioners were given the pay scale of Rs. 750-940 whereas the Tailor Masters working in other departments were put in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-30-1560-EB-40-2040.
Petitioners again made representation on 1121987 to respondent No. 3 requesting him to release the grade of Rs. 1200-2040 instead of Rs. 750-940 claiming equality of pay on the principle of `equal pay for equal work'.
No action was taken on the aforesaid representation.
Petitioners thereafter sent several reminders and ultimately filed the present petition for release of the same grade as it being given to the Tailor Masters working in other departments of the State of Haryana with effect from 11986 with all consequential benefits.
3.
It has been averred by the petitioners that they are substantially discharging the same duties as are being performed by the persons working on similar posts in other departments of the State of Haryana.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it has been stated that petitioners are not discharging the same nature of duties and responsibilities as are being discharged by the Tailor Masters working in the other departments.
The uniforms and other new clothes in the Police Departments are got stitched through contracts given to the independent parties and are not stitched by the Tailor Masters in the Police Departments whereas the Tailor Masters in the other Departments are appointed for stitching the new clothes.
The work of the Tailor Masters in Haryana Armed Police is primarily of repair only whereas the work of the Tailor Masters in the other departments is to stitch the new clothes.
Petitioners are availing the facilities of ration money, rent free accommodation, free summer and winter uniforms which are not provided to the Tailor Masters of other departments.
Petitioners are not entitled to avail double benefits and, therefore, can in no way be equated with Tailor Masters working in other departments.
5.
Counsel appearing for the petitioners argued that principle of `equal pay for equal work' which is embodied in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India, has been treated as integral part of the doctrine of equality and, therefore, the petitioners are entitled to the same pay scale as is being given to the Tailor Masters working in other departments of the State of Haryana and that there is no justification to deny parity in pay to them vis-a-vis the Tailor Masters working in other departments of the State of Haryana who are discharging the same duties which are being discharged by the petitioners.
6.
As against this, counsel appearing for the respondents argued that nature of duties of the petitioners is substantially different than those who are working as Tailor Masters in other departments of the State of Haryana and, therefore, they cannot be equated and given the parity in pay.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
8.
Principle of `equal pay for equal work' is enunciated as a part of Directive Principles of State Policy in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
In the case of Randhir Singh v. Union of India and others, 1982(1) SCC 618 Supreme Court of India held that equality of pay was a constitutional goal capable of being achieved through constitutional remedies and held that principle had to be read into Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In that case a Driver-Constable in Delhi Police claimed equal pay as was being paid to the other Drivers in Delhi Administration and this prayer was granted.
This principle was subsequently followed for granting the same relief in certain cases.
9.
Differentiation in pay scales among government servants holding same posts and performing similar work on the basis of difference in the degree of responsibility, reliability and confidentiality has been accepted as a valid ground for differentiation.
In State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, 1989(1) SCC 121 their Lordships of the Supreme Court opined that the answer to the question whether two posts are equal or should carry equal pay depends upon several factors and the same does not depend upon either the nature of work or volume of work done.
It was observed :  ``........
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the court should not accept it.
The Court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration.''
Similarly in Mewa Ram Kanojia v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences and others, 1989(2) SCC 235, it was held that the same pay cannot be granted merely because two persons do the same work.
The various factors which are taken into consideration are qualifications, duties, amount of work and qualitative responsibilities etc.
It was clarified that dressing of any injury or wound is done both by a Doctor as well as a Compounder, but surely it cannot be suggested that for doing this job a Doctor cannot be compensated more than the Compounder.
In a recent judgment in State of Haryana and others v. Jasmer Singh and others, 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC) Civil Appeal No. 14226, decided on 7th Day of November, 1996, their Lordships of the Supreme Court after noticing the various judgments of the Supreme Court held as under :-  ``It is, therefore, clear that the equality of work performed by different sets of persons holding different jobs will have to be evaluated.
There may be differences in educational or technical qualifications which may have a bearing on the skills which the holders bring to their job although the designation of the job may be the same.
There may also be other considerations which have relevance to efficiency in service which may justify differences in pay scales on the basis of criteria such as experience and seniority, or a need to prevent stagnation in the cadre, so that good performance can be elicited from persons who have reached the top of the pay scale.
There may be various other similar considerations which may have a bearing on efficient performance in a job.
This Court has repeatedly observed that evaluation of such jobs for the purposes of pay scale must be left to expert bodies and, unless there are any mala fides, its evaluation should be accepted.''
10.
In the present case the difference in pay scale of the Tailor Masters working in the Haryana Armed Police and the Tailor Masters working in other departments of the State of Haryana has been maintained from the beginning.
The same has been done keeping in view the nature of duties, responsibilities and the service conditions in two services.
Emoluments have been fixed by the State keeping the job requirements in view.
Tailor Masters working in the Haryana Armed Police are not performing the duties of stitching of new clothes and are primarily doing the repair work whereas the Tailor Masters working in other departments are appointed for stitching the new clothes.
Tailor Masters working in Haryana Armed Police are availing the facilities of ration money, rent free accommodation, free summer and winter uniforms which are not provided to the Tailor Masters working in other Departments.
The principle of `equal pay for equal work' is applicable where the employees holding the same rank perform similar functions, discharge similar duties and responsibilities.
This doctrine would not apply where the nature of job, responsibilities and conditions of service are different.
The evaluation of the fixing of pay scale keeping in view the nature of duties and responsibilities must be left to expert bodies as observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court and unless there are mala fides, the evaluation of the expert bodies should be accepted.
11.
Petitioners constitute a distinct class and enjoy certain privileges and benefits by virtue of having been appointed in Police Department and their emoluments have been fixed by the State keeping the job requirement in view.
Policy based on principle of equality of justice and fair play would be available to a class of people placed similarly.
As the petitioners are not placed similarly to those working as Tailor Masters in the other departments of the State of Haryana, they cannot claim parity in pay.
12.
In the present case, we have found that nature of duties and responsibilities and conditions of service of the Tailor Masters working in the Haryana Armed Police is different than the Tailor Masters working in the other departments in the State of Haryana.
Petitioners claim for equality of pay with the Tailor Masters working in other departments of the State of Haryana, cannot be accepted.
13.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this petition which is dismissed with no order as to costs.