VK Bali, J - Mr Gulzar Singh Gill an Assistant Engineer through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash the order dated 4th of May, 1994 (Annexure P-7) by which the penalty of stoppage of one increment with future effect has been imposed upon as also the order dated 27th of January, 1995 (Annexure P-11) whereby the appeal against the said order was rejected.
He has further prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to consider and promote him to the post of Executive Engineer with effect from the date persons junior to him were promoted.
2.
In the wake of controversy that is presently in issue, there is no need to give the detailed facts.
Suffice, however, to mention that the petitioner was appointed as Junior Engineer in the Punjab State Electricity Board on 16th of September, 1969.
On 18th of April, 1989 as per the case set up in the writ petition an anonymous complaint was made against him to the Executive Engineer (Enforcement) Ludhiana.
Subsequently, on the same lines another complaint was made on 14th of April, 1989, wherein it was alleged that no action had been taken on the earlier complaint dated 13th March, 1989.
The allegations in the complaint were as under:-  (i) That a temporary connection had been given by the petitioner to a consumer for the purposes of constructing a building.
It was alleged that the load was for running a hot mix plant and a load of 22 KW was sanctioned against a load of 4 KW and the same was used accordingly.
(ii) That the date of the bill regarding payment was extended wrongly from 17.1.1989 to 2011989.
It is relevant to point out the fact that the bill which was issued by the Revenue Accountant who is incharge of the Revenue wing under his signatures, the Revenue Accountant wrongly fixed the grade period of the electricity bill without the knowledge of the petitioner.
It is very important to point out the fact that the signatures of the petitioner on the bill are forged and are bogus and the grace period which was corrected by the S.D.O.
on the written request of the consumer that the grace period of the bill had been of 15 days wrongly fixed.
Furthermore, the grace period of the bill had been wrongly fixed.
It is relevant to point out that the fact that the bill was handed over by the Revenue Accountant to the Bill Distribution Centre and the same was delivered late to the consumer by the Bill Distribution Centre so the whole process of the grace period on the bill was defeated and that only necessitated the fact that the grace period of the bill should have been extended/corrected as per the rules and regulations of the Board.
When the second complaint was made before the Executive Engineer, he ordered that an enquiry should be conducted in the matter.
Petitioner was exonerated in the Preliminary Enquiry but the Punjab State Electricity Board yet served a charge-sheet on him on 3rd of August, 1990.
In reply to the charges levelled against the petitioner he gave a detailed reply controverting the charges with documentary proof to support and justify his innocence.
It is the case of the petitioner that this charge-sheet was later withdrawn.
However, the Board decided to conduct a departmental enquiry and, thus, Deputy Secretary (Enquiry), Patiala was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
After number of hearings spread over two years, the petitioner was exonerated with the following observations:-  (i) On the basis of the presented documents before me the charge No. 1 is not proved.
(ii) The process of correcting the grace period was according to the rules of the Board and no charge can be made out against the petitioner.
Despite the fact that the petitioner was exonerated at all stages, as has been mentioned above, the Punishing Authority with regard to second charge differed with the enquiry officer and vide impugned order Annexure P-7 held him guilty of the said charge and consequently punished him by stopping his one increment with future effect.
It is conceded position that while differing with the report of the Enquiry Officer with regard to second charge, the petitioner was not heard.
That being the position, there is no need to go into the details of the case as in considered view of this Court, the principles of natural justice enjoined upon the Board to hear the petitioner in the matter, if it was to differ with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
Mr. Anil Malhotra appearing for the Board, however, contends that Regulation 9 of the Punjab State Electricity Board, Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations), 1971 (hereinafter referrred to as Regulations) dealing with the action on the enquiry report by the Punishing Authority, does not talk of giving notice.
The requirement of the regulation is only of recording reasons.
The Regulation pressed into service reads thus:-  "Action on the Inquiry Report 9(1) The punishing authority if it is not itself the inquiring authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of the Regulation 8 as far may be.
(2) The Punishing authority, shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of the charge, record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of Regulation 5 should be imposed on the employee, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Regulation 10, make an order imposing such penalty.
(4) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings, on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry, is of opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation-5 should be imposed on the employee, it shall make an order imposing such penalty and it shall not be necessary to give the employee an opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed."
A perusal of the aforesaid regulation clearly shows that the same is silent with regard to issuing a notice to the concerned delinquent.
It neither talks of giving such a notice or of not giving such a notice.
However, as stated above, the principles of natural justice do require such a notice to be given to the concerned employee as is clearly made out from the dictum of the Full Bench of this Court in State of Haryana v. Ram Chander, A.I.R. 1976 Punjab and Haryana 381, as also Single Bench decision of High Court in CWP No. 12454 of 1992 (BM Sharma v. State Bank of India and others) 1995(4) SCT 834(P&H) decided on 851995 wherein the Learned.
Judge has relied upon number of Judgments of the Apex Court.
3.
In so far as the second relief asked for is concerned, it is not disputed that persons junior to the petitioner were promoted to the rank of Assistant Executive Engineer from 1990 onwards.
Nothing at all has been stated in the written statement as to why the petitioner was ignored and it appears that the only reason why he was not considered and promoted to the next rank was, that immediately preceding his consideration, enquiry came to be conducted against him and ultimately after conclusion of the inquiry even though petitioner was found innocent by the enquiry officer, his increment was stopped by the Punishing Authority.
4.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner,vehemently contends that the enquiry culminating into an order whereby one increment of the petitioner with cumulative effect was stopped, could not come in the way of the petitioner's right of consideration to promotion to the next higher rank.
5.
There is no need to go into this issue as, in view of the earlier discussion, the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect deserves to be set aside.
6.
This writ petition is, thus, allowed to the extent that the order dated 451994 (Annexure P-7) is quashed.
The order passed in appeal (Annexure P-11) against the order, Annexure P-7, is also quashed.
The department shall, however, be at liberty to reprocess the matter but that can be done only after hearing the petitioner.
The Punishing Authority may disagree with the report of the Enquiry Officer but that course can be adopted only after hearing the petitioner.
As on today, however, there is nothing against the petitioner that might come in his way for considering him for promotion to the next higher rank with effect from the date his juniors were promoted.
The respondents would, thus, consider his case for promotion.
Mr. Khehar, at this stage pleads that the case of petitioner for promotion can be considered as per Regulation 10(8)(a) of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965.
Mr. Patwalia, however, refutes the said contention.
It is, however, for the appropriate authorities to see if the said regulation applies.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.