PS Mishra, CJ.
- Heard learned counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1.
2.
Before we take up the contentions before us in the appeal, we may take notice of the way the impugned order has been made.
All that we are able to gather from the impugned order is that the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 was working as an Assistant (clerk) in the institution of the 3rd respondent- appellant herein.
He allegedly misappropriated an amount of Rs. 22,000/- and was subjected to a disciplinary enquiry.
He was served with the memo of charges of which he replied.
He was asked to state whether he opted for oral enquiry or personal hearing.
He, however, made no choice.
The management appointed a committee consisting of four persons to enquire into the charges.
Pursuant to the enquiry, the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 was found guilty and was removed from service.
Learned single Judge, after noticing the above, has ordered as follows:  ".....
Very strange procedure has been adopted in the instant case in appointing a committee of the four persons which is unheard of.
After report being submitted to the management, the management has passed order dated 1151985.
The management did not discuss the charges in detail.
In fact, there is no discussion with regard to the sustenance of the charges vis-a-vis material available and the defence taken by the petitioner.
The management held "The management has found that the explanation and statements given are far from satisfactory and are self-contradictory and not at all bona fide.
Further there is no truth in the points stated by the incumbent and no proper explanation or answers given even in the enquiry.
The management is, therefore, found that all the charges framed against Sri P Gopalakrishna are proved beyond doubt and this is a fit case to take proper disciplinary action and award punishment to the incumbent.
Having considered the seriousness of the charges and the lack of truth and bona fides in his statements throughout, punishment of dismissal from service as Junior Assistant is deemed proper punishment in the circumstances."
This is hardly a decision which can be rendered in a serious matter of a disciplinary enquiry resulting in civil consequences and more so, dismissal from service affecting the entire career of the petitioner.
The disciplinary enquiry cannot be conducted and order cannot be passed that too, imposing the harshest punishment of dismissal in this light-hearted fashion.
Precisely, that was the reason for the appellate authority i.e., the 2nd respondent to set aside the order and absolutely there was no legal infirmity for the Government to interfere.
In fact, the Government has based on extraneous considerations as even what is not found in the original order of the management is discussed by the government like audit report, etc.
It has to be borne in mind that the second appeal can only be within its limits of the adjudication made by the authorities below and cannot traverse beyond what is stated and what is contained in the orders of authorities below.
When there is no specific finding pointing to the specific basis which is legally acceptable, it is not safe to punish the delinquent merely on surmises and conjectures and that too with vague and general allegations.
Such a procedure cannot be termed as fair, it is needless to mention that in administrative enquiries visiting with civil consequences, the action should be fair and as the said fairness is lacking in the instant case, a benefit has to be given to the petitioner and consequently I set aside the impugned order and restore that of the 2nd respondent..." 3.
We have, however, been able to gather from the records that the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 preferred appeal against the order of dismissal and the first appellate authority interfered with the order of dismissal and directed for reinstatement.
As provided, however, under the law in this behalf the management preferred appeal before the State Government which was eventually heard by the Secretary, Department of Education, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.
The second appellate authority, however, reversed the order of the first appellate authority and affirmed the order of the disciplinary authority passed in the domestic enquiry.
4.
Besides, however, the finding of the enquiry and besides the proof of the charges levelled against the writ petitioner-respondent No1, the Secretary, Department of Education (the second appellate authority) was informed of the two letters written by the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 to the Headmistress of the school (institution) which contained his admission to the alleged misappropriation and the audit report which, in the meanwhile, was received and which contained informations about the misappropriations committed by the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1.
After the order of the second appellate authority, the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 moved this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Learned single Judge has passed the above order.
Hence the appeal by the management under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the Court.
5.
There may be some substance in the contention of the writ petitioner- respondent No. 1 that the letter and the audit report were not available in course of the enquiry and at least he was not made aware of the contents of the letters and the audit and thus there has been violation of the principles of natural justice to the limited extent that if some material was used against him he was entitled to be acquainted with and the opportunity to rebut such material.
6.
Exacting rule of evidence, however, are not applied in domestic enquiries or quasi-judicial proceedings in appeals and revisions arising out of disciplinary proceedings against delinquent employees.
The second appellate authority who received such additional materials which the management wanted to use against the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 was expected to at least call upon the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 to admit or deny the latters.
This, it seems, however, was not done by the second appellate authority - Secretary, Department of Education.
The writ petitioner-respondent No. 1, however, having come to know of the documents - the letters and the audit report and the use to which they were put against him in the second appeal, sought review of the order and questioned the admission of the letters and the audit report in evidence against him on technical grounds but never denied that he had written the letters or that there was any audit report.
In the writ petition that he filed after the second appellate order also, he raised contentions after contentions as to the mistakes in the proceedings against him including that the Secretary, Department of Education, committed illegality by taking the above letter and the audit report in evidence against him.
He, however, never said that he was not the author of the letters or that he had not confessed that he committed embezzlement, although temporarily, of the money to which he was not entitled and which legitimately belonged to the institution.
7.
Amongst the three cardinal principles of natural justice, which courts in India have recognised, audi alteram partem occupies a prime position.
Non-compliance with the rule renders the action without jurisdiction going thus by the rule mechanically one shall have to agree with the contention of the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1.
Principles of natural justice including the rule of audi alteram partem are, however, not static rules.
They are variables and vary from fact to fact and case to case.
In cases of action against delinquent employees in particular, adherence to the principles is a must but not mechanical and not in case where the rules are sought to be invoked without there being a specific denial of the presence of the charges or the guilt or in the cases as one in hand, of the contents of the documents or materials sought to be used against the delinquent.
It is by now well settled that Courts must in all cases of removal from service see whether violation of the principles of natural justice, which is alleged by the petitioner, has in fact resulted in miscarriage of justice.
If it has not resulted in miscarriage of justice, it will be futile to ask for re-exercise and benefit the delinquent by reinstatement which he does not deserve.
8.
The instant case is one in which the delinquent-respondent No. 1 does not deserve interference on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice as above, for, he has not denied to have written the letters and has admitted the guilt.
Once the letters are taken into consideration, it has to be held that he has been guilty of, at least temporary, embezzlement or criminal breach of trust.
In cases where the Court can give the opportunity to the delinquent to explain his conduct and readily fulfil the requirement of audi alteram partem by extending such a hearing and the delinquent is not able to satisfy its conscience, the Court shall reluctant in interfering with the orders which appear to have been made in violation of the principles of natural justice.
9.
In the instant case, we have afforded such an opportunity to the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1.
He has not been able to satisfy us that the letters are not written by him.
10.
We are satisfied that his confession is enough to disentitle him to any claim of reinstatement in service.
We are also not satisfied that any lesser punishment will be adequate in the case of the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 it is a fit case, in our opinion, in which the second appellate authority's order should be affirmed and not interfered with.
Learned single Judge has committed error of law in this behalf.
The order passed by the learned single Judge is accordingly set aside and the order imposing punishment or dismissal from service is affirmed.
11.
The writ appeal is accordingly allowed.
Appeal allowed.