Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner and respondent No. 3 who are working in the Market Committee, Jalalabad West, District Ferozepur, have an inter se dispute regarding promotion to the post of Head Clerk.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Auction Recorder on April 18, 1966.
In April, 1968, he was promoted as a Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
On September 27, 1982, he was promoted to the post of Accountant.
As against this, respondent No. 3 joined the service of the Respondent-Committee on October 4, 1972.
He was promoted to the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on June 4, 1975.
In the seniority list of class III employees as it existed on September 13, 1982, the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 2 while that of respondent No. 3 appears immediately below him.
3.
On October 4, 1983, one Mr. Vijay Kumar Madan, whose name appeared at Sr. No. 6 in the seniority list, was promoted as a Head Clerk.
Aggrieved by this promotion, respondent No. 3, filed a civil suit for a declaration that the promotion of Vijay Kumar Madan without considering his claim was illegal and that he was entitled to be promoted to the said post.
This suit was decreed by the learned trial Court on November 4, 1985.
The decree was affirmed and became final between the parties.
Proceedings for execution of this decree were initiated by respondent No. 3.
The petitioner filed objections on September 28, 1987.
These objections were rejected by the learned executing court.
Thereafter, on September 10, 1992, it was ordered that "necessary action be taken for the promotion of Shri Pukhraj Singh, Mandi Supervisor against the vacant post of Shri Nirmal Singh, Head Clerk in accordance with the orders of the Sub Judge, 2nd Class, Ferozepur."
At this stage, the petitioner filed the present writ petitions 5. with a prayer that the direction contained in the letter dated September 10, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-8, be quashed and that a writ of mandamus be issued directing respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to consider and promote him to the post of Head Clerk.
Admittedly, during the pendency of this writ petition, respondent No. 3 was promoted as Head Clerk vide order dated December 12, 1992.
4.
In the written statements filed on behalf of the three respondents, the factual position as noticed above has not been disputed.
However, the primary plea raised on their behalf is that respondent No. 2 having been promoted in pursuance to the judgment and decree of the Civil Court, the petitioner has no cause of action which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Admittedly, the petitioner is senior to respondents No. 3.
It is also not disputed that he was not a party to the civil suit instituted by respondent No. 3 Consequently, the judgement and decree passed by the civil court cannot affect his right adversely.
It is also undisputed that respondent No. 3 has been promoted vide order dated December 12, 1992 without considering the claim of the petitioner.
His challenge to the order on the ground that the action of the respondents is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution, is well- founded.
6.
Mr. Gurrattan Pal Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 3 submits that the decree passed by the civil court having attained finality and the petitioner having not challenged the said decree by instituting a suit, he is not entitled to impugn the order promoting respondent No. 3 through the present writ petition.
7.
This contention cannot be sustained.
It is no doubt true that the petitioner had filed objections during the execution proceedings.
It is also true that he has not disclosed the factum of his having filed the objections before the civil court in his writ petition.
However, even if the petitioner can't be complimented for having withheld this information, the fact remains that he was not a party in the suit and as such had no locus standi to object to the execution of the decree passed in favour of respondent No. 3.
That being so, his objections were rightly rejected by the civil Court.
This does not, however, mean that he is bound by the decree passed by the civil court or that his rights vis-a-vis respondent No. 3 were extinguished.
The petitioner's cause of action arose only when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
This order of promotion was admittedly passed without considering his claim.
Consequently, the prayer made by the petitioner that the promotion of respondent No. 3 without the consideration of his claim was illegal and that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents No. 1 and 2 to consider his claim, deserves to be granted.
8.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Head Clerk w.e.f.
December 12, 1992.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, he will be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.