THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed challenging the award passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh, in I.D.R.
No. 202 of 1988 decided on June 3, 1991.
The petitioner worked as Chowkidar on daily wages with effect from August 4, 1986 upto August 24, 1986 and as Mali with effect from August 25, 1986, to November 24, 1986, and from March 2, 1987 to March and again as Chowkidar from April 2, 1987 to July 24, 1987.
Thereafter, the services of the petitioner were not taken in by the respondent.
Therefore, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute and the matter was referred to Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that the petitioner worked for less then 240 days in a year and therefore the petitioner is not entitled to any relief whatsoever.
Aggrieved by the said award, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
2.
According to the petitioner, he worked with the respondent from April, 27, 1986, to July 24, 1987 ie for a period of more than 240 days and that the finding of the Labour Court that he worked for less an 240 days is erroneous and that the holidays have to be counted for the purpose of counting 240 days as continuous service and if the holidays are to be counted as working days, the petitioner worked for more than 240 days in a year and, therefore, the award of the Labour Court is liable to be set aside.
In the written statement filed by the respondent, the respondent has given the number of working days actually worked and paid by the respondent in each month.
The number of working days for which the petitioner was paid daily wages came to only 196 days.
From averments made in the written statement, it is clear that the petitioner was not paid the wages for Sundays and others holidays.
Therefore, the Sundays and other holidays for which no wages have been paid, cannot be counted while computing the continuous service of the petitioner.
It has been held in Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 458 that:-  "The expression "actually worked under the employer" cannot mean those days only when the workman worked with hammer, sickle or pen, but must necessarily comprehend all those days during which he was in the employment of the employer and for which he had been paid wages either under express or implied contract of service or by compulsion of Statute, standing orders etc.
Thus, Sundays and then paid holidays should be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the total number of days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked."
This position has been referred to by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Rajinder Kumar Sharma, AIR 1993 SC 1317 : 1993(3) SCT 169(SC) as follows:-  "We are of the opinion that the matter should go back to the Tribunal for a decision afresh.
Neither the decision of this Court in Daily Rated Casual Labour nor the proceedings of the P&T Department issued on February 10, 1988 say that the casual labourers are entitled to be paid even on the days they do not work.
The approach of the Tribunal that since the aforesaid proceeding of the P&T Department doesn't provide otherwise, the respondent is entitled to be paid even for the days he did not work (i.e. Saturdays, Sundays and Gazetted Holidays) does not appear to be sound."
Thus, it is clear that the holidays, i.e. Sundays and other gazetted holidays during which no wages have been paid to the workman cannot be counted for the purpose of determining whether the workman worked continuously for a period of 240 days.
If the holidays for which no wages have been paid by the employer are excluded, the working days of the petitioner fall short of 200 days.
Thus, it is clear that the petitioner has not worked for a period of 240 days in a year, before the order of termination.
I do not, therefore, find any ground warranting interference with the award passed by the Labour Court.
This petition is, therefore, dismissed.
No costs.