MS Liberhan, J - Our this order will dispose of civil writ petitions 17782, 17783, 17784, 18550 of 1995 and 293 of 1996 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
Matrix of case in short taken from CWP 17782 of 1995 emerges :  2.
Petitioner joined the cadre of HCMS Class-II, through the Haryana Public Service Commission and in due course of time was declared as HCMS Class-I.
The State run medical colleges in Haryana cater to courses of Postgraduate Degrees/Diplomas in various medical specialities.
32 seats were reserved for doctors i.e. 19 seats of postgraduation and 13 seats of diploma from amongst members of HCMS cadre, sponsored by the State.
Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, issued prospectus for admission to the above said courses for the year 1995.
Petitioner took the entrance test in terms of the eligibility conditions provided in the prospectus.
The result of the said test was announced on 27101995.
No weightage is provided in the eligibility conditions in the prospectus for inservice candidates sponsored by the State though in case of open candidates it was so provided.
Candidates were to be given admission in the subject of their choice according to the merit.
Petitioner who is the sponsored candidate by the State from amongst the members of the HCMS cadre impugned the admission, inter-alia, contending that the merit list amongst the sponsored candidates has been prepared on the basis of total of the marks obtained in the entrance test and the marks given by the sponsoring authority.
The State of Haryana vide its instructions dated 1131994 prescribed 100 marks for selecting candidates to be sponsored by the State against the seats reserved for inservice doctors in the cadre.
The marks under these instructions are sub divided i.e. 40 marks for academic qualifications, 10 for experience, 10 for rural service, 5 for the State level prizes, 10 for annual confidential reports and 25 marks for interview.
One of the conditions imbibed in the instructions for sponsoring candidates for admission against the reserved seats is that he must have secured minimum 20 marks in the entrance test before he can be considered for nomination against the sponsored seats.
A Committee comprising of Secretary Health (Haryana), Director General Health, and Director Health Services Haryana was constituted to hold interviews and evaluate the marks as divided above and then to sponsor suitable candidates against reserved seats.
It was envisaged that doctors in service could be permitted to take the entrance test against the sponsored seats only if they submit their application through their employer with a 'No Objection Certificate' before the date fixed.
In compliance with the conditions for permission to take the entrance examination, the respondents issued no objection certificates to the candidates with a specific condition, which may, at this stage, be noted in verbatim :-  "That they will have to abide by the terms and conditions contained in Government Letter No. 18/83/89-IHBI dated 1131994".
The petitioner has impugned the admission, inter-alia, on the grounds : the prospectus neither provides for marks for interview nor envisages admission on the basis of merit secured in the entrance test and the conditions prescribed for sponsoring candidates in the instructions, no weightage was provided for inservice candidates, the admission was to be governed only on the basis of merit secured in the entrance test as provided in the prospectus for the session 1995-96.
The main ground for challenge is compilation of the merit list qua the sponsored candidates on the basis of merit in the entrance test together with the eligibility criteria provided for sponsoring candidates in terms of the no objection certificate which it is contended cannot be enforced as charter for admission; the prospectus has the force of law.
It is contended that preparation of merit list on the basis of entrance test and in terms of the instructions issued being in violation of the prospectus is a compilation which cannot be sustained.
Providing of 25 marks for the interview was further challenged as arbitrary; admission to the session 1994-95 was made on the basis of instructions of the Govt. dated 1131994 which for reasons best known to the State were not in force or made applicable for the session 1995-96.
The prospectus envisages that against 32 seats reserved for sponsored candidates, in terms of the prospectus, 64 candidates could have been invited for interview and given an offer of admission according to their choice according to the merit, but herein 72 persons were called which is contrary to the prospectus, thus the admission cannot be sustained.
Petitioner claims her superior right for admission solely on the basis of entrance test being higher in merit in the entrance test alone and the respondent being lower in merit, his selection is in violation of Chapter 5 of the prospectus.
3.
The respondents refuted the grounds taken by the petitioner for impugning the admission.
It was averred that in terms of instructions dated 1131994 Annexure P5, it is a condition precedent that HCMS doctors sponsored by the State will be eligible to appear provided they submit a no objection certificate issued to them as well as the respondents granting them permission to take up the entrance test as per the conditions provided in the instructions which would be applicable to the State sponsored candidates amongst the HCMS cadre against the reserved seats.
4.
The mechanism of selection provided by the prospectus is to the effect that merit list of eligible candidates twice the number of seats in each category on the basis of written test shall be notified and they are to be called for interview in order to produce the requisite documents.
Choice of subjects were to be offered according to the availability of the subjects and they are to be called for interview according to the merit.
These candidates were further given option that in the eventuality of subjects of their choice not being available they could ask to be placed in the waiting list.
It was further envisaged that seats falling vacant within one month would be offered to the persons in the waiting list.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner put his case that since the prospectus for the year 1995-96 does not provide that the instructions issued on 1131994 by the Govt. would be applicable to the sponsored :-candidates as provided in the prospectus for the session 1994-95, consequently the instructions Annexure P5 dated 1131994 cannot be enforced by the State and the conditions contained therein cannot be make a condition precedent for admission.
It is argued that admissions are to be given according to the prospectus and the instructions contained or referred to therein.
The prospectus and the instructions issued therein govern the admissions.
In case there is any error in the prospectus, that can be rectified at a proper stage.
The prospectus cannot be changed subsequently.
In order to support his submission, learned counsel for the petitioner relied on Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc., 1993(4) SCT 328(P&H)(FB) : 1993(2) PLR 212, Dr. Vinay Rampal v. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, 1983(3) SLR 295, Arvind Rana v. Haryana Agricultural University, 1994(2) SCT 745 (P&H) : 1994(4) RSJ 285, Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 434 and Madan Lal and others v. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and others,1995(2) SCT 880(SC) : JT 1995(2) (Supreme Court) 291.
6.
Conspectus of law that emerges from the judgments cited by leaned counsel for the petitioner is :  (i) admission to various courses can be given according to the prospectus and instructions issued or given in it.
The prospectus and the instructions issued thereunder have force of law; (ii) The decisions with regard to comparative merit should not be interfered with by Courts except in cases of patent illegality, material irregularity or mala-fide; (iii) Prospectus cannot be changed subsequently by the Government to the detriment of a student to benefit another and admission has to be made according to the prospectus issued before the examination as the same has the force of law.
Instructions contrary to the prospectus cannot be issued.
The examination, if provided, must be given due importance.
7.
It was observed in Madan Lal's case (supra) that if a candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview then only because the interview is not palatable to him, he cannot subsequently turn round and contend that process of the interview was unfair or the selection committee was not properly constituted.
For the above observations, the Hon'ble Supreme Court relied on its earlier judgment in Om Parkash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1043.
8.
It was further observed that Courts do not sit in appeal and reassess the relative merit of candidates.
One cannot say that given marks were less or performance was better.
In the same context, it was observed that a candidate cannot challenge that the assessment was not justified or proper.
Object of examination and viva voce is to assess the intelligence, general knowledge, personality, aptitude and suitability and allocation of separate marks for interview as oral interview alone may not be a sufficient contest to evaluate the capacity and calibre of the candidates.
Yet it is one of the recognised modes for selection of candidates to be sponsored for admission particularly when the totality of the factors and circumstances like academic attainments, technical experience, suitability for higher studies, one's experience, number of years spent in service, rural service done, merit certificates issued etc. was taken care of while making an overall assessment of the traits of the candidates to be sponsored.
It was observed that mere apprehension or suspicion of the candidate on the basis of his having secured higher marks in written test and lower marks in interview by itself is of no consequence.
There is no gainsaying that policy contained in instructions dated 1131994 referred to above was upheld by the Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
2988 of 1990 and CWP 14701 of 1990, decided on 2911996.
9.
In view of the admitted facts that no objection certificate granted to the petitioner on 2391995 permitting her to take the entrance test for the purpose of finally sponsoring the candidates by the State against the reserved seats for inservice candidates provided that the policy decision dated 1131994 would be applicable to the candidates, we are of the considered view that no objection certificates issued to the candidates were subject to the conditions imposed by the policy decision dated 1131994.
Reference has been specifically made in the earlier part of the judgment.
The policy decision or the terms and conditions does provide for 25 marks out of 100 marks for interview and 75 marks for other relevant factors laid down in the criteria fixed viz. the marks for number of years of service rendered, experience, rural service etc. as referred to above.
10.
In our considered view the sponsored candidates form a class in themselves.
The State is well within its right to choose sources from which admission can be made which should satisfy contest on merit and rationality.
The object has always been to ensure that all candidates in a class are judged from the same standard and given equal opportunity to compete on merit.
As observed above, the inservice candidates required to be sponsored against the reserved seats were judged by the same standards and same rules.
The petitioner unhesitatingly took a chance and having lost the same, turned round and challenged the standard or mode of selection for being sponsored.
There cannot be any mathematical exactitude in such a situation.
The petitioner having once participated and taken a chance in terms of the law laid down in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke's case (supra), she cannot be permitted to challenge the holding of interview or awarding of marks according to the prescription prescribed for eligibility to be sponsored against the reserved seats, when no objection certificate was issued to her and she was permitted to take the entrance test subject to the conditions imposed by the State being the sponsoring authority.
11.
On the first look on the prospectus, it does give an impression that selection was to be made solely on the basis of entrance test and since the instructions dated 1131994 do not form part of the prospectus, the same do not constitute conditions precedent for granting admission according to the merit.
But on deeper examination we find no force in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioners for the reason that it is the State's right to sponsor their candidates against the reserved seats.
It was well within its power to prescribe eligibility conditions or other conditions for sponsoring candidates for admission against the reserved seats.
The conditions provided by the above instructions, in our considered view, are not in any way in conflict with the regulation or mode provided for admission in the prospectus, for the general candidates, which are a class apart.
All the inservice candidates have been treated equally and were given equal chance.
The conditions provided by the instructions are applicable to all inservice candidates seeking admission against seats reserved for sponsored candidates and are in addition to the eligibility conditions provided by the prospectus for the general candidates.
Petitioners and other such candidates did take a chance for their selection.
The petitioners were well aware of their right when they were issued no objection certificates to take up the entrance test.
The criteria provided for admission against the sponsored seats already found to be valid cannot be termed as arbitrary or discriminatory.
We are further of the considered view that conditions on the basis of which no objection certificates were issued cannot by any law or general principles, be required to form a part of the prospectus.
Prospectus are issued in generality for admission to all candidates.
It specifically provides that before a person can take the entrance test he has to produce a no objection certificate from the Government to take the test.
It nowhere debars the State from laying down a policy for issuance of a no objection certificate nor can it be presumed that conditions cannot be imposed while granting a no objection certificate as has been done in the case in hand.
It is well known that admission to various courses or the quota of reserved seats has to be regulated by various provisions properly framed and effectively published which is the case in hand.
No objection certificate issued categorically provides to the notice of the candidates of the class to which the petitioner belongs and against the reserved quota seats they are claiming that the conditions imposed by the policy of 1994 would be applicable to them.
12.
We find no force in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioners that the policy should have been incorporated in the prospectus.
The plea of non-incorporating the conditions for grant of no objection certificate in the prospectus for taking the test for admission against the seats reserved for sponsored candidates is of no consequence.
13.
There are no specific allegations of mala-fide against the Committee taking the interview though a freak attempt was made to demonstrate that 25 marks provided for interview are unreasonable and can result in injustice to the meritorious students.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, it would be unrealistic to undertake to hunt for individual case to find out that marks provided for interview are excessive to such an extent as to result in injustice or are totally arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious etc.
In our considered view, no criteria for admission has been changed at any point of time.
Restricting the right of the State to issue executive instructions when circumstances so require particularly when these have been issued in advance would amount to making the Government static and non- functional which should not be the principle.
14.
In view of the observations made above, we are of the opinion that the conditions provided by the instructions are in addition to the conditions of eligibility envisaged for admission on the basis of merit secured in the entrance test and do not run contrary to the eligibility criteria.
In totality of the circumstances, the conditions imposed by the policy decision are in addition to the eligibility conditions provided for by the prospectus.
It cannot be reasonably inferred that the policy decision dated 1131994 for admission in the session 1994-95 was ever withdrawn and was not made applicable for admission to the sponsored candidates for the year 1995-96.
There is no gain-saying that students have been admitted according to the merit prepared amongst the sponsored candidates by the State in terms of its instructions issued and the prospectus issued by the University, particularly when the Division Bench of this Court has already upheld the criteria for sponsoring candidates against the reserved seats though we have reservations for the marks provided for the interview which seems totally disproportionate to the number of marks provided for other categories.
It would be for the State to reduce the marks of interview for future in order to rule out the chance of arbitrariness and undue favour, or put the meritorious candidates to disadvantage which we hope the administration would take care of.
As presently advised, it is in the interest of consistency in judicial pronouncements and predictability of law to uphold the marks for interview as just, as this Court vide its order dated 151996 in Civil Writ Petition 18441 of 1995 has already pronounced on the validity of interview and the marks provided for that and upheld the same selection which is binding.
There is no gain-saying that 25 marks for interview appears to change the very character and merit of the selection.
15.
We are of the considered view that selection is not violative of Chapter 4 of the prospectus as observed above.
We have gone through the records produced by the State.
In the majority of cases of the petitioners, which are being disposed of by this order, the respondents have better position in order of merit after taking into consideration the criteria fixed and even reducing the interview marks to zero.
We cannot substitute our opinion in determining the merit of respective candidates for that of the experts who have adjudged them after due consideration, unless and until the merit so determined, prima-facie, is found to be arbitrary, malicious or perverse.
There is no mala fide alleged in the writ petition against any member of the Selection Committee or any other candidate.
None has been impleaded as respondent in the writ petitions attributing mala fide against him.
This very selection has already been upheld in CWP 18441 of 1995 decided on 151996.
Thus, in totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, we find no merit in the writ petitions.
The same are dismissed with no order as to costs.