VK Jhanji, J - This is defendant's second appeal.
Plaintiff Wazir Singh was allowed admission in PhD (Animal Project Technology Programme).
In June, 1993, he made an application to the Vice Chancellor, Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, for discontinuance of PhD Programme on the grounds (i) that due to financial burden on his parents he cannot continue his studies and, (ii) that he was trying for a job so that he can earn for his family.
The Dean, Post Graduate Studies, Haryana Agricultural University Hisar, communicated to the plaintiff the order of the Vice Chancellor dated 1761993 allowing the plaintiff to discontinue his PhD Programme with immediate effect.
It is the case of the Plaintiff that after the grant of permission he joined as Research Associate for six months with the Department of Food and Nutrition and was relieved from the said job on 17.12.1993.
Soon thereafter, on 20.12.1993 he applied to the University for the continuation of his PhD Programme from the current semester.
Vide order dated 2511994 the application of the Plaintiff was rejected and he was informed that if he is interested he may apply for fresh admission in PhD Programme by 121994.
This order came to be challenged by the Plaintiff in suit for permanent/Mandatory injunction for direction to the defendants to allow him to complete his PhD Programme in Animal Product Technology.
Defendants in their written statement not only questioned the locus standi of the Plaintiff to file suit but also took up the plea that the permission allowed was not in accordance with the rules and therefore, permission allowed will have the effect of cancelling the PhD Programme.
In addition to this, it was also averred that application filed by the Plaintiff for discontinuance of PhD Programme was on a plain paper, addressed directly to the Vice Chancellor of the University which is not permissible under the rules and moreover, he did not complete his preliminary examination and had no compelling reasons to leave the University without seeking the permission of Dean of the University which was mandatory requirement of the rules.
With regard to instances, which the Plaintiff had given, where students similarly situated were allowed to continue studies, the defendants averred that precedents cited by the plaintiff are not applicable to his case.
In his replication the Plaintiff reiterated his stand.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following disputes were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to complete his PhD Programme in APT as alleged ?
OPP 2.
If issue No. 1 is proved, then whether the plaintiff is entitled to the mandatory injunction as prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his act and conduct from filing the present suit ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus-standi to file the suit ?
OPD 6.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the present suit ?
OPD.
7.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff has neither been properly valued for the purpose of Court-fee and jurisdiction nor proper court fee has been affixed on the plaint ?
OPD.
8.
Whether the plaintiff has not come to the court with clean hands, if so its effect ?
OPD.
9.
Relief.
Trial Court dismissed the suit primarily on the ground that the application was not in terms of rule 202 in Student Hand Book, Part-I (1992-93) and the granting of permission to discontinue studies was only for limited purpose, i.e. not to recover the amount of fellowship from the plaintiff.
As regards the instances which the plaintiff had given in his plaint, trial Court opined that all those candidates who were granted permission to discontinue studies, later were allowed to continue the same because they had applied to the Dean of the University and their compelling reasons were given in their applications, whereas the plaintiff had applied for discontinuation on the pretext of trying for a job, besides not moving his application to the proper authority through proper channel, i.e. Dean, Post Graduate Studies, Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar.
In appeal, the Additional District Judge reversed the judgment and decree of the trial Court and held that the plaintiff is entitled to complete his PhD Programme.
As a consequence thereof, the defendants were directed to allow the plaintiff to continue his PhD Programme in the current semester.
2.
In this second appeal, order of the first appellate Court is being challenged on the ground that under the rules, plaintiff was required to seek permission regarding discontinuation of PhD Programme from the Dean, Post Graduate Studies, whereas he applied directly to the Vice Chancellor of the University and that too on the grounds of financial burden on his parents and also trying for a job to earn for his family, which were not compelling reasons for discontinuing the studies.
Counsel for the appellants has contended that Rule 202 of Semester Rules (contained in Student Hand-Book Part-I of the University) comes into play only when for certain compelling circumstances a student on good standing has to leave the college with the permission of the Dean and that too on completion of preliminary examination whereas in this case the plaintiff (respondent herein) had not completed his preliminary examination.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their help gone through various documents referred to by them during the course of arguments.
It is provided in the rules contained in Student Hand-Book Part-III for the year 1990 that a candidate who joins PhD should not be allowed to drop his studies for the purpose of joining service unless he has completed his preliminary examination, except where permissible in the Student's Hand Book and in case he drops before the preliminary examination for the purpose of joining service, his admission to PhD Programme will be treated as cancelled and he will have to seek admission to PhD Programme, if he desires as a fresh candidate.
Rule 202 given in Student Hand-Book Part-I (1992-93) reads as under :-  "202 : A student on Good Standing who, for certain compelling reasons, had to leave the College, with the permission of the Dean he/she can be re-admitted within a period of one year, only with the prior approval of the Academic Council."
Plaintiff by way an application made in June, 1993 to the Vice Chancellor, sought permission to drop the PhD Programme.
In his application, reasons for discontinuing studies were - financial burden on his parents and trying for a job so that he could earn for his family.
Noting made on this application (Exh.
D-2) has revealed that it was firstly put up before Major Advisor who recommended and forwarded it to the Professor and Head, Animal Products Technology Programme, who also had no objection in allowing the prayer of the plaintiff.
Then the note was put up before Dean, Post Graduate Studies, who also allowed the prayer under his initials.
Vide letter dated 1761993, the Dean intimated to the plaintiff and also the Authorities of the University including Major Advisor that the Vice Chancellor has allowed the plaintiff to discontinue his PhD Programme with immediate effect.
The contention that the application was never put up before the Dean, Post Graduate Studies, or he never granted any such permission, is not acceptable because Exhibit D-2 has come from the custody of the defendants and it was for the defendants to prove that permission was not allowed by the Dean under his initials.
In order to rebut this initial presumption, defendants could have examined Dean, Post Graduate Studies, but they having failed to do so, an adverse inference has to be drawn against the defendants.
Otherwise too, when the Dean communicated the order of the Vice Chancellor he was alive to the situation that the plaintiff has been permitted to discontinue his studies.
When the application was put up before the Dean and also the Vice Chancellor it was open to them to reject the prayer of the plaintiff on the ground that he has not completed his preliminary examination or the reasons given in his application are not compelling for which permission can be granted or that the application was not addressed to the Dean, Post Graduate Studies, but having not done so it does not lie with them at this stage to say that the permission so granted was against the rules.
Thre is no proforma prescribed under the Statute or in the Student Hand Book for making an application to discontinue PhD Programme.
Rule 202 of Student Hand Book Part I (1992-93) only provides that a student who had to leave the college for certain compelling reasons may be readmitted by the Dean within a period of one year of his leaving the college.
It nowhere provides that the application cannot be addressed to the Vice Chancellor or that Vice Chancellor is not competent to grant permission though in the hierarchy of the University he is the Head of the Institution.
Even if for the sake of arguments it is accepted that the permission to discontinue studies was not in accordance with the rules, the plaintiff cannot be made to suffer for the mistake committed by the Vice Chancellor and the Dean.
In this context, reference may be made to decision of the Apex Court in Ashok Chand Singhvi v. University of Jodhpur, 1989(1) RSJ 361, wherein it has been held that it is the duty of the University to see that its statutes, rules and resolutions are clear and unambiguous and do not mislead bona fide candidates, and if there was a mistake in admitting the candidate, the candidate cannot be made to suffer for the mistake committed by the University.
4.
It is erroneous to contend that the permission sought was given for saving the plaintiff from returning the amount of fellowship received by him together with interest during the course of his studies.
The rule in this regard is Rule 26 of Student Hand-Book Part-III (1990) which provides that the candidate, awarded fellowship, shall be required to fill in a bond giving an undertaking that he would not resign the fellowship and discontinue studies/research during the period of fellowship without the prior permission of the Vice-Chancellor.
However, in the present case neither the plaintiff offered to resign the fellowship nor any such permission was sought from the Vice Chancellor.
It is not correct that the plaintiff applied to the Vice Chancellor for permission to discontinue studies in order to escape his liability to refund the amount of fellowship received by him.
5.
It may also be noticed that one Satyapal who was also a student of PhD in Animal Product Technology Programme, sought permission on 2111992 for discontinuing his studies and in his application he also mentioned that because of certain family problems, he is unable to continue his studies.
He was allowed to discontinue his studies and vide order dated 231993 the Vice Chancellor allowed him to rejoin the studies in anticipation of the approval of the Academic Council.
Likewise, one Sunita Midha applied to the Dean to drop her studies on maternity grounds in February, 1992 and she was allowed to rejoin her studies in the Department of Food and Nutrition vide letter, Exhibit D-12.
In the same manner, Mrs. Maya Singh who was student of B.Sc.
(Home Science) applied for discontinuation of her studies due to family circumstances.
She was allowed to discontinue studies and again was readmitted to the course almost after four years.
In all these instances, the only reasons given in the applications were family circumstances and if these students have been allowed to rejoin their studies, I fail to understand as to how the case of the plaintiff can be distinguished by saying that in their applications compelling reasons have been given whereas in the case of petitioner compelling reasons have not been given.
As a mater of fact the reasons to discontinue studies given in the application made by the plaintiff are far more compelling than what have been stated in the applications of other above-said students.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.