SC Malte, J - This appeal is against the judgment and decree dated 1781978 by which the suit filed by the appellant was dismissed by the trial Court and the appellate Court also in the first appeal before the District Court, Gurdaspur.
The plaintiff had sought declaration to the effect that the order dated 12.7.1977 by which his services were terminated was illegal, unconstitutional and against the terms and conditions of his employment.
He further sought the relief to take him back in the service with all dues in respect of salary, increments etc.
Briefly stated his contention was that while terminating his services, certain procedure and terms and conditions were not followed.
He claimed that as per the conditions in the appointment letter, a one month notice in lieu of salary should have been given before his termination.
It was further contended that the impugned order of termination had not been passed by the appointing authority and the said order was never communicated to him.
2.
The State of Punjab opposed this suit by contending that the termination order was proper and legal and that the plaintiff was relieved of his service on 19.7.1977.
The other contentions of the plaintiff also came to be denied.
It was contended that the termination of service of the plaintiff was as per the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
3.
The trial Court held that the termination of the plaintiff was proper and as per the terms and conditions of his appointment.
On this main finding, the trial Court dismissed the suit.
The matter was taken before the District Court, Gurdaspur.
The Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur held that the question regarding the one month's notice or salary in lieu of it while terminating the employment of the plaintiff was not applicable in his case because the initial appointment was for a fixed period of six months only, and that too by an officer who was not authorised to employ the plaintiff.
He further observed that further extension of employment was granted by the Director, Health & Family Planning, Punjab, and that extension ended on 31.12.1976.
As per terms and conditions of the said letter of appointment, the plaintiff's services were rightly terminated.
He observed that the said letter did not contain the condition that a one month's notice, or salary in lieu of it, was to be given before the termination order.
4.
In this Court, the counsel for the appellant submitted that before the termination order was issued it was obligatory to issue a one month's notice, or in lieu, thereof, one month's salary should have been paid to the appellant.
It was further contended that in the absence of compliance of such condition, the termination of the appellant was illegal.
In support of his contention, he relied upon a case of Kulwant Kaur v. District Education Officer, Amritsar and others, reported as 1974(1) S.L.R.
76.
In that ruling it is observed by His Lordship that a person appointed temporarily is entitled to one month's notice or salary in lieu thereof in the event of termination of his service.
It was further observed that on failure to comply with that, the termination would be illegal.
The observations made in that ruling should be considered in the set of facts in that case.
In this case I find that by letter Exhibit P-1 dated 331976 the plaintiff was initially appointed on temporary basis for a fixed period of six months.
He reported on duty on 931976.
Obviously, therefore, the fixed period of his employment as per letter Ex.P-1 would come to an end on 891976.
Besides the position that the said letter was by a Civil Surgeon who was not an authority entitled to appoint the plaintiff, the fact remains that the period of his employment came to an end by mere efflux of time indicated in the appointment letter.
In that letter, one of the conditions was that if the employee wanted to resign, he should serve one month's notice or forego one month's salary in lieu thereof, and if the Government has to terminate the employment, it was obligatory to serve one month's notice, or one month's salary in lieu thereof.
This condition obviously was in respect of termination of his service before the fixed period of six months as indicated in the aforesaid appointment letter.
Besides the position mentioned above, both the trial Courts have observed that the Civil Surgeon was not a person or authority empowered to appoint the plaintiff.
On this premise it was observed that the conditions indicated the said appointment letter did not legally bind the State.
5.
Now the real question of controversy would be as to whether termination order dated 12.7.1977 was in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
Material before me indicates that subsequently by letter Exhibit D-1 the Director of Health and Family Planning, Punjab, accorded extension of service of the plaintiff from 1101976 to 31.12.1976.
It may be mentioned here that in Exhibit P-1 there is a clear overwriting in the figure of month, and figure 12 indicating the month in the said letter was overwritten in ink showing that it was 3.
It clearly appears that somebody has played mischief and attempted to change the date.
I say so because the copy of the said letter found at page 55 of the file, clearly shows that the period for which the extension was granted was upto 31.12.1976.
In other words even as per that letter the employment of the plaintiff comes to an end by sheer efflux of time.
6.
The next contention was that the termination order dated 12.7.1977 was not in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
But I find that on record there is no letter showing that the services of the plaintiff were further extended beyond 31.12.1976.
In the absence of such a letter, it would not be possible to find out what were the conditions under which the plaintiff was appointed.
7.
It was also contended that the Government of Punjab has issued instructions that those temporary employees who have completed one year of employment would be regularised and absorbed in regular employment.
No such letter or notification is placed on record.
The District Court in its judgment has observed that even in that case, the continuance or absorption of the employee in the regular employment depended on the screening and scrutiny of his performance.
Thus, I find no substance in this appeal.
Hence it is dismissed with costs.