GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to clause 2(iv) of Annexure P-4 issued by the Government of Haryana on the subject to employment to the dependants of the deceased Govt. employees under Ex-Gratia Scheme.
2.
Father of the petitioner Shri Ranjit Singh was employee as Class IV servant (Mali-cum-Chowkidar) in Zila Sainik Board, Narnaul.
He died on 1941994 while on duty.
The petitioner's mother submitted an application dated 951994 before the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board, Narnaul for appointment of the petitioner on compassionate grounds as per the Ex-Gratia Scheme formulated by the State Government.
Her application was forwarded by the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board to the Secretary, Haryana Rajya Sainik Board.
The Secretary, Haryana, Rajya Sainik Board informed the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board that the name of the petitioner has been entered at Serial No. 463 of the priority list prepared by the Government for giving employment to him.
On a further representation made by the petitioner, the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board once again wrote on 1261995 to the Secretary, Haryana Rajya Sainik Board, respondent No.2, that employment may be provided to the petitioner because the widow of late Shri Ranjit Singh was hard pressed.
On 1171995 the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board wrote a letter (Annexure P-3) to respondent No. 2 intimating that a post of chowkidar-cum-mali was lying vacant in the Zila Sainik Board at Narnaul.
An affidavit of the petitioner was also sent alongwith letter (Annexure P-3).
Notwithstanding these recommendations, the representations made by the petitioner and her mother have not been decided, as a consequence of which, the petitioner has not been given employment on compassionate grounds in accordance with the Ex-Gratia Scheme.
3.
The petitioner states that during the pendency of his application, the Government issued Memo No. 16/5/95-6 GS-II dated 851995 and has issued further instructions for giving employment to the dependants of the deceased employees under the Ex-Gratia Scheme and on the basis of clause (iv) of these instructions, the respondents have now taken a decision not to give appointment to the petitioner because he had been married before the death of his father.
The petitioner has pleaded that this decision of the respondents and incorporation of clause 2(iv) in the instructions contained in the memo dated 851995 (Annexure P-4) is arbitrary and unconstitutional because there is no nexus between clause (iv) and the object of giving employment to the dependants of a deceased employee.
4.
The respondents have pleaded that in view of the policy of the Government only unmarried children are eligible for appointment under the Ex-Gratia Scheme which has been framed keeping in view the observations made by the Supreme Court in SLP No. 10504 of 1993 - Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others.
Respondents have further pleaded that mere inclusion of the name of the petitioner in the priority list does not confer any right upon him to be appointed in the Government service and in view of the policy instructions issued by the Government, the petitioner cannot be given appointment on compassionate grounds.
5.
Two points which required adjudication by the Court are : whether the petitioner can be deprived of employment on compassionate grounds being a dependant of late Shri Ranjit Singh on the basis of the instructions contained in the Memo dated 851995 (Annexure P-4) and whether clause 2(iv) of the Memo (Annexure P-4) is unconstitutional.
6.
Perusal of the averments made in the writ petition and the reply and the accompanying documents shows that the name of the petitioner was entered in the priority list of the Govt. at serial No. 463 because the petitioner was considered eligible to be appointed as dependant of the deceased employee.
Letter (Annexure P-3) dated 1171995 shows that a post of Chowkidar-cum-Mali was lying vacant under the Zila Sainik Board at Narnual since 941994.
It is thus clear that on the date of making an application by the mother of the petitioner for his appointment under the Ex. Gratia Scheme a clear post of Chowkidar-cum-Mali was available and but for laxity on the part of the respondent-department to take a decision on the application submitted by the petitioner's mother, the petitioner would have been appointed as Class IV servant.
The instructions issued on 851995 vide memo Annexure P-4 cannot be applied retrospectively so as to prejudicially affect the right of the petitioner to be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds.
It is, therefore, reasonable to hold that due to their failure to act upon the application filed by the petitioner, the respondents have deprived the petitioner of his right to be considered for appointment as a dependant of late Shri Ranjit Singh.
7.
Coming to the second issue, we may refer to clause 2(iv) of Annexure P-4 which reads as under :-  "Dependant of the deceased employee would denote only his/her spouse and unmarried children.
If any dependent of deceased Government employee's family is married at the time of death of the employee, he/she would not be eligible for employment under the scheme."
From the above quoted clause of the Government memo dated 851995 (Annexure P-4) it is clear that a distinction has been made by the Govt. between a dependant who is married at the time of the death of the deceased and the one who is not married.
The former is not entitled to be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds whereas the latter is.
The inclusion of clause 2(iv) in its present form in the instructions contained in Annexure P-4 shows total non-application of mind by the competent authority because dependant of the Govt. deceased would include his wife also.
If the provision is literally interpreted, all the widows would stand excluded from the policy of appointment on compassionate grounds.
However, keeping in view the well established cannon of interpretation namely that absurd interpretation of a provision should be avoided, we hold that clause 2(iv) does not apply to the widow of the deceased who is ordinarily a dependant of the deceased employee.
The distinction made between a married dependant and unmarried dependant has been sought to be justified with reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, Judgments Today 1994(3) SC 525 : 1994(3) S.C.T.
174.
That was a case in which the petitioner had sought appointment on higher posts under the policy of the Government to give appointment on compassionate grounds.
While rejecting the claim made by the petitioners to be appointed on the basis of their qualifications the Supreme Court held that policy of giving appointment on compassionate grounds is one of the exceptions to the rule that appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of application and merit.
Their Lordships observed :-  "On such exception is in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
In such cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration taking into consideration the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a provisions is made in the rules to provide gainful employment to one of the dependents of the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for the post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial conditions of the family of the deceased and it is only if it is satisfied that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family."
From the above extracted portion of the judgment of the Supreme Court, it is clearly borne out that what is to be kept in mind by the Government while considering the cse of a dependent for employment on compassionate grounds is the financial conditions of the family.
Their Lordships did not indicate that a married dependent of the deceased employee should be excluded because he must be presumed to be earning sufficient money to sustain the family.
In Indian society children are married by their parents during their life time.
This is one of the pious wish of the parents that their child is married during their life time.
In majority of cases such marriages are performed without regard to the fact whether boy is capable of earning to such an extent which should sustain him and his family.
In rural India, marriage of children are performed immediately after they attain the age of majority irrespective of the fact that the married children may or may not be earning an amount which would be sufficient to sustain the family.
Similarly an unmarried child may be earning sufficient amount so as to sustain the family.
Therefore, the financial conditions of the family has no direct nexus with the marriage of the dependent of the deceased.
A married child may be dependent on the deceased and unmarried child may not be dependent on the deceased.
Therefore, merely on the basis of marriage of the child, a classification cannot be made between the dependents of the deceased employee.
Such classification has nothing to do with the criteria of economic conditions of the family of the deceased as indicated in the Supreme Court judgment.
In fact clause (2)(i) of Annexure P-4 reflects the Government's internation to restrict employment only to those cases where monthly income of the family is less than Rs. 2500/- per month.
In our opinion, clause (2) (i) sufficiently meets the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court and classification made between married and unmarried dependents of the deceased Govt. employee is wholly arbitrary and irrational.
This classification has no nexus, whatsoever, with the object sought to be achieved and it is, therefore, contrary to Article 14 of the Constitution.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition.
Clause 2(iv) of Memo dated 851995 (Annexure P-4) is declared to be unconstitutional and is struck down.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds and pass a necessary order within a period of two months from the submission of the certified copy of this order.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.