NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2391981 by virtue of which recovery of Rs. 2765950 was ordered to be recovered from the plaintiff is illegal, wrong, ultra vires, against the rules, based upon non-existing facts and so constitute malice in law and thus null and void.
3.
As per facts stated in the plaint, the plaintiff was working as a Sub Divisional Officer, Construction Sub Division No. 1, Fazilka, when the theft of the government chest took place.
The plaintiff was charge-shetted on the ground that he committed negligence by giving his personal key to the chest clerk.
On receipt of reply to the charge-sheet, an enquiry was initiated and the plaintiff was asked to make statement by the Investigating Officer and ultimately the matter was dropped and instead of enquiry proceedings, an order for recovery of the amount i.e. Rs. 2765950 was ordered holding him liable for loss of the amount to the extent of 60%.
In respect of the 40% of the loss, the Clerk was burdened with this liability.
4.
The defendant by way of written statement took up the preliminary objection to the effect that the suit is pre-mature as final punishment is yet to be awarded; that it is not maintainable in the present form; that no notice u/s 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was issued.
On merit, it was pleaded that the charge-sheet was served upon the plaintiff and the reply of the plaintiff to the charge-sheet was found not satisfactory and so it was tentatively decided that 60% of the stolen money be recovered from the plaintiff.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration that the order dated 2391981 is illegal, void etc ?
OPP 2.
Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC was served by the plaintiff before filing the present suit ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is pre-mature ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
Issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Issue No. 3 was not pressed by the defendant and so was decided against the defendant.
Under issue No. 1, the trial Court came to the conclusion that the order of recovery of a sum of Rs. 2765950 is according to law.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
Before the appellate Court, it was argued that no such order could be passed against the plaintiff as he had retired on 31.10.1980 whereas the order passed for recovery of the amount is dated 2891981.
According to the counsel, once a government servant has retired from service, be cannot be considered to be a government servant and so no disciplinary proceedings could commence or continue after his retirement.
Otherwise too, the order for recovery of the amount is without any reason.
The lower appellate Court, however, found no merit in this contention and so dismissed the appeal.
Dealing with the objection that no regular enquiry has been held, the lower appellate Court held that the punishment imposed was minor and so no regular enquiry was called for.
7.
Assailing the judgment and decree of the Courts below, learned counsel for the appellant termed these to be wholly perverse and against the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules (for short 'the Rules') governing the service of the plaintiff.
According to the counsel, admittedly, the charge- sheet was issued to the plaintiff and to which he filed the reply.
Even proceedings had been initiated by the Investigating Officer but somehow the same have been dropped and ultimately an order of recovery was passed on 2891981 and that too after the plaintiff's retirement.
According to the counsel, once the authorities thought it appropriate to initiate the enquiry, the same could not be dropped.
Secondly, the punishment awarded i.e. recovery of amount by no stretch of imagination can be termed to be a minor penalty.
In any case, since the plaintiff stood retired, even such a punishment could not be awarded.
Elaborating, the counsel urged that the minor penalties are (i) censure; (ii) withholding of promotion; (iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to government by negligence or breach of order; and (iv) withholding of increments of pay.
The amount now sought to be recovered obviously cannot be recovered from the pay of the plaintiff as he has retired, so the punishment imposed upon the plaintiff cannot be termed to be a minor penalty and so by inference it is taken to be major penalty.
Even as per Rule 2.2.
(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, any specific loss before it is made recoverable from a pensioner is to be determined by holding departmental proceedings i.e. after an enquiry.
Even this aspect of the matter has been glossed over.
The defendant while imposing this penalty of recovery of the amount alleged to have been stolen has unnecessarily burdened the plaintiff without any adjudication by any Court or by any other appropriate authority and so the order imposing the penalty deserves to be set aside.
Lastly, the counsel urged that as per case of the defendant, the impugned order is based on preliminary investigation i.e. it has not attained finality and so no recovery could be ordered on the basis of such a report.
Reliance was placed upon the decision in case reported as Bhola Nath Roy v. State of West Bengal and others, 1992(2) S.L.R.
563 : 1992(3) S.C.T.
62, Major Suresh Chand Mehra v. The Defence Secretary (U.O.I.)
and others, 1991(1) SCT 129(SC) : 1991 (1) SLR 187 and Kehar Din v. The Presiding Officer, 1992(2) SCT 387.
8.
Justifying the order of recovery dated 2891981 as well as dismissal of suit and the appeal by the Courts below, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, argued that the impugned order is not only just in the circumstances of the case but according to law as well.
According to the counsel, there is no denying the fact that the plaintiff handed over the personal keys of the government chest in his possession to the Chest Clerk.
Such an act was against the rules as well as against all acceptable norms.
There was theft of government chest and so departmental proceedings were initiated against the plaintiff as well as against the Chest Clerk for their utter negligence thereby causing monetary loss to the government.
The plaintiff was apprised of the charges and after receiving his reply and after further investigating the matter, ultimately it was decided that instead of delaying the matter it would be appropriate if the amount of money loss is recovered from these two delinquent persons in the ratio 60 :40.
The plaintiff was found to be not only negligent and careless but also having violated the rules while handing over personal keys of the chest to his subordinate resulting in monetary loss to the government.
Accordingly, the authorities imposed a minor penalty directing him to reimburse the loss to the extent of 60%.
The counsel further argued that such a penalty falls within the ambit of minor penalty.
He further argued that since the matter has already been initiated against the plaintiff while he was in employment, the rules governing a government employee would govern him even after his retirement.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the judgments of the Courts below as well as other documents referred to by the respective counsel during the course of their submissions.
The factual aspect of the matter is not in dispute i.e. plaintiff's handing over his personal key of the government chest to his subordinate and theft having occurred causing monetary loss to the government.
The plaintiff has made no attempt to disown this factual aspect of the matter.
Plaintiff's objections are based upon certain provisions of the Rules.
Besides this, support is being sought from the judicial pronouncements that proper procedure has not been followed or that he had been denied a fair opportunity to place his view point.
Rule 5 of the Rules envisages awarding of penalty upon a government employee.
Penalties can be minor or major.
Under the category of minor penalties, the penalty of censure; withholding of promotion; recovery from the pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the government by negligence or breach of order; and withholding of increments of pay, have been enumerated.
According to the counsel, since the plaintiff stood retired, clause (iii) i.e. recovery from his pay of whole or part of any pecuniary loss..., cannot be imposed upon the plaintiff as he retired on 31.10.1980 whereas the order of recovery is dated 2891981 and so by inference any such order of recovery for any alleged loss which accrues on account of the negligence of the plaintiff would ipso facto come within the ambit of a major penalty.
10.
I find no merit in this submission of the learned counsel for the applicant.
Theft in the instant case took place when the plaintiff was in service and necessary steps to determine his negligence/carelessness or otherwise to award any suitable punishment were initiated when the plaintiff was in service.
According to Rule 2.2 (b) (1) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules (Volume I), any departmental proceedings if initiated while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall after the final retirement of the officer, be deemed to be a proceeding under this article and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced i.e. to say in case any departmental proceeding has been initiated, the same shall continue irrespective of retirement of a person.
Examined so, any punishment awarded to the person is to be examined in the light of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules which envisage that any recovery of any pecuniary loss caused by a person to the government by his negligence is a minor penalty.
11.
In Major Suresh Chand Mehra's case (supra), the Court while examining the provisions of the Arm by Act, 1950 and Army Rules, 1954, held that inquiry under sub-rule(1) of Rule 22 is only a preliminary investigation and cannot be equated with a trial.
There is no dispute with this proposition of law but the same has no applicability to the facts of the present case.
In the present case the authorities whereas decided to recover the monetary loss caused to the government on account of negligence of the plaintiff but termed it to be 'tentatively' only i.e. keeping the option to recover more amount if found on further investigation.
12.
Similarly, the decision in Kehar Din's case (supra) has no applicability to the facts of the present case.
In the case cited, no opportunity had been given to the petitioner to cross-examine the witnesses and so the Court held that had the witnesses been permitted to be cross-examined, a story favourable to the petitioner could well have come out and so there has been non-compliance of Rule 14(4) of the Central Civil Service (Classification, Conduct and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
The decision in Bhola Nath Roy's case (supra) also nowhere helps the case of the appellant in any manner.
Both the Courts on appraisal of evidence have come to the conclusion that the punishment of recovery of loss caused to the government is a minor penalty and so perfectly legal and just in the circumstances of the case.
There is no illegality discernible on the perusal of the impugned judgment of the Court below.
The appeal is devoid of merit and is consequently dismissed.
No costs.