Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the Government's action in declining to give the petitioner "further extension in his provisional promotion beyond 1171993."
penal and thus violative of Article 311 of the Constitution ?
This is the short question that arises in the present case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Senior Technical Officer, Class II, in the Directorate of Industries, Punjab.
Vide order dated May 14, 1991, he was promoted as Senior Technical Officer, Class I, on purely "provisional basis for a period of six months or till the approval of Punjab Public Service Commission, whichever is earlier, with effect from 12.7.1991..." A copy of the order is at Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
This provisional promotion was periodically extended.
Finally, vide order dated July 28, 1993, the ad hoc promotion of the petitioner was extended from January 12, 1993 to July 11, 1993 or till the approval of his promotion by the Public Service Commission.
Vide order dated October 30, 1993, the petitioner was placed under suspension and his Headquarter was shifted from Ludhiana to Amritsar.
This was followed by the order dated December 31, 1993 by which the Government conveyed its decision not to extend the period of "provisional promotion beyond 1171993".
Copies of the orders dated October 30, 1993 and December 31, 1993 have been appended as Annexures P-5 and P-6 with the writ petition.
The petitioner challenges these orders as being illegal, arbitrary, violative of the principles of natural justice and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The various grounds raised on behalf of the petitioner shall be presently noticed.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner having been promoted on purely ad hoc basis and his work conduct having not been found to be satisfactory, the Government was entitled "to deny extension in the term of the ad hoc arrangement."
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner was posted as General Manager, Industrial Development-cum-Service Centre (Engg.)
Ludhiana.
On 13.8.1993, he misbehaved, manhandled and insulted an industrialist of Ludhiana in his office and a complaint to this effect was received from the Industrialists' Association.
The allegations against the petitioner were got investigated by an officer of the Department.
During preliminary investigations, the petitioner was fully associated.
It was proved that the petitioner misbehaved, manhandled and insulted the Industrialist without any provocation.
This behaviour of the petitioner resulted in total stoppage of use of services of the Centre by the Industrialists, which resulted in huge loss to the State exchequer.
This uncalled for behaviour of the petitioner damaged the image of the Government in the eyes of the public..." Consequently, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
Since the petitioner's work and conduct were not found to be satisfactory, the Government had not extended the period of ad hoc promotion.
In this situation, it cannot be said "that he was reverted by the Government.
The promotion of the petitioner was only a temporary arrangement for a period of six months which was extended from time to time, upto 1171993, or till the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission is received, whichever is earlier..." The Government having only denied further extension in the period of ad hoc promotion, the petitioner cannot claim that he had been reverted or that the action was punitive.
Various allegations made by the petitioner regarding the validity of the impugned orders have been controverted.
4.
The petitioner has filed an additional affidavit.
He has also produced a few documents.
The petitioner alleges that he has not been paid his salary since July, 1993.
It has also been pointed out that Mr. HS Bains, Industrial Advisor-cum-Additional Director of Industries had submitted a report dated September 8, 1993 in which the petitioner's performance had been described as satisfactory.
Consequently, the petitioner claims that it cannot be said that his work and conduct during the period from January 12, 1993 to July 11, 1993 were not satisfactory.
It has been further averred that in this situation, it was apparent that the impugned order had been "passed on misconduct but the same has not been established".
The petitioner points out that while issuing the suspension order, the Director of Industries had been asked to prepare a charge-sheet and forward it to the Government.
However, no regular enquiry having been conducted, the petitioner was deprived of the chance to prove his innocence and the impugned order of reversion had been passed.
The petitioner has also stated that various other Class II Officers had been promoted to the Class I Service by different orders.
He further complains that the Joint Director who had been deputed to hold an enquiry, had recorded his statement.
However, therefore, when the statements of the various other officials and the complainant were recorded, the petitioner was not associated with the proceedings.
5.
A reply to this additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
With regard to the petitioner's allegation that salary has not been paid to him since July, 1993, it has been stated that the subsistence allowance for the period from November 2, 1993 to January 31, 1994 has been deposited in the current account of the Industrial Development Centre, Amritsar and the petitioner has been informed about it.
With regard to the remaining period, it has been stated that the matter is under consideration.
The petitioner's averment with regard to the report from Mr. HS Bains, has been admitted but it has been pointed out that "a serious instance of misconduct on the part of the petitioner" having come to the notice of the Government, it was decided not to give him further extension is his ad hoc promotion as Senior Technical Officer (Class I).
It has also been pointed out that on the basis of the preliminary investigations, disciplinary proceedings under the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 have been initiated against the petitioner.
The petitioner also filed Civil Misc.
Application No. 3659 of 1995 along with a short affidavit stating that vide order dated February 9, 1995, the Government had observed that the petitioner "has already been given a big punishment for misbehaving with an Industrialist, by not extending the period of his ad hoc promotion as Senior Technical Officer (Grade I) beyond 12.7.1993...." As such, it was not considered appropriate to award him any further punishment.
Consequently, the proceedings were dropped.
6.
This is the entire sequence of events.
It is in the background of this factual position that the petitioner's case has to be considered.
7.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner has made the following submissions :  (i) The order dated December 31, 1993, a copy of which is at Annexure P-6 with the writ petition, is punitive and could not have been passed except after following the procedure as envisaged under Article 311 of the Constitution and the Rules; (ii) By the impugned order, the petitioner has been retrospectively reverted which is not legally permissible; (iii) It has been wrongly observed in the order that "on the basis of his work and conduct during the period from 1211993 to 1171993, it has been decided not to give him further extension in his provisional promotion beyond 1171993".
According to Mr. Arora, the petitioner's work and conduct during this period was absolutely satisfactory and the order is, thus, based on a wrong assumption;  (iv) The petitioner could have been reverted only if the Public Service Commission had declared him unfit for promotion.
That having not happened and various other persons having been allowed to continue on the post in Class I, the action of the respondents was arbitrary and unfair; (v) The action of the respondents in suspending the petitioner without issuing a charge-sheet and obtaining his reply, was contrary to the Government's instructions and cannot be sustained; and (vi) The action of the respondents in not paying the petitioner his salary from July 12, 1993 to October 12, 1994, was illegal and arbitrary.
8.
The contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner have been controverted by Mr. HS Sidhu, learned Assistant Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the respondents.
The relevant record was also produced by him.
9.
The first question that arises for consideration is - Has the petitioner been actually reduced in rank as a measure of penalty so as to attract the provisions of Article 311 and the Rules ?
10.
The admitted position is that the petitioner had been promoted from Class II to Class I on purely "provisional basis for a period of six months".
This ad hoc arrangement had been periodically extended.
The final ex post facto extension was given to the petitioner vide order dated July 28, 1993 when the Governor of Punjab was "pleased to extend the ad hoc promotion.... from 1211993 to 1171993 ...." Thereafter, no order extending the period of petitioner's promotion to a post in the Class I Service had been passed by the Government.
This position had continued till December 31, 1993 when the Government decided not to extend the petitioner's provisional promotion beyond July 11, 1993.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner had been reduced in rank or reverted from Class I to Class II.
In fact, his term of ad hoc/provisional promotion in Class I had ended on July 11, 1993.
The Government merely refused to extend it beyond that date.
This did not attract the provisions of Article 311 or the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
11.
It is true that the orders of extension were sometimes passed after the expiry of the period of promotion.
Even the promotion from Jan 12, 1993 to July11, 1993 had been ordered on July 28, 1993.
Delays in Government offices are not unknown.
Red-tape is one of the banes of our system.
However, from a strictly legalistic point of view, it cannot be said that the petitioner was holding a post in Class I when there was no order to that effect after July 11, 1993.
Mr. Arora submitted that in fact, the petitioner had continued to hold his original post even after July 11, 1993.
He was even suspended while working on that post.
This may be so.
It may entitle the petitioner to claim the salary attached to the post if he had actually discharged the duties thereof.
However, it cannot mean that the petitioner had been promoted to a post in the Class I Service after July 11, 1993 or that he had any right to the post.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Admittedly, the petitioner's promotion was purely ad hoc.
He had been promoted for a period of six months till July 11, 1993 or till such time as the Public Service Commission approved his promotion, whichever was earlier.
It has not been even averred that the Commission had conveyed its approval.
In fact, it was accepted that the Commission had not given its views in the matter.
In this situation, it cannot per se be said that the Government's refusal to extend the period of ad hoc promotion would per se amount to a penal action attracting the provisions of Article 311 or the Rules governing the imposition of penalty.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioner, however, is that he had in fact been punished on account of the alleged misconduct.
Particular emphasis was laid by the counsel on the observations in the order dated February 9, 1995 by which the enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioner were dropped.
In this order, it had been inter alia observed that by not granting extension to the petitioner on the post of Senior Technical Officer Class I, the Government had already punished him.
This is only a manner of saying it.
It does not mean that the petitioner had been actually awarded the penalty of reduction in rank.
On a perusal of the record and the pleadings of the parties, it appears that in view of the incident of August 13, 1993, the Government had taken the view that the petitioner was not suitable for continuing in Class I Service.
It did not mean that he had been reduced in rank from Class I to Class II.
Since the petitioner had no right to the post and the Government on consideration of the matter had formed an opinion that he was not suitable for the grant of further extension, it cannot be said that the petitioner had been reverted from a post of Senior Technical Officer, Class I, by way of penalty.
Nor can the mere issue of charge-sheet vide letter dated April 5, 1994, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-12/A with Civil Misc.
Application No. 5141 of 1994, be said to imply that the order dated December 31, 1993 had been passed as a measure of penalty.
13.
Mr. Arora referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1974(2) SLR 701 in support of the contention that the action had been taken by way of punishment.
This decision was considered by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760(SC) : 1991(1) SLR 606.
On a review of the decisions of various Constitution Benches of the Supreme Court and the case law on the point, the appeal was accepted and it was inter alia held as under :-  "It is erroneous to hold that where a preliminary enquiry into allegations against a temporary Government servant is held or where a disciplinary enquiry is held but dropped or abandoned before the issue of order of termination, such order is necessarily punitive in nature."
14.
Their Lordships were further pleased to observe as under :-  "In the instant case the respondent was a temporary Government servant and there was adverse report regarding his work which was reflected in the adverse remarks made for the year 1977-78.
The competent authority held a preliminary enquiry in the allegations of improper conduct in carrying out unauthorised audit of Boys Fund of an educational institution, on result of the preliminary enquiry no charges were framed against the respondent, no officer was appointed for holding the departmental inquiry instead the competent authority chose to terminate the respondent's services in exercise of its powers under the terms of contract as well as under the relevant rules applicable to a temporary Government servant.
It never intended to dismiss the respondent from service.
Holding a preliminary enquiry does not affect the nature of the termination order.
The allegations made against the respondent contained in the counter-affidavit by way of a defence filed on behalf of the appellants also do not change the nature and character of order of termination.
The High Court failed to consider the question in proper perspective and it interfered with the order of termination in a casual manner."
In view of the above dictum of law, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the action was punitive in character and violative of the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution or the Rules, cannot be sustained.
15.
Equally untenable is the plea that the order of reversion was retrospective in operation.
As already observed, there was no order promoting the petitioner to the post of Senior Technical Officer, Class I with effect from July 12, 1993 or thereafter.
Consequently, there was no order of reversion when the Government merely refused to extend the period of his promotion beyond July 11, 1993.
As such, it cannot be said that the petitioner had been retrospectively reverted.
16.
It was then contended that the Government had extended the petitioner's period of ad hoc promotion from January 12, 1993 to July 11, 1993 vide order dated July 28, 1993.
Furthermore, the Additional Director had submitted a special report describing the petitioner's performance during the aforesaid period as satisfactory.
In view of this position, the observations in the impugned order that further extension in the provisional promotion beyond July 11, 1993 had been declined on the basis of the petitioner's "work and conduct during the period from 1211993 to 1171993" is apparently wrong and untenable.
It is also true that for the aforesaid period, Mr. Bains had described the petitioner's performance as satisfactory.
However, in the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents by Mr. Baldev Singh, Under Secretary to the Government, it has been pointed out that a serious instance of misconduct on the part of the petitioner had come to the notice of the Government.
Accordingly, it was decided not to give his further extension in his ad hoc promotion.
This was perfectly legal.
The petitioner cannot derive undue advantage from a wrong observation in the order which appears to be wholly inconsequential.
Mr. Arora submitted that the petitioner could not have been reverted till his promotion was dis-approved by the Public Service Commission.
The contention is wholly fallacious.
The petitioner was not granted any promotion beyond July 11, 1993.
Till then, the Commission had not conveyed its approval.
The Government was not bound to wait endlessly for the Commission to take a decision.
The petitioner had no right to the post after July11, 1993.
The Government's action refusing to extend the period of promotion cannot be said to be vitiated on the ground raised by the petitioner.
17.
Lastly, it was pointed out that even the order of suspension was vitiated in view of the fact that the petitioner was not granted an opportunity of hearing before he was placed under suspension.
It has been averred that the Chief Secretary had issued instructions vide letters dated May 5, 1959, April 21, 1961 and June 26, 1973.
There is no warrant for such a contention.
It is the employer's right and the Rules permit it that an employee can be suspended in anticipation of an action.
It is not necessary that he should be heard before an order of suspension is passed.
It cannot be said as a matter of law that failure to hear an employee would vitiate an order of suspension.
In the circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice.
Furthermore, the petitioner was, according to the respondents, heard during the course of preliminary enquiry and his statement was recorded before the order of suspension was passed.
Consequently, even this contention cannot be sustained.
18.
As for the petitioner's grievance regarding the payment of salary from July 11, 1993 to October 12, 1994, it has been pointed out in the written statement that the matter is under consideration.
Considerable time has elapsed since then.
If no decision has been taken so far, it would be appropriate for the Government to decide it expeditiously and in any case, within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
19.
Subject to the above, I find no infirmity in the impugned orders.
The writ petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
20.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.