NK Sodhi, J.- This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is directed against the award of the Labour Court, Faridabad dated 26.5.1988 whereby the order terminating services of the petitioner was held to be justified and in order and as a result whereof the reference was decided against him.
2.
The case of the workman is that he was employed in the year 1979 by M/s. Amar Machine Tools (hereinafter called the management) as a Turner and that his services were terminated on 28.8.1985 when he was drawing wages @ Rs. 404-50 per month.
He alleged that the management did not comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act) while terminating his services.
He served a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act claiming reinstatement with full back wages on the ground that his services had been wrongfully terminated.
On receipt of this demand notice, the Conciliation Officer took cognizance of the industrial duspute between the parties and started conciliation proceedings.
Before the Conciliation Officer the management took the stand that it had not terminated the services of the workman and that he started remaining absent from duty w.e.f.
29.8.1985.
The management made an offer to take the workman back on duty.
In view of this offer the Conciliation Officer directed the workman to report for work but in spite of that he did not turn up.
Not only this, the management then sent a letter to him requiring him to resume duty but this letter was received back undelivered.
Another letter was sent to him by registered post informing him that his name had been removed from the muster roll and that he should receive the amount due to him after settling his accounts with the office.
This letter was also received back undelivered.
Thereafter, on a reference made by the State Government under Section 10(1) of the Act the dispute was referred for adjudication to the Labour Court, Faridabed.
After recording evidence of the parties and on consideration thereof, the Labour Court found that the management had offered to take the workman on duty during the course of conciliation proceedings, but he did not join.
It has also been held that the management had written letters to the workman to resume duty and when he did not do so, his name was removed from the muster roll.
It is true that the management required the workman to collect the money that was due to him after settling the accounts in te office and this, according to the Labour Court, was sufficient coimpliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
The order of termination was, therefore, upheld and the reference was decided against the workman.
3.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the privisions of Section 25-F Act had not been complied with and that it was necessary for the management to do so even when the name of the workman was being removed from the muster roll on account of his absence.
In support of this contention, he placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in DK Yadav v. JMA Industries Ltd., 1993(3) SCT 537(SC) : JT 1993 (3) SC 617.
In find merit in this contention.
Even though the workman remained absent which necessitated the removal of his name from the muster roll, yet, such termination amounted to retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
It was, therefore, necessary for the management to have strictly complied with the privisions of Section 25-F of the Act which in the circumstances of the present case cannot be said to have been complied with.
No doubt, the employer wrote to the workmen to clear his accounts in the office but this did not amount to an offer of retrenchment compensation at the time of terminating his services.
The termination was, therefore, not in order though in the circumstances of this case it was just.
4.
The question that now arises is as to what relief the workman is entitled to.
The normal rule is that where an order or termination is neither justified nor in order the workman is entitled to reinstatement with full back wages.
In the instant case, the order of termination is justified though not in order.
Moreover it is more than a decade now that the services of the workman were terminated and he did not join duty when the managment made an offer during the course of conciliation proceedings.
The Labour Court has observed that the workman was a Trade Union activist and may be that for this reason he was adament in fighting out with the management.
In view of that facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that it would be fair and just if the management is directed to pay compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
The workman had about six years of service to his credit when his services were terminated.
A sum of Rs. 20,000/- should be a fair amount of compensation in the circumstances.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the award of the Labour Court set aside.
The management is directed to pay a sum of Rs. 20,000/- as compensation to the workman in lieu of reinstatement.
The workman will have no other claim whatsoever against the management.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.