VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to memo dated 1611995 and also charge-sheet dated 931994 which has been served along with the memo.
2.
Petitioner is a Junior Engineer in the Irrigation Department of the State of Punjab and presently posted at Patiala in Patiala Drainage Division, Patiala.
In July 1981 the petitioner while posted at Bhatinda was entrusted with the execution of work of Teona Distributary of Canal Lining Division No. 4 from RD No. 46000 to 64000.
Petitioner after a short stay at Bhatinda, was ordered to be transferred to Patiala on 28.4.1982.
It is the case of the petitioner that in sequence to his transfer he handed over the charge at site to his successor i.e. Yash Pal Garg, Junior Engineer as per orders of the Executive Engineer of Canal Lining Division No. 4 Bhatinda on 1051982, Petitioner was surprised when on 1611995 he was served with a charge-sheet relating to the period when petitioner was posted at Bhatinda on the work of Teona Distributary Bhatinda.
Challenge is on the ground that after an in- ordinate delay of 12 years from the date of alleged irregularity the serving of charge-sheet is wholly unwarranted.
It is the case of the petitioner that the charge-sheet in question has been issued to forestall his future promotion to the post of Sub-Divisional Officer to which he is entitled to, on the basis of his excellent service career.
3.
In answer to the allegations made in the writ petition, the respondents in their written statement have admitted that the petitioner was posted only for a short period at Bhatinda, but have averred that for the wrong work executed at Teona Distributary he was called upon by the Executive Engineer, Canal Lining Division No. 2, Bhatinda vide letters dated 27111987, 19111988 and 27121988 to explain the irregularities but the petitioner did not submit any reply and the matter regarding serving of show-cause notice to him remained under correspondence in the department.
The show-cause notice has now been served on the petitioner when the matter was finalised by the department.
It has also been averred that there is no bar for the Department to call for the reasons/causes from the employees for his misdeed carried out while in service.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that no charge-sheet could be served on the petitioner after a lapse of such a long time.
He contended that it has now been settled by the Apex Court that the delay in initiating departmental proceedings is fatal to the continuation of departmental proceedings.
Against this, the learned counsel for the respondents has contended that there is no limitation provided for initiating departmental proceedings.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed and the departmental proceedings initiated against the petitioner are to be quashed.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner had remained at Bhatinda for a very short period and the work of Teona Distributary was completed only after he had been transferred to Patiala.
The petitioner has alleged that after he was ordered to be transferred from Bhatinda to Patiala, his successor, Yash Pal Garg, Junior Engineer, who had taken the entire charge at site, completed the work in the year 1983 and thereafter all the final bills were prepared by him and submitted to the Sub-Divisional Officer.
The concerned Sub-Divisional Officer, after having received the final bills and on personal inspection whether work had been done in consonance with the P.W.D.
code, submitted the bills to the Executive Engineer for its pre-auditing and final payment.
After the final bills were submitted to the Executive Engineer, he directed the two S.D.Os to furnish the report regarding specification and design.
As a consequence, joint inspection was conducted and a report that the work has been done as per the P.W.D.
specification and design by Chatar Singh Brar and Balraj Singh Atwal along with Yash Pal Garg, Junior Engineer, was submitted.
Certificate was also recorded on different measurement books.
6.
Respondents in their written statement, have admitted that the measurement book contains a certificate that the work has been done according to P.W.D.
specifications and designs.
Perusal of the charge-sheet shows that the departmental proceedings against the petitioner have been initiated on the basis of some news item published in the daily 'Pilot' newspaper Bhatinda revealing that the work of lining was not correctly done and inspection of the work of the concerned Officer brought to light certain irregularities in execution of the work.
To remove the irregularities, a sum of Rs. 1,96,56520 were incurred and this extra additional expenses incurred have to be recovered from Chatar Singh Brar, S.D.O.
(Retd.)
and the petitioner in equal shares i.e. 1/2 of the amount from each of them as they both were held responsible.
In the charge-sheet, reference is also made to letters dated 27111987, 18111988 and 27121988 which allegedly were sent to the petitioner seeking his explanation to which no reply was given by the petitioner.
However, the petitioner has denied the allegation contained in the charge-sheet that any show-cause notice was served upon him.
It thus emerges that the work in question was completed in the year 1983 when the petitioner stood transferred to Patiala.
Payment of work was made some time in the year 1984.
The irregularities came to the notice of the respondents on 2121984 when news was published in daily 'Pilot', Bhatinda.
There is no explanation worth the name given by the respondents as to why department sleep over the matter for all these years.
The argument that the petitioner did not submit any reply to the show-cause notice served upon him in the year 1987-88 and the matter regarding initiating departmental proceedings remained under correspondence, is not acceptable.
Respondents have not placed on record the show-cause notice alleged to have been served on the petitioner in the year 1987-88 despite his denial of receipt of these notices in the petition as well as in the replication.
Respondents have also failed to bring any proof of the service of these show-cause notices on the petitioner.
Even if it is assumed that notices were served on the petitioner, there is no explanation forthcoming as to why the department slept over the matter after 1988.
Charge-sheet served on the petitioner on 1611995 for the irregularities allegedly committed in the year 1982, cannot be maintained.
In this context, reference may be made to judgment of Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Bani Singh and another, 1990(2) S.L.R.
798 wherein the Apex Court quashed the departmental proceedings initiated after 12 years as no satisfactory explanation of such delay was given.
In the recent decision, the Apex Court in State of Punjab & others v. Chaman Lal Goyal, 1995(2) RSJ 882 : 1995(2) S.C.T.
343 has observed as under :-  "It is trite to say that such disciplinary proceeding must be conducted soon after the irregularities are committed or soon after discovering the irregularities.
They cannot be initiated after lapse of considerable time.
It would not be fair to the delinquent officer.
Such delay also makes the task of proving the charges difficult and is thus not also in the interest of administration.
Delayed initiation of proceedings is bound to give room for allegations of bias, mala fides and misuse of power.
If the delay is too long and is unexplained, the court may well interfere and quash the charges.
But how long a delay is too long always depends upon the facts of the given case.
Moreover, if such delay is likely to cause prejudice to the delinquent officer in defending himself, the enquiry has to be interdicted.
Wherever such a plea is raised, the court has to weigh the factors appearing for and against the said plea and take a decision on the totality of circumstances.
In other words, the court has to indulge in process of balancing."
As already noticed, irregularities which are the subject matter of enquiry, are said to have taken place in the year 1982-83.
It is not the case of the department that they were not aware of the said irregularities and came to know only in the year 1995.
According to the charge-sheet and the written statement, they came to know of the irregularities from the news item published in the daily 'Pilot' Bhatinda in the year 1984.
Further, according to them, show-cause notice was served on the petitioner in the year 1987-88, though this part of the allegation has not been accepted by the petitioner.
Accepting this to be true, there is no explanation why they again slept over the matter till 1995.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge Memo and thus, in the light of the judgments of the Apex Court, it would be unfair to permit the respondents to proceed with the departmental proceedings because the petitioner would be handicapped in recalling the nature of work executed during his positing at Bhatinda or producting documents or witnesses which would have been available to him in case the proceedings had been initiated soon after the irregularities came to the notice of the department.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the Memo.
dated 1611995 and the charge-sheet are hereby quashed.
No costs.