VK Jhanji, J. (Oral).
- This shall dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 6471 of 1993 and 3373 of 1994.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6471 of 1993, Petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of Mandamus, directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Inspector with effect from the date his immediate juniors have been promoted, whereas in Civil Writ Petition No3373 of 1994, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 931994 whereby he has been ordered to be retired compulsorily with immediate effect under Rule 918 of the Punjab Police Rules, Volume I.
3.
Petitioner was initially appointed as Constable on 2261963.
On passing of the Lower School Course, he was put in `C' list and thereafter he was promoted as Head Constable.
He was confirmed as such w.e.f.
181974.
Further, on being promoted as ASI on 10.4.1979, petitioner was confirmed on 3181984.
He was further promoted as Sub Inspector (S.I) on 28101984 and confirmed on this post w.e.f.
31.3.1990.
The grievance of the petitioner in this petition is that in September and November, 1991, respondents 4 and 5, immediate juniors to the petitioner, were considered and promoted to the rank of Inspector, whereas the case of the petitioner who was senior to them was not considered.
Petitioner has averred that during the last 10 years' record, he has been communicated only one A.C.R.
of the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988, against which he submitted representation and that was forwarded vide letter dated 6121988 to the Reviewing Authority.
but the same has been rejected summarily without assigning any reason and primarily on the ground that no such representation lies.
The action of the respondents is being questioned on the ground that petitioner being senior to respondents 4 and 5 had a right to be considered for promotion to the rank of Inspector prior to the date his juniors were promoted.
Thus, it has been averred that action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In the written statement filed in response to Civil Writ Petition No. 6471 of 1993, respondents 1 to 3 have justified the promotion of the juniors to the petitioners, on the ground that petitioner had earned adverse remarks regarding his act and conduct for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988 as ``integrity doubtful."
The representation of the petitioner against this entry was considered and rejected vide order dated 3131989.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that report from 27.6.1987 to 3131988 could not have been taken to be an adverse report regarding honesty and, therefore, order promoting respondents 4 and 5 without considering the case of the petitioner is wholly arbitrary.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that oral complaints with regard to corruption had been received against the petitioner.
The adverse report was communicated to the petitioner and his representation in this regard after consideration has been rejected.
Thus, the counsel contended that no case is made out for interference by this Court.
6.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties, it is necessary to notice the so-called adverse report which has been termed as report of integrity doubtful and on the basis of which the petitioner has been ignored for promotion.
In the report, against the column of honesty, it has been mentioned ``Oral complaints have been received."
In his representation dated 21.11.1988, petitioner had submitted that the reporting officer has neither disclosed the name(s) of complainant, nor given any indication about the case/matter to which the complaints related.
He had also made reference to Govt. instructions issued as in 1956 vide composite Punjab Govt. letter dated 4101956, and repeated in Haryana Govt. circular letter No.1 of 1987, which lays down in explicit terms that remarks about integrity must be invariably fortified by reasons and specific instances which may be in possession of the reporting officer.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, has fairly conceded that there does not exist any document/note on the record of the Government which could justify the ground that there were oral complaints about honesty and integrity of the petitioner.
She was also not in a position to show from the record that oral complaints were made by some persons against honesty and integrity of the petitioner and the Reporting Officer/Reviewing Authority had relied upon such oral complaints for the purpose of recording adverse entry regarding integrity of the petitioner.
Petitioner in his representation has stated that though the reporting officer claims that there were complaints, yet he has not given any details thereof, and in absence of any instance he cannot effectively controvert the same.
It is also noteworthy that respondents in their written statement have not clarified as to whether any enquiry was made into these allegations/complaints and if so, what was the outcome of those.
During the course of hearing, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, fairly admitted that no enquiry was ever initiated against the petitioner in regard to oral complaints.
Instructions dated 4101956 were considered by a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No.11695 of 1993 (Daya Nand Dalal v. State of Haryana others.)
decided on 30.11.1994.
It was held by the learned Judges of the Division Bench that ``a perusal of the above-quoted extracts of the circulars shows that while recognising the importance of the entries made in the annual confidential reports in general and remarks relating to honesty and integrity of the officials in particular, the Government has made it obligatory for the concerned officers to be careful while recording adverse remarks relating to integrity.
The Government had emphasised that the reporting officer should fortify with reasons his remarks relating to integrity of an official.
It has been further emphasised that non-committal remarks or baseless remarks should not be made by the reporting officers.
The Government has gone to the extent of observing that truth about the subordinates should be known to the reporting officers and should be brought to the notice of the higher authorities.
We may observe that though the instructions issued by the Government do not have the force of law, the administrative authorities subordinate to the Government as also the Government are bound to act in accordance with these instructions.
A minor deviation from the procedural aspect at the instructions may not by itself be sufficient to vitiate the adverse remarks, but a whole sale or wanton breach of the instructions may lead to an inference that the remarks have been made without application of mind or the same are baseless.
It may also indicate arbitrariness and casualness in the approach of the reporting/reviewing officer.
It cannot be over emphasised that the column regarding integrity is most vital both to the Government servant as well as the public service.
It is well recognised that the integrity of a public servant is as important as his efficiency.
A dishonest public servant or one whose integrity is doubtful may cause greater injury to the public interest than an inefficient public servant.
Adverse remarks regarding integrity ordinarily constitute sufficient material for superseding a senior official at the time of promotion, for withhold of the efficiency bar and can be used for retirement before superannuation.
Therefore, it is imperative that the column regarding integrity is filed with greatest care and caution.
If the adverse remarks regarding integrity are found casual, perfunctory or cryptic or where it is found that the adverse entries have been made for extraneous considerations or there is non-application of mind, the Court will have to scrutinise the challenge to such remarks with greater seriousness."
There is no dispute with the proposition that confidential reports are made by a competent officer on the basis of subjective satisfaction and the remarks need not contain reasons.
However, at the same time, it is also settled that as and when adverse reports are challenged in a court of law, respondents are required to justify the recording of the remarks on the basis of material available with them.
In the present case, the reporting officer has not clearly mentioned in the Annual Confidential report that the petitioner is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt.
He has also not indicated that integrity of the petitioners is doubtful.
What has been stated is that oral complaints regarding honesty were received.
These remarks being vague and indefinite, no action on the basis of this could have been taken against the petitioner when his case for promotion came up for consideration.
Accordingly, action of the respondents in not considering the case of the petitioner has to be held as arbitrary.
7.
There is yet another aspect of this case.
As noticed, petitioner was promoted as Sub Inspector on 28101984 and confirmed as such on 3111990, i.e. after the recording of Annual Confidential Report for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988.
A Full Bench of this Court in Punjab State and others v. Kulwantbir Singh, 1993(2) SCT 567 (P&H)(FB) : 1993(1) S.L.R.
647, had an occasion to deal with question whether the crossing of efficiency bar by a government servant has the effect of washing away all previous entries in his service record, in the context of retention in service on completion of requisite qualifying service or premature retirement, as the case may be, and further promotion in service.
The Full Bench after laying down broad principles held that ``adverse remarks prior to promotion to a higher post particularly where it is based upon merit and not seniority alone, would lose their significance and such promotion would take away the sting of the adverse remarks against the government servant concerned."
The Supreme Court in Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : 1992(2) S.L.R.
2, while dealing with adverse confidential reports in context of compulsory retirement reiterated the principle that if the government servant is promoted to a higher post, notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
The promotion of the petitioner is governed by Rule 131 of the Punjab Police Rules, Vol.I, Ch.XIII, which prescribes that promotion from one rank to another and one grade to another in the same rank shall be made by selection tempered by seniority.
Efficiency and honesty shall be the main factor governing selection.
When the petitioner was promoted as Sub Inspector on 28101984 and confirmed on this post on 3111990, it can be presumed that he had been found fit for that promotion, as selection has to be made on the basis of merit.
In view of the ratio of aforementioned decisions and Rule 131 of Punjab Police Rules providing for promotion on the basis of selection tempered by seniority, the adverse entry ``oral complaints have been received" recorded for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988 loses its sting as the petitioner was confirmed after the adverse entry had come into existence.
For subsequent promotion, this entry could not have been taken to be an adverse entry.
For this, I also find support from decision of Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No5413 of 1993 (Ajmer Singh v. State of Haryana etc.) dated 1631994 : 1995(1) SCT 307 (P&H)(DB), wherein somewhat similar circumstances, the action of respondents therein is not considering the case of petitioner therein on the basis of adverse entry prior to his confirmation was quashed, being unjust.
8.
Accordingly, Civil Writ Petition No6471 of 1993 is allowed, with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion with effect from the date his immediate juniors were promoted, on consideration of his service record but ignoring the adverse entry which was recorded prior to his confirmation.
Petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits.
9.
In Civil Writ Petition No3373 of 1994, petitioner is aggrieved of order dated 931994 whereby he has been made to retire compulsorily.
Respondents in their written statement have tried to justify this order on the basis of adverse entry of doubtful integrity for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988.
10.
In view of finding recorded in Civil Writ Petition No6471 of 1993 that adverse entry of `integrity doubtful' recorded for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988 be ignored.
Civil Writ Petition No3373 of 1994 too is allowed and order dated 931994 retiring the petitioner compulsorily by taking the entry for the period from 27.6.1987 to 3131988 to be one of `integrity doubtful' is quashed, leaving it open to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner afresh in accordance with law.
No costs.