GS Singhvi, J - Although more than 44 years and 6 months ago, the people of India decided to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist Secular Democratic Republic and further decided to secure to all its citizens equality of status and of opportunity, social, economic and political justice and gave to themselves a written Constitution, equality before law, as enshrined in Articles 14, 15 and 16 continues to be a paper equality for a large segment of the society.
People are forced to seek intervention of the Courts for remedy of those grievances which should normally be remedied by the executive wing of the Government.
Likewise though the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" which is enshrined in Article 39(d) has been treated as an integral part of the doctrine of "equality before law" as contained in Articles 14 and 16, the administrative authorities do not give effect to the said doctrine resulting in avoidable litigations in the Courts.
Case of the petitioners is illustrative of the failure of the respondents to abide by these constitutional dictates.
This is the position even after rendering of a judgment by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2115 of 1972, decided on 22101981, directing the grant of salary to those petitioners, at par with Sanskrit teachers.
2.
All the petitioners are employed as Hindi teachers in Government Schools, which are under the control of the Department of Education of Government of Haryana.
All are substantive in service.
They form cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers and their service conditions are regulated by the provisions of the Haryana Educational Service Class II, School Cadre Rules.
This cadre includes teachers of various disciplines including Sanskrit and Shastries.
There is a common seniority fist of these teachers.
Pay scale of the cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers were revised w.e.f.
1121967 and it was prescribed as Rs. 125-250.
By a subsequent order dated 451968, the State Government further revised pay of language teachers.
Pay scale of Sanskrit Teachers was revised to Rs. 220-400 (85% Posts) and Rs. 400-500 (15% posts).
Pay scales of other language teachers were, however, not revised.
This resulted in a discriminatory situation amongst the teachers belonging to cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers.
3.
Petitioners have pleaded that when there exists a common cadre of teachers in common seniority fist and the same set of rules govern their services, the Government cannot discriminate them in the matter of grant of pay scales or revision thereof.
Petitioners have pleaded that the parity in the pay scales which was maintained till 1968, has been unlawfully disturbed by the respondents.
4.
No reply to the writ petition has been filed and, therefore, avernments made in the writ petition will have to be treated as correct.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that despite a common seniority list of all teachers falling in the cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers, the respondent-Government has singled out Sanskrit teachers for higher pay scales and this has been done without any reason or rhyme.
Learned counsel argued that even though claim of the persons similarly situated was accepted by this Court on 22101981 when Civil Writ Petition No. 2115 of 1972 was allowed, the Government has not extended similar benefits to the petitioner.
Shri Gupta argued that having allowed the order of this Court to attain finality, the respondents cannot thereafter deny benefits of revised pay scales to the petitioners.
5.
Shri Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, could not point anything from the record to show the rationality of the decision of the Government in not giving benefit of revised pay scales to the petitioners.
6.
Burden to prove that discrimination is being practised by the State or its functionaries amongst the members of one group primarily lies on a person who makes a grievance that he has been denied equality before law.
However, once he discharges this primary burden, it becomes obligatory for the respondents to show to the Court that action taken by them does not suffer from any arbitrariness or it is not irrational.
In this case, petitioners have discharged this burden which lay upon them to prima facie show that the action of the respondents suffers from arbitrariness.
The petitioners have unequivocally pleaded that they belong to the Cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers.
Their service conditions are governed by that very set of rules which govern the conditions of service of Sanskrit Teachers.
They have further pleaded that a common seniority list of all Classical and Vernaculer Teachers is being maintained.
When the petitioners have placed sufficient material before the Court to show that there was a total identity between them and Sanskrit Teachers, it was for the respondents to have pleaded and proved that discrimination brought about by revision of pay scales of Sanskrit Teachers, has a reasonable nexus with the purpose sought to be achieved and that no hostile discrimination has been practised by them.
However, the respondents have totally failed in discharging the burden which lay upon them.
They have not produced any material before the Court in the form of pleadings or otherwise to show as to on what ground a distinction has been made between Hindi Teachers on the one hand and Sanskrit Teachers on the other hand.
Having treated all Classical and Vernacular Teachers as members of the same cadre, it was not open to the respondents to have prescribed a higher pay scale for Sanskrit Teachers alone.
By doing so, the respondents have already discriminated the petitioners and have denied them equality before law.
7.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to give benefits of higher pay scales to the petitioners at par with Sanskrit Teachers as ordered by this Court on 22101981 in Civil Writ Petition No. 2115 of 1972.
The respondents should undertake the exercise of giving benefits of this order to the petitioners within a period of six months.
I further direct that similar benefits be extended to other teachers belonging to the cadre of Classical and Vernacular Teachers even though such teachers may have no approached this court by filing a separate writ petition.
This direction is necessary in order to avoid further litigations by similarly situated persons.
Since the respondents have failed to give benefits to the petitioners despite the judgment dated 22101981, they shall pay costs of Rs. 500/- five hundred) to each of the petitioners.
Petition allowed.