GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - The petitioner who has passed MA, and has done M Phil and is presently registered for Post Doctoral Research Work was appointed with effect from 27101987 as Lecturer (History) on temporary basis in the service of Fateh Chand College for Women, Hissar.
Her appointment was preceded by selection made by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
Kurukshetra University (respondent No. 2) with which respondent No. 3 is affiliated, approved petitioner's appointment as a Lecturer in History.
Since the petitioner was appointed against a leave vacancy caused due to the fact that one Mrs. Asha Kiran was on leave, her temporary appointment was continued with short intervals.
Respondent No. 2 also approved the continuance of the petitioner in service upto 3131991.
She was once again selected and was appointed as Lecturer in History upto 3131994.
This time again, the respondent No. 2 approved petitioner's appointment.
Finally Mrs. Asha Kiran resigned from service of respondent No. 3 with effect from 3131994.
Thereafter, the petitioner made a claim for appointment in service on regular basis in view of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana on 20111987 and, therefore, she requested the respondents to regularise her service.
Having failed to persuade the respondents for issuing an appropriate order in her favour, she approached this Court by means of this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to treat her as regularly appointed Lecturer in History at least with effect from the date of availability of the vacancy.
2.
Respondents have resisted the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the policy decision on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner has been superseded vide circular dated 841991.
According to them, a person appointed against a leave vacancy through a regularly constituted Selection Committee can have no right of regular appointment on the availability of regular vacancy and such regular vacancy has to be advertised afresh for making regular appointment.
3.
Mr. Majithia, learned counsel for the petitioner, has strenuously argued that after having rendered 7 years' service, the petitioner has acquired a right to be treated as substantive in service and she cannot be deprived of the only source of her livelihood particularly when the Government has itself formulated a policy of giving the benefit of regularisation to those teachers who were at one time selected for appointment against leave vacancy on the recommendations of duly constituted Selection Committee.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on decisions of this Court in Parveen Chaudhary v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) RSJ 130 : 1995(1) S.C.T.
22 and in Civil Writ Petition No. 3975 of 1991, Miss Vandana Thukral v. State of Haryana and others, decided on February 4, 1994.
Learned counsel for the respondents have pleaded that the policy decision contained in the executive instructions issued by the Government of Haryana on 20111987 stands amended by a subsequent circular dated 841991 and since the leave vacancy caused due to grant of leave in favour of Mrs. Asha Kiran became available as a regular vacancy with effect from 3131994 only, the said vacancy could be filled only by a fresh advertisement.
Learned counsel argued that no right much less a vested right came to acrue in favour of the petitioner on the basis of her selection and appointment against the leave vacancy.
They submitted that the Government which has the power to issue administrative instructions has also the power to supersede, modify or amend such instructions and, therefore, as on 3131994 the instructions issued vide circular dated 841991 would prevail and the same have to be applied by the respondents for the purpose of making appointment against regular vacancy which became available due to the resignation of Mrs. Asha Kiran.
4.
There can be no denying that the post of Lecturer in a aided college is a public office inasmuch as the Government provided 95% grant to the college.
This is the position so far as respondent No. 3 is concerned.
Therefore, any appointment to the post of Lecturer in the service of respondent No. 3 should be made only in accordance with the provisions of the relevant rules and regulations as also in accordance with the equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Even if the rules and regulations had not been framed by the University or the College, it was imperative for them to have acted in consonance with the equality clause contained in the Constitution.
It could have been possible for the respondents to fulfill the requirement of giving opportunity of consideration to all persons only by advertisement of the post and by considering all the eligible persons.
Though, the respondents did make an effort to comply with this requirement, it is evident from the record that the selection on the basis of which the petitioner was appointed in the service of respondent No. 2 was a selection meant for appointment against a leave vacancy.
A large number of eligible candidates may not have applied for the post against the leave vacancy.
It must, therefore, be held that no right came to vest on the petitioner on the basis of her appointment against the leave vacancy made in the year 1987 or in the year 1994 to claim subsequent regularisation of service.
5.
A perusal of the judgment of this Court in Parveen Chaudhary v. State of Haryana (supra) shows that the petitioner in that petition was appointed against the leave vacancy some time in the year 1989 and that appointment was continued.
The holder of the post Smt. Jagroop Kaur resigned from service before March 1991.
Petitioner claimed that the regular vacancy which became available due to the resignation of Smt. Jagroop Kaur should be given to her and her appointment should be treated as regular appointment.
The Court relied on the existing instructions for taking the view that once regular vacancy had become available, the petitioner who stood appointed by a duly constituted Selection Committee had acquired a right to be appointed to the post of Lecturer in Political Science on regular basis.
6.
In Miss Vandana Thukral v. State of Haryana and others case (supra), the petitioner had joined service in August, 1989 against leave vacancy.
In February 1991, regular vacancy became available.
The petitioner claimed appointment on regular basis in view of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana in the year 1987.
Her claim was resisted by the Government on the ground that the new instructions had come into existence in April, 1991.
A learned Single Judge of this Court held that when the vacancy had become available prior to the coming into force of the new policy decision, the said vacancy was required to be filled under the old policy and in view of the old policy, the petitioner was entitled to be considered for regular appointment as Lecturer with effect from the date the regular vacancy became available.
7.
In my opinion, neither of these decisions help the case of the petitioner.
In those cases regular vacancy had become available prior to the issue of circular dated 841991 and due to this reason the Court held that in respect of the vacancy which became available prior to 841991 the incumbent who had been selected for appointment against a leave vacancy was entitled to be regularised.
In fact, the petitioner's case is fully covered by another decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4637 of 1992, Dr. Purshotam Dass v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) S.C.T.
336, decided on October 28, 1992.
In that case, this Court has held that after the issue of circular dated 841991, a person appointed as Lecturer against leave vacancy does not get any right to be regularised in the service even though he/she may have been appointed against the leave vacancy on the recommendation of a duly constituted Selection Committee.
8.
In view of the above it must be held that the petitioner did not acquire any legal right to be regularised in service with effect from 3131994 i.e. the date on which the regular vacancy in the cadre of Lecturer in History became available with the resignation of Mrs Asha Kiran.
9.
Mr. Majithia lastly submitted that with effect from October 15, 1994 the petitioner has once again been appointed as Lecturer in History but she has been offered fixed salary of Rs. 2500/- per month and she has not accepted the amount of fixed salary and she is working without getting any pay.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 3 submitted that he does not have any information about the re-employment of the petitioner and, therefore, he is not in position to make any statement to counter the statement made by Mr. Majithia.
In my view if at all the petitioner has been given a fresh appointment as Lecturer in History, there can be little justification for not paying any pay to her in the same manner in which it was paid upto 3131994.
Therefore, it appears to be just and proper to direct respondent No. 3 to make payment of salary to the petitioner in the regular time scale for the period during which she works as Lecturer in History.
10.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed subject to a direction that for the period for which the petitioner works as Lecturer in History, she shall be paid salary in the regular time scale.
This shall, however, not confer any right on the petitioner to claim regularisation in service at any time in future and it shall be open to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to make regular appointment by advertising the post.
Costs made easy.
Petition dismissed.