GS Singhvi, J - Petitioners Swinder Singh, Kirpal Singh, Manmohan Singh and Balwant Singh have jointly filed this petition with a prayer for issue of a direction to the respondents to promote them as Agriculture Inspectors against the 18% promotion quota in terms of Government's circular dated 19.1.1983 (Annexure R-3/1).
Averments made in this petition and the reply filed by the different respondents show that petitioner Swinder Singh has passed class 8th and having joined service on 1.4.1958 he has by now rendered 36 years of service.
Petitioner Kirpal Singh has also passed class 8th examination and having joined service in the year 1964, he has rendered over 30 years of service by now.
Petitioner Manmohan Singh has passed Gyani examination in Punjabi.
He joined service as Beldar.
He was later on appointed as Agriculture Sub Inspector in the year 1964 and by now he has rendered over 30 years of service.
Petitioner Balwant Singh has passed matric examination.
He has completed 29 years of service and has also passed six months training in horticulture.
2.
Persons holding the posts of Sub Inspectors were at one time eligible to be promoted as Agriculture Inspectors on the basis of their seniority and 20 years service.
However, by Annexure P-3, the Government of Punjab issued policy instructions for promotion of Agriculture Inspector from the post of Agriculture Sub Inspector.
In these instructions it came to be provided that 18% of the posts in the cadre of Agriculture Inspectors shall be filled from amongst the Agriculture Sub Inspectors, who are matriculate and have rendered over 20 years of service and have also passed Agriculture Sub Inspector's training course of any recognised institution.
The criteria for promotion is seniority-cum-merit.
3.
Petitioners contention is that although they had completed 20 years of service as early as in 1978, 1984 and 1985 respectively and a number of persons junior to them have been given promotion as Agriculture Inspectors, their candidature has not been considered.
Petitioners have relied on order dated 2441991 passed in C.W.P.
No. 9696 of 1987 Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others and also an order dated 11121992 passed in C.W.P.
No. 2600 of 1992 Amar Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have contested the claim made by the petitioners by stating that none of the petitioners fulfil the conditions of eligibility as specified in circular dated 19.1.1983.
According to them three of the petitioners do not possess the qualification of matric pass and none of them has undergone Agriculture Sub Inspector training course of a recognised institution.
On the strength of these assertions respondents have pleaded that in terms of the circular dated 19.1.1983, the petitioners cannot claim right to be considered for promotion.
Respondents have pleaded that the posts of Agriculture Inspector became available in the year 1987.
Prior to that no person junior to the petitioners had been promoted and after 19.1.1983, the petitioners are not entitled to be considered because they are not having the minimum requisite qualifications specified in the circular annexure P-3.
In regard to the two judgments of this Court dated 2441991 and 11121992, respondents have stated that those petitioners possessed the qualifications specified in the circular dated 19.1.1983 and, therefore, they had been treated eligible to be considered for promotion as Agriculture Inspectors.
It has also been stated that only petitioner No. 4 can be taken at par with Amar Singh, one of the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 2600 of 1992.
4.
Learned counsel argued that, since the petitioners acquired 20 years of experience as early as in 1978, 1984, and 1985, they should have been considered for promotion irrespective of the fact that they did not possess the minimum qualification specified in the circular dated 19.1.1983.
Alternative submission of the learned counsel is that petitioner No. 4 stands at par with Amar Singh and since Amar Singh has been given promotion in view of Court's order dated 11121992, at least petitioner No. 4 should be ordered to be given promotion with retrospective effect.
Yet another submission of the learned counsel is that irrespective of the qualifications prescribed in the circular dated 19.1.1983, the petitioners can be ordered to be promoted on account of their length of service.
His last submission is that even if the petitioners are not allowed promotion at least selection grade should be given to them, else they would retire without getting even a single promotion.
Learned A.A.G.
has submitted that upto 19.1.1983, the petitioner's had not been superseded by any junior persons and after 19.1.1983, they can be given promotion only if they fulfil the conditions of eligibility and since petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3 do not fulfil the conditions of eligibility and since petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3 do not fulfill the conditions of eligibility, they have no right to be promoted.
He, however, fairly stated that the case of petitioner No. 4 stands at par with Amar Singh and the Court may consider his case for grant of appropriate direction.
5.
From the facts which have been placed on record by the two sides, it is abundantly clear that the petitioners have not been superseded by any junior person against the vacancies which were available as on 1811983.
Therefore, they can have no legitimate grievance in respect of the promotions made upto 1811983.
In respect of vacancies which became available on or after 19.1.1983, promotions could be made by the respondents No. 1 and 2 only from amongst those who fulfilled the conditions of eligibility.
Petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3 are neither matriculate nor have they passed the training course of Sub Inspector from a recognised institution.
Thus it is an admitted position that the three petitioners do not fulfil the minimum conditions of eligibility as specified in circular dated 19.1.1983.
Being ineligible to be considered for promotion the petitioners cannot make a grievance and they cannot be heard to say that persons junior to them have been given promotion superseding their claim.
In my considered opinion neither any legal nor any fundamental right of petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3 has been infringed by any action or omission of the respondents.
6.
Submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that they should be ordered to be given promotion on account of length of service cannot be accepted for the simple reason that the petitioner's case is not one of total absence of any avenue of promotion.
They do have an avenue of promotion inasmuch as they can be promoted as Agriculture Inspectors from the lower cadre of Sub Inspectors.
It is a different thing that they do not fulfil the conditions of eligibility and for this reason, they are not entitled to be promoted as Agriculture Inspectors.
Petitioners may have suffered a hardship on account of the fact that they have not got a single promotion during their service career.
However, that is a matter, on which the Government can take decision after application of mind.
So far as the Court is concerned, no direction can possibly be given in favour of the petitioners for their promotion or grant of selection grade merely because they have served for sufficiently long period.
7.
In so far as the petitioner Balwant Singh is concerned, in view of the admissions made in paragraph Nos. 12 and 14 of the reply, it is clear that his case stands at par with the case of Amar Singh.
Amar Singh has been promoted in view of the judgment of this Court as the respondents No. 1 and 2 have implemented the direction given by this Court for Amar Singh's promotion as Agriculture Inspector.
Therefore, a suitable direction deserves to be given in so far as Balwant Singh is concerned.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed in so far as it relates to petitioners No. 1, 2 and 3.
In respect of petitioner No. 4, it is allowed.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to consider the case of petitioner Balwant Singh for promotion as Agriculture Inspector on the same footing on which Amar Singh's case was considered (in pursuance of Court's order dated 11121992).
His case shall be considered for promotion with effect from the date persons junior to him in the cadre of Sub Inspectors have been promoted.
In the event of his being found suitable for promotion to the post of Agriculture Inspector on the basis of his record, petitioner Balwant Singh should be given promotion with retrospective effect.
He should be given benefit of fixation of pay (notional) with retrospective effect.
Actual monetary benefits should be given to this petitioner with effect from 31.8.1993 i.e. the date of filing of this petition.
Ordered accordingly.