NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of mandamus to the respondents to consider the petitioner for the post of Art and Craft Teacher with a further direction that she be appointed as Art and Craft Teacher from the date candidates lower in merit have been appointed.
2.
In pursuance to the advertisement (Annexure P-1) petitioner possessing qualification of Art and Craft Teacher Training Course, applied for consideration.
Petitioner was interviewed by the District Education Officer on August 28, 1991 and no objection was raised with regard to her qualification.
It is subsequently that the selection was quashed by this Hon'ble Court and the matter went to the Supreme Court which was sent back with the directions to consider the claim of those candidates who were selected.
It is once again that the petitioner was interviewed on November, 18, 1992 as a scheduled caste candidate and was successful.
However, petitioner was denied appointment on the ground that the certificate issued by the Department of Technical and Industrial Training, Punjab is not recognised by the State of Haryana and so her claim though recognised on merits was declined.
It is this order which has been assailed by the petitioner on the ground of discrimination and also contrary to the decision of this court wherein it was conceded by the Government counsel that persons possessing the requisite qualification from Punjab will be considered on its merit and persons having already been inducted in the service would be regularised.
In addition to it, the petitioner contends that there has been no conscious decision by the respondents by which it can be inferred that Art and Craft Teachers Course from Punjab stands dereconised.
3.
In pursuance of the notice of motion having been issued by the court, respondents have put in appearance and filed written statement.
By way of preliminary objection it has been urged that petitioner has passed her Art and Craft Teacher Training Examination from the Department of Technical Education, Industrial Training, Punjab which is not recognised by the State of Haryana.
It has been further stated that the Degrees and Diplomas issued by the other State Governments are governed by the instructions contained in Haryana Government's letter No. 2140-Edu.
II(4)-75/77-84 dated 1831975 (Annexure R- 1).
It has further been stated that Diplomas issued by other States are recognised on reciprocal basis.
Since the certificates issued by the State of Haryana have not been recognised by the Punjab Government, the present certificate possessed by the petitioner has rightly not been considered to be equivalent to the one issued by the Haryana Education Board.
On merits, it has been averred that no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed which could entitle her to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this court.
As regards the concession given by the counsel in the earlier writ petition, it has been stated that the facts of the case were quite different as in those cases petitioners were already working as ad hoc employees.
It was, thus, prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed with costs.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant material referred to by the respective counsel during the course of arguments.
Factual aspects are not much in this dispute.
Petitioner possessed her certificate duly issued by the Department of Industrial Training, Punjab (Annexure P-2) having passed two years Course of Arts and Crafts Teacher Training, the requisite qualification sought from the perspective candidate as per advertisement (Annexure P-1).
Admittedly, no objection with regard to the qualification possessed by the petitioner was raised by the respondents at the time when she submitted her candidature for consideration.
She was interviewed on 28.8.1991 and again on 18.11.1992 (as per directions of the Supreme Court) and was successful.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his case relied upon the earlier decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 388/1984 wherein Deputy Advocate General, Haryana at the bar that Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates possessed by the petitioners have been recognised by the Haryana Government.
According to the counsel for the petitioner, identical objection was raised as in the present case.
Thus, in view of the binding precedent, the objection now raised by the respondents pales into insignificance.
Even subsequently Director, School Education, Haryana vide letter dated 1221984 (Annexure P-4) ordered for regularisation of persons, appointed as ad hoc teachers though those teachers had passed their training course from outside the State of Haryana.
This way, the Education Department, Haryana had recognised the Certificate/Diploma possessed by a candidate from Punjab to be an equivalent qualification.
6.
Learned Addl.
Advocate General, Haryana has tried to distinguish the earlier order of this Court dated October 12, 1984 in Civil Writ Petition No. 388/1984 on the ground that those persons had already been working as teachers and so it was thought appropriate by the Government not to throw them out for the solitary reason that Diplomas/Degrees/Certificates possessed by them were not recognised by the Haryana Government.
Similarly, letters issued by the Director, School Education Board, Haryana dated 1221984 was intended to protect persons who are already in the employment of the department.
In any case, on the basis of Annexures P-3 and P-4 one can infer that State Government has recognised.
Certificates/Diplomas/Degrees from Punjab as equivalent qualification for the purpose of consideration in the State of Haryana.
We do not find much merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
Admittedly, there is no conscious decision by the Government since issuance of letter (Annexure P-4) dated 1221984 by which Diploma in Art and Crafts (two years) from Punjab (Industrial Training Department) has been taken to be an equivalent course certificate in the Education Department of the State of Haryana.
It is thus, can be stated that a certificate possessed by the petitioner is equivalent to the one recognised by the State of Haryana.
This precise objection was subject matter of the adjudication in Civil Writ Petition No. 467 of 1987 decided on 2031991 Sharanjit v. State of Haryana and Others.
It has been held that the action of the respondents suffers from vice of arbitrariness.
In the present case, facts are almost identical.
It has been admitted by the learned Addl.
Advocate General, Haryana that State did not challenge the decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 467/1987 by way of letters patent appeal and so the same has become final.
Petitioner's claim that she was selected, has not been specifically denied by the respondents.
We accept the petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment with effect from the date when others selected along with her, were appointed.
This direction be complied with within a period of two months from today.
No order as to costs.