VK Bali, J - Krishan Kumar Sharma, petitioner herein through this petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated 181975, Annexure P-13, vide which he was reverted to his parent department as his service was no longer required in the department of Prosecution and Litigation and was asked to report for duty to the Police Department.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner joined the service of Police Department on 2121960 as Constable.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 16.11.1966.
While in service, he continued his academic studies and obtained degree of BA in the year 1965 and degree of LL.B.
in the year 1968 from the Panjab University.
In the month of September, 1969, a post of Prosecuting Sub Inspector fell vacant and he was appointed as Prosecuting Sub Inspector w.e.f.
September 23, 1969 on ad hoc basis.
A copy of the appointment letter in this behalf has been placed on record as ANNEXURE P-1 and a perusal thereof clearly manifests that he was appointed as temporary Prosecuting Sub Inspector for a period of four months only on temporary basis in the scale of Rs. 250-450.
He continued as Prosecuting Sub Inspector for about one year and discharged the duties on the said post, according to him, most satisfactorily till August 13, 1970 when he was sent on deputation to the Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Chandigarh as Assistant Central Intelligence Officer Grade II which post was equal to that of the Prosecution Sub Inspector in the Punjab State.
He took over his assignment in the Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau on August 19, 1970.
He served in the said Department upto 11.7.1973.
During the tenure of his deputation, he submitted an application to the Inspector General of Police for regularisation of his services as Prosecuting Sub Inspector but the later approved his appointment again as Prosecuting Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis which post he joined as such at Hoshiarpur on 1871973.
It is pleaded that he continued to work as Prosecuting Sub Inspector most satisfactorily uptill 31.3.1974 when the prosecution agency in the State was separated from the Police Department and all the Prosecuting Sub Inspectors were appointed as Assistant District Attorneys Grade II with effect from 141974 under the newly created Directorate of Prosecution and Litigation.
The name of the petitioner was included in this list at serial No. 74.
The total list was of 118 Assistant District Attorneys Grade II.
Earlier, all the Prosecuting Sub Inspectors in the State of Punjab were asked to give options for their appointment in the new Directorate on a prescribed proforma duly attested by a Gazetted Officer.
The petitioner submitted his option duly attested before his appointment as Assistant District Attorney Grade-II.
It is pleaded that thereafter, Director of Prosecution and Litigation, Punjab, vide letter dated 2641974 addressed to all the District Attorneys and the Assistant District Attorneys sought their service data on the prescribed proforma.
The petitioner continued to work as Assistant District Attorney Grade II most satisfactorily and his inter-se seniority was also fixed amongst the Assistant District Attorneys Grade II at serial No. 123 in the order issued on 11.9.1974.
However, he was shown as Prosecuting Sub Inspector w.e.f.
1871973 and not from 2391969 when he was appointed for the first time as Prosecuting Sub Inspector.
Aggrieved against this, he filed a representation on 9101974 requesting for counting of his entire service as Prosecuting Sub Inspector w.e.f.
2391969 and also prayed for regularisation of his service in terms of the policy of the Punjab Government as contained in the circular dated 29.1.1973, Annexure P-12.
Instead, however, vide orders dated 181975, Annexure P/13, he was reverted from the post of Assistant District Attorney Grade II to the Police Department.
It is this order, as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment that has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents, it has been pleaded that all the posts of Prosecuting Sub Inspectors of Police were abolished w.e.f.
April 1, 1974 consequent upon the separation of Prosecution Agency from the Police Department.
All Prosecution Sub Inspectors, who were borne on the strength of Police Department on March 31, 1974 were appointed as Assistant District Attorneys Grade-II in the pay scale of Rs. 350-15-380/20-500/20-600 subject to the condition that they were to be deemed to be permanent/temporary/ad hoc Assistant District Attorneys (hereinafter referred to as ADAs) in accordance with the position held by them as Prosecuting Sub Inspectors in the Police Department and their inter se seniority which they held in the Police Department, had to remain intact while fixing their seniority in the joint seniority list of ADAs of the enter cadres.
The term of petitioner which was ad hoc was extended for a further period of six months upto March 31, 1975 vide orders dated December 9, 1974.
His term beyond March 31, 1975 had, however, not been extended and services of petitioner being no longer required, he was reverted to the Police Department vide memo dated August 1, 1975.
He was relieved by the District Attorney, Hoshiarpur on August 4, 1975.
Consequently the tenure of his adhoc appointment was extended upto August 4, 1975 for releasing his pay for the remaining period he worked as ADA vide order dated September 2, 1975.
Even though name of petitioner appeared at Sr. No. 74 in the order of Director of Prosecution and Litigation and Joint Secretary to Government of Punjab dated March 27, 1974 appointing various Prosecuting Sub Inspectors of Police as ADAs w.e.f.
April 1, 1974 and his name appeared against Sr. No. 123 in the provisional joint seniority list of the ADAs as on April 1, 1974, he being ad hoc Prosecution Sub Inspector on March 31, 1974, was treated as an Ad hoc ADAs w.e.f.
April 1, 1974 in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
As he was an ad hoc ADA, there was no question of fixation of his seniority with the regular ADAs from April 1, 1974.
It is further pleaded that petitioner was reverted from the post of ADA on administrative grounds.
He was an ad hoc ADA and as such had no right to hold the post or claim it.
His services were no longer required and he was, therefore, reverted to his parent department vide memo dated August 1, 1975.
It is further pleaded that petitioner could be reverted any time in accordance with the condition of his appointment without any opportunity of being heard or serving with notice of any kind.
He had no right to claim the post and was reverted to his parent department on consideration of his performance.
4.
Separate written statement has also been filed by respondent No. 2 SJB Ohri, IPS Assistant Inspector General of Police, Punjab but no specific mention of the same requires to be made as the contents thereof are reiteration of the facts mentioned in the written statement filed by respondent No. 1.
S Balram Singh Cheema, Deputy Director Prosecution who has also filed an additional affidavit wherein it has been pleaded that upon the separation of Prosecution Agency in the State from the Police Department, 17 Prosecuting Sub Inspectors were appointed as ADAs purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months in the first instance w.e.f.
April 1, 1974.
Petitioner was one of the above said 17 persons.
The period of ad hoc appointment of those ADAs was extended vide order dated December 9, 1974 for another six months.
At the time of giving second extension in the tenure of ad hoc appointments of those ADAs, a special report regarding their performance was called for vide memo dated April 18, 1975.
On the basis of performance, the tenure of ad hoc appointment of petitioner and one Yogesh Chand was not extended beyond March 31, 1975 and he was, thus, revert to his parent department i.e. the Police Department.
5.
Petitioner has filed replication to the affidavit of S Balram Singh Cheema wherein it has been pleaded that record of petitioner was all through good.
6.
Mr. Sarwan Singh, learned counsel appearing of behalf of petitioner realising that appointment of petitioner was on ad hoc basis and he was a temporary employee, has raised solitary point for consideration and, that is, that once it is proved from the records of the case that petitioner was reverted on the ground that his service record was not good, the impugned order would visit the petitioner with evil consequences and the same, thus, could only be passed after issuing show cause notice to petitioner and after hearing him in the matter and holding an enquiry.
It is in this strain that learned counsel argues that the impugned order of reversion is violative of Articles 14 and 311 of the Constitution of India.
A specific reference has been made by learned counsel to the averments made in the additional affidavit wherein it has been specifically mentioned that petitioner was reverted when a special report regarding his performance was called for vide department memo dated April 18, 1975 and it is on the basis of that report that the tenure of his ad hoc appointment was not extended beyond April 31, 1975.
Annexure R-2 vide which the Director of Prosecution had asked for recording of special report of ADAs, it is argued, clearly mentions that information with regard to general reputation and honesty etc. be also given.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am, however, of the opinion that there is no merit in the contention raised by learned counsel for petitioner and, therefore, this petition must fail.
The apex Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 (SC) has held, "Under the service jurisprudence a temporary employee has no right to hold the post and his services are liable to be terminated in accordance with the relevant service Rules and the terms of contract of service.
If on the perusal of the character roll entries or on the basis of preliminary inquiry on the allegations made against an employee, the competent authority is satisfied that the employee is not suitable for the service whereupon the services of the temporary employee are terminated, an exception can be taken to such an order of termination.
"it was further held," A temporary Govt. servant has no right to hold the post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Government servant.
A temporary Government servant can however be dismissed from service by way of punishment.
Whenever the competent Authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his service in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary government servant.
If it decides to take punitive action, it may hold a formal enquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the government servant in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Since a temporary government servant is also entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) in the same manner as a permanent government servant, very often the question arises whether an order of termination is in accordance with the contract of service and relevant rules regulating the temporary employment or it is by way of punishment.
It is now well settled that the form of the order is not conclusive and it is open to the Court to determine the true nature of the order.
In Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, 1958 SCR 828, a Constitution Bench of this Court held that the mere use of expression like 'terminate' or 'discharge' is not conclusive and in spite of the use of such expressions the Court may determine the true nature of the order of ascertain whether the action taken against the government servant is punitive in nature.
The Supreme Court further held that in determining the true nature of the order, the Court should apply two tests, namely : (1) whether the temporary government servant had a right to the post or the rank or (2) whether he had been visited with evil consequence; and if either of the tests is satisfied, it must be held that the order of termination of temporary government servant is by way of punishment.
It must be borne in mind that a temporary government servant has no right to hold the post and termination of such a government servant does not visit him with any evil consequences.
The evil consequence as held in Purshotam Lal Dhingra's case (supra) do not include the termination of services of a temporary government servant in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service."
Mr. Sarwan Singh, however, contends that even though the tenure of petitioner was ad hoc or temporary but since the impugned order visited him with evil consequences, the second test as extracted above, would certainly clothe the impugned order with the character that the same would be punitive in nature.
I am unable to accept this contention as it is in every order of dismissal or reversion that evil consequences would follow but it is not in that context that the apex Court has laid down the test of visiting a person with evil consequences.
It is rather to see if such an order would come in the way of a citizen in securing some other employment with the Government.
The judgment relied upon by Mr. Sarwan Singh in the case of Anoop Jaiswal v. Govt. of India, 1984(1) SLR 426, can not come to the rescue of petitioner as the facts of the said case clearly reveal that the impugned order of termination was passed in the middle of the probation period.
An explanation was called from Anoop Jaiswal regarding the alleged act of indiscipline, namely, arriving late at the Gymnasium and acting as one of the ring leaders on the occasion and an explanation was obtained.
Similar explanations were called for from other probationers and enquiries were made behind the back of those persons, and it was only the case of Anoop Jaiswal which was dealt with severely in the end.
From the facts quoted above those, it was proved that the order was passed on allegations and in fact it had come into existence on account of misconduct of the persons concerned.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition falls and is dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.