R S Mongia, J (Oral) - Prior to 2111982 the post of Homoeopathic Physician in the State of Punjab was within the purview of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
From the said date, the post was taken out of the purview of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Before 2111982, petitioner Nos. 1, 3 & 4 were appointed as Homoeopathic Physicians purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the appointment of suitable candidates through the Punjab Public Service Commission, whichever was earlier.
These ad hoc appointments had been made by the Departmental Selection Committee, after names were sponsored by various Employment Exchanges, purely as stop-gap arrangements to await the appointment of suitable candidates through Punjab Public Service Commission.
These ad hoc appointments had been extended from time to time.
2.
In response to an advertisement issued in January, 1982 for the posts of Homoeopathic Physicians, petitioner No. 1 had applied for the same and was recommended by the Public Service Commission vide its letter dated 1091982 and was given appointment on regular basis w.e.f.
2111982.
Petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 were selected by the Departmental Selection Committee on 1171983 after the post of Homoeopathic Physician had been taken out of the purview of the Punjab Public Service Commission and were given regular appointment on the basis of fresh selection w.e.f.
1171983.
Petitioner No. 2 was selected and given regular appointment w.e.f.
17.7.1984.
For determining the seniority, the service rendered by petitioner Nos. 1, 3 & 4 on ad hoc basis has not been taken into account and their services for the purpose of seniority has been reckoned only from the date of their regular appointment.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 were posted for some period at District Headquarters where they were bestowed with the powers of Drawing and Disbursing Officers.
In the present petition, the grievance of petitioner Nos. 1, 3 & 4 is that the seniority list has been wrongly framed by ignoring their ad hoc service.
If such ad hoc service is taken into account, they would become senior to many persons and such promotions to the next higher rank of junior persons would be liable to be quashed.
The grievance made by petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 is that for the period they had discharged the duties of Drawing & Disbursing Officers, they were entitled to higher pay scale having discharged the duties of higher responsibility.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that when the petitioners were appointed on ad hoc basis, the same process had been gone into which was required to be gone into at the time of regular appointment and they having been regularly appointed later on were entitled to count the period of ad hoc service towards seniority.
Primary reliance by the petitioners was placed on two judgments of the Apex Court in G P Doval v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP., 1984(2) SLR 555 and The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 SC 1607.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the initial appointment was not made on regular basis as the appointment on regular basis could only be made through the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The petitioners were appointed on purely ad hoc basis and it was only a stop-gap arrangement till the regular appointments were made through the Public Service Commission.
The appointments were made only from amongst the sponsored candidates from the Employment Exchange and the consideration of the candidates by the Department Selection Committee was only with the idea to make temporary and stop-gap arrangements and was not for the purpose of making regular appointments.
He further submitted that since after 2111982, the posts in question had been taken out of the purview of the Public Service Commission, petitioner Nos. 3 & 4 were selected afresh in July, 1983 by the Departmental Selection Committee when cases of all eligible persons who had applied for the posts were considered by the said Committee with the idea of making regular appointments.
On the basis of judgment of Supreme Court rendered in the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association case (supra) and in Union of India v. Professor S K Sharma, 1992(2) SCT 330 : AIR 1992(2) SC 1188, learned counsel submitted that since the initial appointment was only on ad hoc basis and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Admittedly, when the ad hoc appointment of petitioner Nos. 1, 3 & 4 was made, the post in question was required to be filled through the recommendations of the Public Service Commission and the Departmental Selection Committee has no authority to select and fill in the posts on regular basis.
The appointment letters, which were issued to the petitioners clearly stated that the appointment was purely ad hoc and was for only a period of six months or till the regular appointees through the Public Service Commission came and joined, whichever was earlier.
This clearly shows that it was a stop-gap arrangement to tide over a particular contingency i.e. awaiting the appointment of the candidates through the Public Service Commission.
The consideration by the Departmental Selection Committee for selecting the candidates was only to make a stop-gap arrangement and not regular appointments, as the standard of selection may differ for making only ad hoc appointments and regular appointments.
Apart from this when ad hoc appointments were made by the Departmental Selection Committee, the regular appointments were to be made only through the Commission.
In Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association case (supra), while summing up the principles regarding determination of seniority, one of the principles laid down in para 44 is as under :-  "(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
In Professor S K Sharma's case (supra), the Apex Court reiterated the abovesaid principle and while doing so, noticed two earlier judgments of the Supreme Court in Masood Akhtar Khan v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1990), 4 SCC 24 and D N Agrawal v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1990 SC 1311.
In paras 6 & 7 of the judgment rendered in Professor S K Sharma's case (supra), it was observed as follows by the Apex Court :  6.
In Masood Akhtar Khan v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1990) 4 SCC 24 it was held that if the initial appointment is not made according to the rules, subsequent regularisation of his service does not entitle an employee to the benefit of intervening service for seniority.
Seniority has to be reckoned from the date of regular appointment and not to be counted from the date of any stop-gap appointment.
7.
In D N Agrawal v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1990) 2 SCC 553 : (AIR 1990 SC 1311) it was held that regular appointment at later date cannot relate back to the date of ad hoc appointment and the employee is not entitled to claim the period of officiation between the dates of ad hoc appointment and regular appointment for being counted for the purpose of seniority.
A Constitution Bench of this Court in Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, (1990) 2 SCC 715 : (AIR 1990 SC 1607) held as under :-  "Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
Seniority cannot be determined on the sole test of confirmation, for, confirmation is one of the inglorious uncertainties of Government service depending neither on efficiency of the incumbent nor on the availability of substantive vacancies.
The principle for deciding inter se seniority has to conform to the principles of equality spelt out by Articles 14 & 16.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
Learned counsel for the petitioners, however, urged that the case of the petitioner is covered by principle (B) laid down by the Apex Court in the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association's case.
Principle (B) is in the following terms :  "(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the most uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted."
Learned Counsel also drew my attention to para 13 in G P Doval's case (supra).
6.
In the abovesaid two authorities, relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners, it is clear that if the initial regular appointment is made by not following the rules, but later on the same Authority makes the regular appointment by following the rules or the Authority, which was to make regular appointments approves the earlier appointment, then in such a case the entire period of service of a person, though initially not appointed in accordance with the Rules, will have to be counted.
However, in the present case, the initial appointment was neither regular appointment, nor it was sought to be so made.
It would have been different, if the initial appointment was made on regular basis but the procedure had not been followed and later on that defect was rectified.
The initial appointment in this case was sought to be made only as a stop-gap arrangement and regular appointment was to be made by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
I am of the considered view that the case of the petitioner is covered by Principle (A) noticed above as well as the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Professor S K Sharma's case.
Consequently, I hold that the petitioners are not entitled to count their ad hoc service for the purpose of seniority.
7.
Coming to the other grievance made by the petitioner Nos. 1 & 2 that for some period they were given additional duty of Drawing and Disbursing Officer when they were working in the Headquarters, and, therefore, they were entitled to higher pay.
8.
In para 7 of the written statement, it has been averred as under :-  7.
"That Government vide orders dated 4121986 (Annexure P-4) declared the Homoeopathic Physicians then posted at District Headquarters as Drawing and Disbursing Officers and again Govt. vide orders dated 3181987 (Annexure P-5) revised the structure of classification of transfer in Govt. accounts, declaring of Drawing and Disbursing Officers.
At the time of initial orders dated 4121986 (Annexure P-4) the pay scales of Physicians was Rs. 750-1300 and the pay scale of physicians posted at District Headquarters and Physicians posted in other dispensaries was identical.
Before 4121986, there was no transfer policy that senior Physicians should be posted at District Headquarters Dispensaries.
Keeping in view the identical pay scale the physician then posted at Distt.
Headquarters Dispensaries were declared as Drawing and Disbursing Officers as a stop-gap arrangement, in addition to their own duties, as an administrative measure for the disbursement of pay to the employees.
The scales of Homoeopathic Physicians were revised on 3181988 from Rs. 750-1300 to Rs. 1800-3200 and that of the Incharge of District Level Homoeopathic Dispensary to Rs. 2000-3500 which was subsequently revised to Rs. 2200-4000/-.
The post of Incharge of Distt.
Level Homoeopathic Dispensary is in a higher scale as compared to the post of Homoeopathic Physicians.
14 posts were upgraded as Incharge of Distt.
Level Homoeopathic Dispensary in the scale of Rs. 2000-3500 on the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission.
The promotions to these posts of higher scale was made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit vide orders dated 26.3.1992 (Annexure R-2).
The Physicians who were junior in the seniority list and were working at Distt.
Headquarters Dispensary were adjusted in other dispensaries."
9.
It will be evident from the above that only a stop-gap arrangement was made when the petitioner Nos. 1 & 2 were asked to discharge the duties of Drawing and Disbursing Officers in addition to their own duties.
Since the pay scales of the Homoeopathic Physicians at the Headquarters and other places was the same, therefore, it was not necessary that only seniormost Physicians were to be posted at the Headquarters.
It was a part of the duty at the Headquarters that the incumbents were to act as Drawing and Disbursing Officers also.
For this, they were not entitled to any additional pay or higher pay scale.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.