SK Jain, J - Ram Sarup Jindal deceased/appellant herein (now legally represented by his son Padmesh Kumar Jindal), born on 2081918, joined the services of the erstwhile princely State of Jind as Kanungo on 12.6.1940.
He was confirmed in the said State.
He was promoted as Saddar Kanungo on 1151946 and Naib Tehsildar on 2471976.
On the merger of Jind State with the erstwhile State of Pepsu, he was integrated as Naib Tehsildar.
He was promoted as Tehsildar on 28.10.1954 by the Pepsu Government.
The State of Pepsu merged with the erstwhile State of Punjab with effect from 1111956.
He was selected and promoted to PCS (Executive) on 18662 in the erstwhile State of Punjab.
On the eve of reorganisation of the State of Punjab on November 1, 1966, he was allocated to the present State of Punjab.
Ram Sarup Jindal retired as PCS (Executive) from the State of Punjab on attaining the age of 58 years on August 31, 1976 as per service rules applicable to the employees of the State of Punjab.
2.
Ram Sarup Jindal filed Civil Suit No. 443-T of 27101980/82 in the Court of Shri RK Tyagi, Sub Judge, 1st Class, Patiala (B), against his retirement on the plea that according to the condition of service applicable to the employees of the erstwhile princely State of Jind and that he was entitled to continue in service till he attained the age of 62 years.
Learned trial Court vide his judgment and decree dated 1641984 decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
The State filed Civil Appeal No. 22-T/86 of 2371984 which was allowed by Shri MS Luna, learned Additional District Judge, Patiala, vide his judgment and decree dated 3031987.
3.
It is that judgment and decree of the first appellate court which has been appealed against by the plaintiff and which requires my examination of its sustainability or wages including subsistence allowance during suspension, the periodical increments, pay scale, leave, Provident Fund, Gratuity, confirmation, promotion, seniority, tenure or termination of service, compulsory or premature retirement, superannuation, pension, changing the age of superannuation, deputation and disciplinary proceedings.
In view of the abovesaid judgment of the Supreme Court there should be no hesitation in concluding that change in the age of superannuation is certainly a condition of service.
4.
The question doing rounds right now is as to whether in the circumstances of this case, this condition of service could be changed, and if at all it could be changed, what procedure should have been followed ?
5.
A copy of Pepsu Code of Laws Vol. II is placed on record as Ex. PC.
The appendix to the said volume contains the covenant entered into by the Rulers of Faridabad, Jind, Kapurthala, Nabha, Patiala, Kalsia and Nalagarh States in the formation of Patiala and East Punjab States Union (PEPSU State).
Article XVI of the said covenant reads as under :-  (1) The Union hereby guarantees either the continuance in service of the permanent members of the public services of each of the Covenanting States on conditions which will not be less advantageous than those on which they were serving on the 1st of February, 1948 or the payment of reasonable compensation or retirement on proportionate pension.
(2) The Union further guarantees the continuance of pension and leave salaries sanctioned by competent authorities in any of the Covenanting States to members of the public services of that State who have retired, or proceeded on leave preparatory to retirement, and the compassionate allowances granted to dependents of deceased members of those services, before the date on which the administration of that State is handed over to the Raj Pramukh.
6.
Provisions of Sections 115 and 116 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 and Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1956, which are relevant herein are also reproduced below :-  "Section 115 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956.
115.
Provisions relating to other services -  (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the Lieutenant-Governor or Chief Commissioner in any of the existing States of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg, Kutoh and Vindhya Pradesh, or is serving in connection with the affairs of any of the existing States of Mysore, Punjab, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and Saurashtra shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the successor State to the existing State.
(2) Every person, who, immediately before the appointed day, if serving in connection with the affairs of an existing State part of whose territories is transferred to another State by the provisions of Part II shall, as from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the principal successor State to that existing State, unless he is required by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of any other successor State.
(3) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub-section (2) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.
(4) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (3) to a successor State shall if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in that successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Government concerned, and in default of such a agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.
(5) The Central Government may by order establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to :  (a) The division and integration of services among the new States and the State of Andhra Pradesh and Madras; and  (b) The ensuring fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this section and the proper consideration of any representation made by such persons.
(6) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any persons to whom the provisions of Section 14, apply.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect after the appointed day of the operation of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State.
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantages except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
116.
Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same posts -  (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the Union or of an existing State in any area which on that day falls within another existing State or a now a State or a (Union Territory) shall, except whereby virtue or in consequence of the provisions of this Act such post or office ceases to exist on that day, continue to hold the same post or office in the other existing State or now a (") State or (Union Territory) in which such area is included on that day, and shall be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to such post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, such State, or by the Central Government or other appropriate authority in such (Union Territory), as the case may be.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority after the appointed day, from passing in relation to any such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or office.
(a) The word and letter "Part A" were omitted by IAL, 1956 (1111956).
(b) Substituted for the words "Part C State" ibid.
Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
82.
Provisions relating to other services  (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab shall, on and from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central Government, to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of any other successor State.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day the Central Government shall by general or special order, determined the successor State to which every person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (2) to a successor State shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in the successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Government concerned or in default of such agreement as may be determined by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government may, by order establish one or more advisory committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to -  (a) the division and integration of the services and  (b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this Section and the proper consideration of any representation made by such persons.
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section related to any person to whom the provisions of Section 81 apply -  (6) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection With the affairs of the Union or any State :  Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Analytical examination of the above said provisions shows that Section 116 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 provides for the continuance of Officers in equivalent posts and under the proviso to Section 115(7) a guarantee is given that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person who is allotted to another State cannot be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
This protection could not be removed by the rules made by the State subsequent of November 1, 1956 unless the previous approval of the Central Government was obtained thereto.
Similarly, under the proviso to Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, a guarantee is given that the conditions of service immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
It is not the case of the Haryana State that such approval was obtained at any stage and, therefore, I am of the opinion that the learned lower appellate Court had rightly held that the respondent continued to be governed by service conditions of the princely State of Jind which governed his services when he was recruited as a civilian clerk on 1271943.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in :  (i) MD Shukla and others v. State of Gujarat and others, AIR 1971 SC 117 : (1970 SLR 312 (SC)),  (ii) State of Punjab and others v. Harivans Gaur, 1988(1) SLR 444; and  (iii) Gulzara Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1983 (2) SLR 469.
7.
Learned Assistant Advocate General Punjab, has argued that since the respondent had not exercised any option as to whether he wanted to be governed by the service rules of the princely State of Jind or by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, it will be deemed that he was to be governed by the later rules and since according to these rules an employee was to retire at the age of 58 years, the respondent had rightly been retired at that age.
8.
I am unable to agree with the argument of the learned Assistant Advocate General, the respondent was never asked to give option whether he would like to be governed by his pre-absorption Rules or by Punjab Civil Services Rules.
In the absence of anything on record to show that the petitioner was asked to give such an option which he failed to exercise, the contention that the Punjab Civil Services Rules, will apply, is without any basis.
In holding the above view, I am supported by the ratio laid down in :  (i) Union of India v. Gobinder Singh, 1991(1) RSJ 633 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
71(Punjab & Haryana) (DB);  (ii) Jaganath v. Union of India, 1969 SLR 551; and  (iii) State of Haryana v. Amar Nath Bansal, 1993(5) SLR 97 : 1993(4) SCT 734 (P&H).
As a result of the above discussion, the judgment and decree of the learned first appellate Court dated 3031987 which is impugned in this Regular Second Appeal cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside.
The judgment and decree of the learned trial Court dated 1641984 is restored.
Consequently, this Regular Second Appeal is allowed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.