VK Bali, J - Petitioner, Krishna Bai, a JBT teacher in Hindu High School, Raman, District Bhatinda, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the memo dated October 15, 1990 (Annexure P-7) vide which she was told that the diploma of JBT of Rajasthan is not equivalent to that of Punjab as no reciprocal arrangement of Punjab Govt. with Rajasthan Government existed.
This was in the wake of the fact that she had obtained JBT diploma in the year 1979 from Rajasthan.
Even though this was the only order which was challenged when the petition was filed but later on when her services were terminated vide Annexure P-9, dated April 26, 1991, the petitioner had to amend the writ petition so as to challenge the order aforesaid.
The appointment letter of the petitioner clearly shows that she was appointed on regular basis but she was to remain on probation for a period of one year and it is during the said year that she has been asked to quit.
In the meeting of the Managing Committee of the School that was held on April 16, 1991, it was opined that continuance of petitioner in service of the school was not in the interest of school as well as of the students.
Resolution (Annexure P-10) was passed on April 16, 1991, intimation whereof was given to petitioner on April 26, 1991 as per Annexure P-9 and on April 18, 1991, as per the case of respondents.
If the termination of services of the petitioner is in accordance with the terms of her appointment letter; this Court would be reluctant to interfere in the matter even though it may not the permissible for the respondents to dispense with her services only if she had done JBT diploma from Rajasthan.
However, the positive case of the petitioner is that she had challenged the order/memo (Annexure P-7) dated October 15, 1990, contents whereof have been noticed above in the earlier part of the judgment and when the matter came up before the motion bench of this Court, it was ordered that the services of petitioner shall not be terminated.
The order of .stay was conveyed to the respondent-Management and with a view to make the order of Court futile, documents, Annexures P-9 and P-10 were manufactured at later stage and for the precise reason no termination order of services of petitioner was conveyed to her earlier to April 26, 1991.
2.
The controversy, as noticed above, has reached such a stage that the matter cannot be proceeded further till such time a positive finding is available as to whether the order dated April 16, 1991 was actually passed on April 16, 1991 or on later stage and for that matter, there is no choice but to refer this matter to the Senior Sub Judge, Bhatinda to record a firm finding of fact on the point referred to above after affording opportunity of leading evidence to the parties.
Parties are directed to appear before the Senior Sub Judge, Bhatinda on August 3, 1993.
Let the report be submitted within a month thereafter.
It shall be open to the parties to rely upon oral as also documentary evidence including terms and conditions of service of petitioner under which she was appointed.
3.
Nothing said in this order would prejudice the Senior Sub Judge in returning a finding on the issue aforesaid.
Order accordingly.