Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners pray for the issue of a writ order or direction quashing the selection of respondents No. 4 to 10..... and commanding the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to appoint the petitioners against 2 vacancies out of total 7 vacancies."
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On July 30, 1988, the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala advertised seven posts of Assistant Research Officers in the Irrigation Department.
The two petitioners as well as respondents Nos. 4 to 10 applied for these posts.
They were interviewed by the Commission.
The petitioners were not found suitable while respondents No. 4 to 10 were selected.
Aggrieved by this selection, the petitioners have approached this Court primarily on the ground that the slection made by the Commission was violative of the provisions of Punjab Irrigation Research (Class-II Service) Rules, 1963 and that the action of Respondents No. 3 in rejecting the petitioners and selecting respondents No. 4 to 10 was illegal and arbitrary.
3.
Written statements have been filed by different respondents.
The one filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is absolutely cryptic.
It has been primarily stated that the averments relate to respondent No. 3.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 3 it has been inter-alia stated that initially the Commission had taken the view that the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement were "essential" and accordingly, some of the applications were rejected.
It has been further stated that "subsequently, on closer scrutiny of the rules it was found that the qualification or experience in the line of research and published work as prescribed in the rules was not a mandatory but only a preferential qualification.
Consequently some candidates previously rejected on the ground that they did not possess experience in the line of research and published work became eligible.
All candidates, who qualified for the interview including Manish Kumar referred to by the petitioner were called for interview."
It has also been averred that "the recommendations for appointment were made in respect of candidates who were found most suitable on the basis of their merit and performance in the interview."
On these premises, the selection has been supported.
4.
Separate written statements have also been filed by respondent Nos. 6 to 9.
Replications thereto have also been filed by the petitioners.
5.
The case had initially come up for hearing on April 20, 1993.
Reference to the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 only had been made by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Mr.AS Bakshi, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 6 to 9 had not been able to appear.
I had, after hearing the learned counsel for the petitioners and Mrs. Charu Tuli, who had appeared for the official-respondents, dictated an order allowing the petition.
Before this order could be actually signed.
Mr. Bakish had appeared before me and prayed that the matter be listed for rehearing.
Accordingly, the case was ordered to be listed for rehearing.
It had actually come up for hearing on May 3, 1993.
On that day, Mr. Sukhbir Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, stated that copies of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 6 to 9 had been handed over to him in Court and that the case be adjourned to enable him to obtain further instructions and to file a replication, if necessary.
He had further stated that respondent Nos. 4 and 10 had not been appointed in spite of their selection and so far as respondent No. 5 is concerned, he had not joined in spite of the fact that a letter of appointment had been issued to him.
As a result, accordingly to the learned counsel the petition survived only in respect of the challenge to the selection of respondent Nos. 6 to 9.
In these circumstances, it was considered appropriate to adjourn the case to enable the learned counsel for the petitioners to file the replications.
The order which had been dictated on April 26, 1993 was directed to be kept in a sealed cover on the record of this case.
The cover bearing the seal of the OSD of this High Court is on record.
The replications have been filed.
The case has now come up for hearing.
6.
Mr. Sukhbir Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, has stated that so far as respondent No. 6 is concerned, he was eligible and the petitioners do not press their claim against his selection and appointment.
Accordingly, the learned counsel did not press the petition regarding respondent No. 6.
However, with regard to the remaining three respondents, it was contended that they were ineligible and their selection is unsustainable.
On the other hand, Mr. AS Bakshi, learned counsel for the respondents, vehemently contended that they were eligible and that the action of the respondents was in strict conformity with the Rules.
7.
It is apt to notice the relevant part of the advertisement.
It reads as under :-  "Applications on prescribed forms are invited by the 25th August 1988 :-  IV : SEVEN POSTS OF ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICERS IN THE IRRIGATION DEPARTMENT :  Pay : Rs. 825-1700.
Age : Between 21-35 years on 1688.
Upper age limit is relaxable upto 45 years for Punjab Govt. servants and exceptionally qualified candidates.
Qualifications : (i) Second Class degree of M.Sc.
Physics or Chemistry or B.Sc Engg.
(Civil) or its equivalent of any recognised University.
(ii) Should have experience in the line of his research and also published work to his credit.
Prescribed EQs are minimum and mere possession of the same does not entitle candidates to be called for interview.
Where the umber of applications received in response to an Advertisement is large and it will not be convenient or possible for the Commission to interview all those candidates, the Commission may restrict the number of candidates for interview to a reasonable limit on the basis of qualification and experience higher than the minimum prescribed or by holding a screening test.
KNOWLEDGE OF PUNJABI of Matric or its equivalent standard is essential for all posts (relaxable for Sikh Migrants).
NOTE : Applicants must possess the requisite qualifications and experiences by the last date of receipt of applications."
Do Respondent Nos. 7 to 9 fulfil the conditions of eligibility?
The first person is Respondent No. 7.
The petitioners have filed a document (Annexure P-5) in which they have given their own qualifications as well as those of the respondents.
According to the petitioners, Respondent No. 7 possesses the qualification of M.Sc.
Chemistry and has published 12 papers.
However, it is suggested that he has no experience of research.
This claim has been controverted by respondent No. 7, who has inter-alia pointed out that besides possessing the qualification of M.Sc.
Ist Class, he had also done his PhD and had five years of experience in the line of research.
A copy of the PhD degree awarded to him has been produced as Annexure R.7/1.
He has also produced a certificate from Professor SS Bhatti, Head of the Department of Physics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar certifying that "he has got research experience of about five years."
He has also produced a list of publications indicating that the had published 20 research papers in various national and international journals.
In the replication filed on behalf of the petitioners, it has been averred that no credit for the period during which respondent No. 7 was working for his PhD can be given to him.
8.
On a consideration of the matter it appears that respondent No. 7 was fully eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Research Officer.
He had the necessary qualifications and experience.
He has not only passed the M.Sc.
examination with a first class, but possesses even higher qualification of PhD He has published 20 research papers from the year 1982 to the year 1988.
Some of these papers have been published in foreign journals.
After considering the matter, I am of the view that he was fully eligible for the post in question.
9.
As for respondent No. 8, the only ground urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that he was ineligible as he was not within the prescribed age limit.
Otherwise he fulfilled the qualifications.
The said respondent in his written statement has inter-alia averred that he had 11 years research experience in the Irrigation Department itself besides a teaching experience of seven years.
He has also produced a copy of the certificate issued by the Irrigation and Power Research Institute indicating that he had worked as Research Assistant inn Physics Division from November 1970 to September, 1981.
The problems on which he had conducted research have also been indicated.
Is his selection vitiated on account of his being beyond the prescribed age limit on the last date for submission of the application ?
10.
A perusal of the relevant portion of the advertisement, as extracted above, indicates that the upper age limit was "relaxable upto 45 years for Punjab Goverment servants and exceptionally qualified candidates."
Mr. Sukhbir Singh, however, contends that Rule 9 as well as the advertisement only permit relaxation in case of serving government employees or exceptionally qualified candidates.
According to the learned counsel, respondent No. 8 was not a Government servant and could not be termed as exceptionally qualified.
11.
On a perusal of Rule 9, I find that originally an age limit of 40 years had been prescribed.
It was subsequently reduced to 35 years.
In case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes etc. a different age limit could be prescribed.
It was also provided that "the upper age limit may be relaxed in the case of Goverment servants and exceptionally qualified candidates."
Mr. KK Arora, respondent No. 8, had actually served as a Research Assistant in the Irrigation Department for almost 11 years.
He had also the teaching experience of seven years.
It has also been stated by him that he had published 8 papers on various subjects connected with the "Irrigation in the Journal of Irrigation and Power Research in the Indian Journal of Power and River Valley Development."
If on a consideration of the matter, the appropriate authority considered that the said respondent was suitable for selection and appointment and that the age limit deserved to be relaxed, it took a possible view which cannot be termed as arbitrary or unreasonable.
Admittedly, the respondent had worked in the department for a fairly long time.
He had published research papers.
In such a situation, the view taken by the authority was not wholly arbitrary.
I do not consider it a fit case to interfere with the discretion exercised by the appropriate authority.
It was a matter for the consideration of the experts.
If they considered the candidate as being 'exceptional' and decided to give him the benefit of relaxation of the age limit, it cannot be said that his selection and the consequential appointment are illegal.
Accordingly, the challenge even in respect of respondent No. 8 cannot be sustained.
12.
So far as respondent No. 9 is concerned, he possesses the qualification of B Engg.
(Civil).
He has produced copies of the certificates showing that he had passed the examination with 'distinction' and that he had been placed in the merit list in the IIIrd year examination.
However, admittedly he had no research experience.
Strictly speaking, he was not eligible for appointment.
However, it is the admitted position that he was appointed soon after his selection and has continued to work since then.
Mr. Bakshi, learned counsel for the said respondent, submitted that since the respondent has already been appointed, he should be allowed to continue on the higher post.
13.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that the period for which a candidate "should have experience in the line of his research........" has not been prescribed.
By now, the respondent has acquired sufficient experience to claim eligibility.
Keeping in view the observations of the Apex Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, reported as 1985(3) SLR 200 : AIR 1987 (SC) 454, Vikram Singh v SSS Board, Haryana, 1991(1) SLR 176 : 1991(1) SCT 122 (SC) and Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SLR 546 : 1991(1) SCT 647 (SC), it does not appear to be reasonable to quash the selection and appointment of Respondent No. 9.
14.
In view of the above findings, there appears to be no ground to quash the selection or appointment of respondent Nos. 7 to 9.
Accordingly, the primary relief claimed by the petitioners cannot be granted to them.
It, however, deserves mention that the two petitioners have been working in the department for a fairly long time.
Petitioner No. 1 joined as a Research Assistant on June 29, 1976.
He claims to have published 17 research papers.
Similarly, petitioner No. 2 has been working as a research Assistant, 'A'-Grade since April 12, 1972.
He also claims that 18 research papers written by him have been published in different national and international journals.
Further more, learned counsel for the department (Respondent Nos. 1 and 2) could not point out anything which may disentitle the petitioners for appointment to the post of Assistant Research Officers.
Even otherwise, it is clear that respondent Nos. 4 and 10, who had been initially selected were in fact not appointed.
Respondent No. 5 did not join in spite of an offer having been made to him.
Consequently, three posts are available.
It would be in the fitness of things if respondent Nos. 1 and 2 consider the claims of the petitioners favourably for appointment to the post of Assistant Research Officers, which are available.
15.
In view of above, the writ petition has become infructuous in so far as respondent Nos. 4 and 10 are concerned.
The challenge to the selection and appointment of respondent No6 was given up.
The petitioners' challenge to the selection of Respondents Nos. 7 to 9 cannot be sustained.
However, it is directed that the claims of the petitioners shall be considered favourably against the available vacancies.
The needful in this behalf shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
There would be no order as to costs.