RS Mongia, J - The petitioner Shri Harbans Lai Gupta was working as Chief Engineer (Commercial), Punjab State, Electricity Board, Patiala (in short `the Board'), when the present writ petition was filed on March 16, 1989.
During the pendency of the writ petition, he has since retired on May 31, 1991.
2.
In the writ petition it has been averred that the petitioner had an excellent and unblemished record of service throughout his professional career of more than 32 years.
All his controlling officers, Members and Chairmen of the Board throughout his long career appreciated his performance of duties and contribution to the profession.
He had held important assignments of Controller of Stores, Officer on Special Duty to the Chairman, Director Commercial, Chief Engineer (Materials Management) and Chief Engineer (Distribution).
3.
The petitioner has levelled allegations of mala fides against the then Chairman of the Board Shri NS Vasant.
According to the averments, the Chairman had started nourishing a grudge against the petitioner owing to certain purchase cases wherein the petitioner refused to oblige the said Chairman because he (the petitioner) could not go against the rules and regulations.
According to the petitioner, because of the grudge by Shri NS Vasant against the petitioner, he was on the look out to harm him.
It has been further averred that two bogus, unfounded, anonymous pseudonymous complaints were got made and foisted to harass and humiliate the petitioner.
4.
On the basis of the above said two anonymous/pseudonymous complaints dated August 10, 1987 and June 16, 1988, two enquiries, to be held by the Vigilance Department of the Board were initiated by the respondent Board against the petitioner.
The first enquiry No. 89/VU dated 1081987 was instituted against the petitioner and some other officers of the Board in respect of the complaint relating to the purchase of LT PVC spacers and the second enquiry No. 37 dated June 16, 1988 was initiated only against the petitioner in respect of some transfers and postings of S.D.Os.
by allegedly accepting illegal gratification.
The petitioner challenged the initiation and holding of the enquiries by the Vigilance Department on the basis of the said two complaints by filing the present writ petition.
By an order dated July 14, 1989 in Civil Misc.
Application No. 11994 of 1989 further proceedings in the enquiries challenged in the petition were stayed and later on this stay was confirmed vide order dated September 15, 1989.
5.
At the very outset it may be observed that the allegations of mala fides have been denied by Shri NS Vasant, the then Chairman of the Board.
6.
It has been alleged in the petition that as far as the complaint dated August 10, 1987, regarding Enquiry No. 80/VU, is concerned, the information regarding the same was received by the petitioner for the first time vide Deputy Superintendent of Police letter dated October 31, 1988, i.e. after more than one year and three months of the receipt of the alleged complaint.
The request of the petitioner for the supply of a copy of the complaint sought to be investigated by the DSP was declined.
Though a copy of the complaint had not been supplied yet whatever information was required was duly supplied by the petitioner.
Vide letter dated December 26, 1988 addressed to the Secretary, it was brought to the notice of the Board that the enquiry was not being conducted in accordance with the instructions dated February 5, 1981 Annexure P.3, of the Government, duly adopted by the Board.
It is mentioned in these instructions that the Government does not believe in launching any witch hunt against the government employees and, therefore, wild and baseless allegations against the Government employees deserved to be curbed.
The relevant portion of these instructions reads as under :-  "------  (i) That where information is given by a complainant with intent that the authority concerned may take action against which may not amount to making charge of any criminal offence or with the intent that criminal proceeding may be instituted against the public servant complained against, the Inquiry Officer/Investigating Officer, before taking up the enquiry/investigation should ask for an affidavit from the complainant in support of the allegations made by him so that later on, if after investigation these allegations are found to he false that Inquiry Officer, Investigating Officer could file a complaint under Section 182 IPC in a court of law of competent jurisdiction for prosecution of the complainant in accordance with the provisions of Section 195 Cr.PC.
2.
The Inquiry/Investigation Officers should be fully impressed to follow the above procedure meticulously so that no difficulty is experienced in launching prosecution against such complainants.
These instructions may be brought to the notice of all Inquiry Officers/investigating Officers for strict compliance."
It may be observed that these very instructions were reiterated by the Secretary of the Board vide letter dated 11.4.1988 Annexure P.4.
According to the petitioner he had also brought to the notice of the Board the instructions dated 321988 Annexure P.1, which are to the effect that all anonymous/pseudonymous complaints will be filed/destroyed as per Government instructions on the subject issued vide Memo No. 500-DG-1967/8923 dated May 3, 1967.
In fact according to the petitioner, both the complaints fell under the above category, being anonymous/pseudonymous, the same should have been filed/destroyed.
7.
As far as the other complaint on which Enquiry No. 37/89 regarding the transfer and posting of S.D.Os.
by allegedly accepting illegal gratification is concerned, the petitioner was informed regarding the same on 1761988 and when he met the Administrative Member of the Board he was given a copy of that complaint (copy Annexure P2) which was being investigated by the DSP The petitioner gave till the information and denied the baseless allegations made in the complaint.
The Administrative Member of the Board who had also looked into the matter made the following recommendation to the Board :  "1.
Secretary may ensure that the investigation agency is following the Pb.
Govt. instructions as at flag `O' (adopted by P.S.E.B.).
From the letter of Chief Engineer, Er.HL Gupta at Ch-164/165, there is a feeling that investigation is not without bias.
The purchase authority is not one person (Chief Engineer), but the Store Purchase Committee consisting of three members, but only the CE is being subjected to the series of questions.
2.
The more important is the fact that this complaint is being investigated by the DSP who had earlier conducted an enquiry regarding the transfer of S.D.Os.
in South Zone against Chief Engineer Er.
HL Gupta and I had then brought out in that case (which should be got linked up) that the DSP's enquiry is malicious and extremely biased.
He had stated that one SDO was given a posting by Shri HL Gupta after paying Rs. 20,000/- but I had brought out that the SDO was posted about one and a half years earlier by the Board, but it appears no action has been taken against the DSP who told blatant lies in his investigation.
Another enquiry by the same unreliable DSP against the same (and a very high ranking) officer in the Board is apparently not imparting justice.
May be, this enquiry was entrusted earlier, but under the circumstances explained, the enquiry must be got shifted to another fair minded officer."
As far as Enquiry No. 89/VU dated 1081987 is concerned, the Administrative Member expressed his opinion, the relevant portion which reads as under :-  "Shri Gupta, vide PUC I, has supplied comprehensive information with reference to will be observed that the purchases had been carried out as per guidelines (framed after consulting MFA) contained in my note dated 2841987.
Sealed tenders were opened by Central Purchase Committee on 5.5.1987 and keeping in view the urgency of the requirement, the Purchase Committee took the decision on 7.5.87 and orders were placed on the lowest acceptable firm and there does not appear to be anything objectionable in the purchase.
Still if any clarification is required, it should have been sought from all the members constituting the committee (as all decisions regarding purchases had been taken by the committee) and not by Shri Gupta as one member man.
Further, all the purchase cases are subject to internal audit as well as statutory audit.
These purchase orders were also pre-audited."
8.
The petitioner, who appeared in person, argued that the enquiries had been initiated against the Board's own instructions which provide that no action to be taken on anonymous/pseudonymus complaints and these were to be file/destroyed.
Pointed reference was made to the instructions dated 321988 Annexure P.1.
He further submitted that to void unnecessary harassment and humiliation the Government instructions adopted by the Board, provided that the complainant should be asked to file an affidavit in support of the allegations made in the complaint and no witch hunting against an employee should be launched and wild and baseless allegations against the employees were to be curbed.
He also pointed out that the DSP who had conducted the enquiry was all out to harm the petitioner at the instance of the Chairman as would be evident from the recommendation of the Administrative Member, already quoted above.
In the case of some of the S.D.Os.
who were transferred, from whom it was alleged that the petitioner had taken illegal gratification, the orders had been issued by the Board much earlier than the dates mentioned in the complaint.
Though in a case the orders had been issued by the Board one and a half years earlier, yet the DSP had said that the petitioner had transferred him by accepting Rs. 20,000/-.
It was further argued by the petitioner that vide instructions of the Government dated 19.7.1981 Annexure P. 7 duly adopted by the Board it had been provided that the Vigilance Bureau shall ensure that final report of a preliminary enquiry is submitted to Government (to the Board in the present case) within two months period from the date of its registration, and in exceptional cases the Government (Board in the present case) has to be moved for relaxation of the period.
Otherwise, in normal cases where investigation of preliminary enquiry is not completed within a period of two months, a presumption will arise that the allegations are not correct.
As far as regular enquiries are concerned, it has been provided in these instructions that the investigation in a regular enquiry would be completed by the Investigating Officer within a period of six months.
The petitioner submitted that these instructions are mandatory in nature but even if these are held to be directory then the time-schedule mentioned therein can be extended by a reasonable period, say, two or three times but it cannot mean that the enquiries can continue for years on end.
The period of two months for finishing preliminary enquiries mentioned in the instructions Annexure P.7 may in a given case he extended by the Board to 4 or 6 months, or even 8 months but it cannot be said that the enquiries can continue for 15 months as in the present case.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the instructions relied upon by the petitioner are mere guidelines and are not mandatory in nature and are directory and the violation of the same cannot vitiate the action of holding preliminary enquiries.
He further submitted that even if there are anonymous/pseudonymous complaints yet if on investigation it is found that there is some truth in the same there is no bar to launch an enquiry on the basis of such a complaint.
He further submitted that one of the enquiries, i.e. Enquiry No. 89/VU had been completed when the stay order was passed by this Court and the other enquiry was about to be completed.
10.
The petitioner also submitted on the merits of the complaints and the enquiries.
He submitted that there was nothing wrong in the action of placing orders for LT PVC spacers by the Purchase Committee of which he was just one of the members.
Regarding the objection that no orders could be placed on a particular firm, he pointed out that even prior to the order placed by the Purchase Committee of which he was one of the members orders were placed on that particular firm and even after he was no more on the Purchase Committee the subsequent Purchase Committee also placed orders on the said firm.
11.
After hearing the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondents, I am of the view that this petition is liable to succeed.
The petitioner has since retired from service on 3151991.
The instructions relied upon by the petitioner that no enquiry can be ordered on anonymous/pseudonymous complaints and that the complainant should be asked to file an affidavit to avoid undue harassment and humiliation to the officers and further to avoid witch hunting on baseless allegations may be directory in nature but a very strong case has to be made out while departing from these instructions.
The time-schedule mentioned in the instructions Annexure P.7 that preliminary enquiries and the regular enquiries should finish within 2 and 6 months respectively may be said again to be directory but that would no mean that two months period can be extended to one year.
Since the time limit is directory in nature, in a given case the period of two months may be extended twice or thrice but it does not mean that the directory instructions are not to be followed.
In the present case admittedly more than one year had elapsed but the preliminary enquiries were not completed.
The investigation did not involve recording much of the evidence at the preliminary stage and the whole thing was based on the record which was already in possession of the Board.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that the departure from the instructions though directory in nature is justified and the continuation of enquiries can be held to be legal.
The Administrative Member, the recommendations of whom have already been noticed above, clearly show that the DSP in question was not fair enough to hold the enquiries against the petitioner.
For instance, the DSP had mentioned that one transfer which had been made by the Board one and a half years prior to the making of the complaint the petitioner had allegedly accepted illegal gratification of Rs. 20,000/-.
On the face of it, this was a false allegation.
12.
For all what has been observed above and the fact that the petitioner has since retired on May 31, 1991.
I am of the view that the Enquiries Nos. 89/VU dated 1081987 and 37 dated 1661988 should not continue against the petitioner.
13.
For the view I have taken in the matter, I am not going into the allegations of mala fides levelled by the petitioner against Shri NS Vasant, which have been denied by him.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the proceedings in the two enquiries Nos. 89/VU dated 1081987 and 37 dated 1661988 are hereby quashed.
Since the petitioner has retired from service during the pendency of the writ petition, respondents are directed to release all the retiral benefits to the petitioner within two months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
15.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that a grievance was also made by the petitioner that he has been discriminated against in the matter of promotion.
Two members of the Stores Purchase Committee, i.e. the Financial Advisor and the then Purchase Officer, have since been promoted whereas the promotion of the petitioner as Engineer-in-Chief with effect from the due date, i.e. 1111989, had not been effected presumably due to pendency of the two enquiries.
The grievance of the petitioner is well-founded.
The proceedings in the two enquiries have now been quashed.
The petitioner had unblemished record of service.
There were directions of this Court in RSA.
No. 1271 of 1991 regarding the consideration of the petitioner's claim to the post of Engineer-in-Chief.
Since there is nothing adverse against the petitioner and the enquiries stand quashed, the respondents are further directed to consider the petitioner for promotion to post of Engineer-in-Chief forthwith from the due date and on the basis thereof the arrears of pay and other pensionary benefits be released to him in the terms and directions issued by this Court in RSA.
No. 1271 of 1991.
There will be no order as to Costs.