RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who belongs to a backward class, had appeared in the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and other allied Services Examination held by the Haryana Public Service Commission in the year 1985, the result of which was declared sometime in the month of September, 1985.
It may be mentioned here that there were 9 posts in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch, 6 posts for `A' Class Tehesildars and 27 posts for Assistant Employment Officer.
However, there was no post of Exercise and Taxation Officer, Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, or Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
The petitioner had given his choice of appointment as follows :-  (1) H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
(2) Excise and Taxation Officer.
(3) `A' Class Tehsildar.
(4) Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies.
(5) Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
(6) Assistant Employment Officer.
As observed above since there were no posts of the ranks of Excise and Taxation Officer, Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, and Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer, the petitioner's choice virtually was first for H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch, second for `A' Class Tehsildar and third for Assistant Employment Officer.
Certain posts in all these categories were reserved for backward classes.
The petitioner, according to his merit, was offered the post of Assistant Employment Officer as a backward class candidate, which post he joined in the year 1988.
It may be observed that there was some stay order passed by this Court regarding appointments resulting delay in appointments.
2.
One Shri Narinder Kumar Wadhawan belonging to a backward class was offered appointment in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
He did not join and consequently one post reserved for the backward classes category became available in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
One Shri RC Verma, who also belongs to a backward class and was given appointment as `A' Class Tehsildar, had given his first choice for H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
When the post became available in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch on account of the non-joining of Narinder Kumar Wadhawan, he staked his claim to the post in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch meant for the backward classes candidates.
However, the respondent-authorities did not accede to his request to give him appointment in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
This led RC Verma, to file a writ petition in this Court (CWP No. 7057 of 1988).
The said writ petition was decided in his favour and it was directed that Shri RC Verma be appointed to the post of H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch against a post reserved for the backward classes candidates with retrospective effect.
3.
The present petitioner staked his claim for appointment to the post of `A' Class Tehsildar reserved for backward classes which had been vacated by Shri RC Verma, who had been given appointment to the H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch by virtue of the judgment in CWP No. 7057 of 1988 - Ramesh Chand Verma v. The State of Haryana and the Haryana Public Service Commission.
His claim was denied by the respondents which led him to file the present writ petition.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents has raised two points - first, that there is another candidate belonging to the backward classes namely Neelam Rattan who is higher in merit that the petitioner and therefore the post of `A' Class Tehsildar could not be offered to the petitioner, and second that the vacancy belonging to the backward classes which became available due to the appointment of Shri RC Verma to the post of H.C.S.
(Executive) Bench had to be carried forward and had to be offered to a backward class candidate in the next selection.
5.
To the above two points raised by the learned counsel for the respondents the reply of the petitioner is that Neelam Rattan had given her first preference, (as is obvious from Annexure P-8), for the post of Assistant Employment Officer and her next choice was for the post of an `A' Class Tehsildar .
He further submitted that Neelam Rattan had been offered the post of her first choice, i.e. Assistant Employment Officer, but she never joined and therefore the question of offering her the next post of `A' Class Tehsildar does not arise.
In any case, he submitted that the post of `A' Class Tehsildar meant for the backward classes had become available when the judgment in Ramesh Chand Verma's case (supra) was rendered on November 9, 1990, and therefore it is too late in the day now to offer the post of Neelam Rattan.
Moreover, he states that by now the offer must have been made to Neelam Rattan and if she has not joined as `A' Class Tehsildar then she should not come in the way of the petitioner for the post of `A' Class Tehsildar.
6.
So far as the second point raised by the learned counsel for the respondents is concerned the reply of the petitioner's counsel is that any vacancy which may arise on any account like non-joining of a particular person cannot be carried forward if a person in the same category is available.
He has relied on the judgment of this court in Ramesh Chand Verma's case (supra), wherein the learned Judge had held that the vacancy can be carried forward only if a backward class candidate is not available, and as the petitioner in the said case was available, who could be appointed to the reserved post meant for the backward classes on the basis of merit, the question of carrying forward the vacancy did not arise.
In the present case the post of `A' Class Tehsildar had fallen vacant by virtue of the judgment of this Court in Ramesh Chand Verma's case (supra) .
Necessary consequences should have flowed to offer the vacant post to the next person on the merit list.
Since, according to the petitioner's counsel Neelam Rattan could not be offered the post of `A' Class Tehsildar, it should have gone to the petitioner.
Shri RC Verma, by virtue of the judgment of this court, was given appointment with retrospective effect though subject to the decision of this Court in the Letters Patent Appeal, which I am told has since been dismissed on April 8, 1993.
7.
In view of what has been observed above, it is held that the petitioner was entitled to be appointed to the post of `A' Class Tehsildar from the date the same became vacant on the appointment of Shri RC Verma to the post of H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
8.
For the forgoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner as `A' Class Tehsildar against the reserved post meant for the backward classes from the date Shri RC Verma has been deemingly appointed to the post of H.C.S.
(Executive) Branch.
Needless to mention that the petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
Let these directions be carried out by the respondents within a period of two months from the date of receipt of this order from the court or from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the judgment from the petitioner.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.