R S Mongia, J - In response to an advertisement issued in October, 1991, inviting applications for admission to Diploma course in Pharmacy for the session 1991-92 in the three State Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab at Amritsar, Patiala and Faridkot, the petitioner applied for admission to the said course against seats reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates.
She took the entrance examination and was placed at serial No. 2 of the merit list of the reserved category of the Scheduled Caste candidates.
The petitioner had passed the Intermediate Science Examination conducted by Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, in the month of June, 1991.
2.
The candidates are required to produce eligibility/equivalence certificate before they are actually admitted to the course.
It is the concerned university to which the college is affiliated, that issues such a certificate as to whether an examination passed by a particular candidate is equivalent to the qualifications required for the course.
Since there was some doubt about the equivalence of the petitioner's qualifications for making her eligible for admission to the course in question, Principal of Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, wrote a letter on 2011992 to the Punjabi University, Patiala (to which the college is affiliated) as to whether the qualifications of the petitioner were equivalent for making her eligible for the admission to the course.
The Punjabi University wrote back on 2111992 to the Principal as follows :-  "Returned in original with the remarks that Intermediate (Science Group) of the Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, is considered equivalent to 10+2 (Science Group) of this University.
Regarding the question of the genuineness of the certificate, an enquiry is to be made from the concerned institution."
The petitioner filed the present writ petition on the allegations that she had been verbally told that her candidature for admission had been cancelled and, therefore, she was being denied admission.
While admitting the writ petition on Judge 3, 1992, the Motion Bench directed the respondents to grant provisional admission to the petitioner to the course in question.
It was further observed in the said order that what seems to have weighed with the respondents in refusing the admission to the petitioner is doubt about the genuineness of the certificate of having passed Intermediate Science Course from Mithapore Degree College, Patna.
In these circumstances, it was directed that the college authorities shall make necessary enquiry with regard to the genuineness of the Intermediate Certificate after associating the petitioner with the enquiry and the enquiry report will be placed on the record of this case.
3.
An enquiry was conducted by the college authorities regarding the genuineness of the certificate.
A letter was received by the Principal of the college dated 8th of July, 1992 allegedly written by Sh. Baldev Jha, the Acting Principal of the Mithapore Degree College, Patna, wherein it was stated that the college leaving certificate and the character certificate sent by the college authorities which had been produced by the petitioner before the said authorities were fake ones and were not issued by the Mithapore College.
The Committee which was enquiring into the matter asked the petitioner to file an affidavit after being confronted with the letter of Sh. Baldev Jha dated 8th of July, 1992.
She filed an affidavit on 28th of November, 1992 enclosing along with the said affidavit a letter received through fax from Dr. Sant Kumar, Principal Mithapore Degree College dated 24th of November, 1992, addressed to the Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, which reads as under :-  "With reference to the above named candidate I am to say that she passed the Intermediate Science Examination 1991 held in the month of June, 1991.
There is some dispute in the college Management and it is affecting the working of the College.
It has been reported to me that the Acting Principal, Shri Baldev Jha has been replying in negative all the letters and enquiries of my period to defame me.
You are, therefore, advised to refer the matter to the Secretary, Bihar Intermediate Education Council Bihar, Patna, which is the Council responsible for holding Intermediate Examination all over Bihar.
This is for your information and necessary action.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/- (Dr. Sant Kumar)  Principal,  Mithapore Degree College, Patna."
After mentioning all the facts as noticed above, the enquiry report was placed on the record.
4.
During the course of arguments when the above said letter dated 24th of November, 1992 was brought to my notice, I passed the following order on May 13, 1993 :-  "There is some dispute regarding the genuineness of the certificate produced by the petitioner before the respondent-authorities for getting admission to Diploma in Pharmacy.
The petitioner is alleged to have passed ISC examination from Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna held in June, 1991 under Roll No. 11764 (Enlistment No. PT-37011).
There is also a dispute regarding the College Leaving Certificate issued by the Principal of Mithapore Degree College, Patna.
Since the question of career of the student is involved and the inquiry by the respondents in the matter may take a long time, I have thought it proper to direct the Registrar of this Court to write a letter to the Secretary of the Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna asking him :-  (1) Whether Miss Bharti Bala daughter of Sh. Gian Chand had appeared in the ISC examination held by the Council in January, 1991 and passed the same ?
(2) And if so, whether photocopy of the certificate purported to have been issued by the Council to Miss Bharti Bala is the one which was issued to her.
In other words, it is a genuine Certificate ?
The photocopy of the certificate which is marked "A" may be sent alongwith the letter.
Another letter be addressed to the Principal Mithapore Degree College, Patna requesting him to apprise this court as to whether Miss Bharti Bala, daughter of Sh. Gian Chand was on the rolls of the College for the ISC examination for the session 1989-91 and further whether photocopy (which is marked "B") was issued by Principal, Sh. Sant Ram.
Photocopy of certificate mark "B" may be sent along with the letter.
Both the authorities be requested to reply at the earliest as the career of a student is involved.
The case to come up on 361993."
A letter has been received by the Registrar of this Court from the Bihari Intermediate Education Council, Patna dated 12th of July, 1993, which reads as under :-  "With reference to your letter 23108 dated the 19th May, 1993 on the above subject, forwarding therewith the photocopy of the Marks Sheet of Miss Bharti Bala, I am to inform you that Miss Bharti Bala appeared as a regular candidate from Mithapore Degree College, Patna, at the I.Sc.
examination conducted by this Council in the month of June 1991 and passed in First Division.
The Marks Sheet of Miss Bharti Bala sent along with your letter under reference has been duly verified from the Tabulation Register of this Council and found correct.
The photocopy of the Marks Sheet duly verified is sent herewith for necessary action."
A letter dated 1971993 has also been received by the Registrar of this Court from the Principal of the Mithapore Degree College, Patna mentioning therein that the petitioner was on the rolls of the College as a regular student in the I.Sc.
session 1989-91 and appeared in the examination of the Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna and was declared to have passed the same in 1st Division and the College Leaving Certificate was also issued to her according to the entries in the Admission Registrar of the College.
5.
Since there was only dispute regarding the genuineness of the certificate produced by the petitioner and after having received the intimation from the Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, I am of the view that the petitioner's certificate was genuine.
The College authorities at Faridkot did not try to got any information regarding the genuineness of the certificate from the examining body i.e. Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna.
There may be some reason for Sh. Baldev Jha not to give correct information but the examining body (Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna) which is wholly independent and not interested one way or the other, has apprised this court regarding the genuineness of the certificate.
6.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and is held that the petitioner was entitled to the admission in the Diploma Course in Pharmacy for the session 1991-92.
The respondents are directed to convert the provisional admission of the petitioner into regular one.
It may be observed here that by virtue of interim order of this Court, petitioner has already appeared in the first year examination of the course.
Let her result be declared subject to her eligibility otherwise for sitting in the examination by taking into consideration the percentage of her lectures from the date she was granted provisional admission by virtue of the order of this Court.
There will be no order as to costs.