JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner as an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police challenges the order of his premature retirement on the ground that it is wholly without jurisdiction and that it could not have been passed in view of his record of service.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners was recruited as a constable in the year 1961.
It is averred that he was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1970 and thereafter as an Assistant Sub-Inspector vide order dated July 19, 1978.
The petitioner avers that this order of appointment was passed by the Deputy Inspector- General of Police.
3.
The petitioner avers that he was communicated adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1992 to September 30, 1982.
A copy of this report has been produced as Annexure P-1 with this petition.
In this report, the petitioner's honesty was described as `doubtful'.
Various other adverse remarks were also made.
Thereafter, a report for the period from April 1, 1982 to March 31, 1983 was recorded and communicated Jo the petitioner vide letter dated June 30, 1983, copy of which has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-2.
Adverse remarks regarding the petitioner's performance in respect of various matter were made.
On receipt of a complaint in the year 1987, the petitioner was placed under suspension on November 20, 1987.
The enquiry into the complaint was entrusted to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate.
The allegations could not be proved.
Accordingly, the complaint was filed.
However, in the Confidential Report for the period from August 31, 1987 to March 31, 1988, the petitioner's integrity was described as `doubtful'.
It was observed that he did not show moral courage and readiness to expose the malpractices of subordinates.
His reputation for fair dealing with public and accessibility to the public was described as below average.
It was also observed that his dealing with public was not straight and fair.
It was also recorded that the petitioner was not fit to hold independent charge of a police post.
The petitioner submitted a representation against these adverse rem-arks to the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
The representation was rejected.
A copy of the order conveyed to this petitioner in this behalf has been produced on record as Annexure P-5.
4.
On April 9, 1989, the Senior Superintendent of Police issued a notice in exercise of the powers conferred by Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services [Premature Retirement] Rules, 1975 informing the petitioner that he shall retire from service on April 9, 1989 after having completed more than 25 years of service.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner submitted a representation the Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Patiala Range who rejected it vide order dated December 9, 1989.
The petitioner then submitted a representation to the Director-General of Police on November 16, 1989.
A copy of this representation has been produced as Annexure P-9.
Having failed to elicit any reply from the officer, the petitioner approached this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11453 of 1990.
This petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench on August 23, 1990.
The Division Bench directed the respondents in the writ petition to decide the representation by "passing a speaking order" "within three months".
The petition was accordingly disposed of.
However, it appears that the Director-General of Police had actually disposed of the petitioner's representation vide order dated August 22, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-12.
After the receipt of this order, the petitioner again approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 984 of 1990.
The case came up for hearing before the motion Bench on January 29, 1991.
Their Lordships disposed of the petition with the observation that "in view of the order dated 23.9.1990 passed by this Court, the Director-General was duty bound to consider the case of the petitioner on merits and the case was to be decided by passing a well reasoned order.
He is now directed to comply with the said order within two months positively."
Accordingly, the Director-General of Police decided the matter vide order dated March 14, 1991.
He rejected the petitioner's representation and upheld the order of premature retirement in view of the adverse remarks recorded in his Confidential Reports.
Aggrieved by the order of premature retirement as also the action of the Director General of Police in rejecting the petitioner's representation, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
5.
The order has been challenged as being without jurisdiction and contrary to the provisions of the rules.
It is averred that there was no basis for describing the petitioner's integrity as `doubtful'.
As such, the order of premature retirement is vitiated.
6.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents in the form of an affidavit of Mr. AK Sharma, Senior Superintendent of Police.
It has been inter alia averred that the work and conduct of the petitioner was not satisfactory.
The petitioner was warned on July 26, 1974 and on November 3, 1978.
He was suspended w.e.f.
August 4, 1971 for indiscipline, assaulting a subordinate and abusing a senior officer.
It has been further averred that adverse comments have been made regarding the petitioners performance in the Confidential Report for the period from April 1, 1982 to September 30, 1982 and thereafter in the report for the period from April 1, 1982 to March 31, 1983.
It has also been averred that adverse remarks have been recorded for the period from August 31, 1987 to Match 31, 1988.
The respondents aver that these remarks in the Annual Confidential Reports have been given by the reporting officers after observing the petitioner's work and conduct.
His performance was poor.
It has also been averred that the petitioner has rightly been retired and his representation etc. have been validly rejected after proper consideration by the competent authority.
7.
I have heard Mr. Gurnam.
Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS Shergil, learned counsel for the respondents.
8.
Mr. Gurnam Singh contends that the petitioner had been actually appointed as an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
As such, the order of premature retirement could have been passed only by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police and not by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
He secondly contends that the adverse remarks were recorded against the petitioner without any basis whatever.
Consequently, no reliance can be placed either on the record on the orders rejecting the petitioner's representations.
On these premises, it is contended that the impugned action is vitiated.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents contends that the Senior Superintendent of Police is the competent authority and the order is justified in view of the petitioner's record of service.
9. Who is the authority competent to pass the order of premature retirement ?
A reference is inevitably required to be made to the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services [Premature Retirement] Rules, 1975 [hereinafter referred to as `the Rules`].
Rule 2[1] defines the `appropriate authority' as under :-  "appropriate authority" means the authority which has the power to make substantive appointments to the post or service from which the Government employee is required or wants to retire or any other authority to which it is  subordinate.".
A perusal of the above provisions shows that an order under Rule 3 can be passed by an authority which has the power "to make substantive appointments to the post or service from which the Government employee is required...." to be retired.
Which is the authority competent to make substantive appointments to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector ?.
The answer is provided by Rule 121 of the Punjab Police Rules, Vol.
II., which inter alia notices that the powers of the Provincial Government under clause [b] of sub-section [1] of Section 241 of the Government of India Act, 1935 have been delegated to the authorities to make appointments to the non-gazetted ranks.
In case of Sub-Inspectors and Assistant Sub-Inspectors, it is recorded that the authority has been delegated to the Superintendents of Police vide CS No. 155 dated 261964.
Further, a reference to Rule 133[2] shows that "officiating promotions to the rank of Sub-Inspector and Assistant Sub-Inspector shall be made by the Superintendents of Police and Assistant Superintendents, Government Railway Police ....." If it is found that "the flow of promotion is unevenly distributed among districts, the Deputy Inspector-General shall make suitable transfers of Assistant Sub-Inspectors and Head Constables on the promotion lists from one district to another.
"Still further, Rule 139 which deals with the preparation of List `D' and promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector shows that the names of the Head Constables, who qualify at Police Training College in the Promotion Course by passing the intermediate School Course are entered in Part I of List `D'.
In the case of "outstanding Head Constables who have not passed the Promotion Course for Head Constables at Police Training College due to being over age but otherwise are of exceptional merit and are considered suitable..." the names can be included in Part II of List `D' with the approval of the Inspector General of Police.
Further, under Clause 3 of Rule 139, the Annual Confidential Reports in respect of all the Head Constables whose names are mentioned in parts I and II of the List `D' have to be furnished to the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
Clause 4 provides that "Promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector shall be made in accordance with the seniority of the Head Constables on List "D" which may be ignored by the Superintendent of Police in exceptional circumstances only for reasons to be recorded in writing with the approval of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.".
10.
A perusal of Clause 4 shows that promotion can be ordered by the Superintendent of Police in the normal circumstances in accordance with the seniority on List "D".
However, the Superintendent of Police is required to get approval of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police in case he wants to ignore the seniority of a certain person on account of certain exceptional circumstances.
There is no provision in the rules which requires that promotion or appointment to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector can be made only by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
11.
In view of the provisions noticed above, it appears that the appropriate authority to pass an order of premature retirement in case of an Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police is the Superintendent of Police and not the Deputy Inspector-General.
12.
Mr. Gurnam Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner had also contended that he had been appointed as an Assistant Sub-Inspector by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police and consequently, the impugned action is without jurisdiction.
13.
Mr. Shergil, has produced the record.
The names have to be approved for inclusion into List `D' for promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
Accordingly, an order was issued on July 3, 1980 by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
It was, however, provided that "formal orders/Gazette Notification will be issued by the concerned SSPs/SP of the Range under intimation to this office.
Accordingly, an order was issued by the Senior Superintendent of Police on July 7, 1980 by which the petitioner was ordered to be promoted as an Assistant Sub-Inspector.
In this situation, it cannot be said that he had actually been promoted by the Director-General of Police and not by the Superintendent of Police.
14.
Mr. Gurnam Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies on the decision of this Court in Karnail Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989[2] SLR 345.
On the basis of this judgment the learned counsel contends that the power of the appointments vests exclusively in the Deputy Inspector- General.
There are clear distinguishing features.
Firstly, in Karnail Singh's case, the order of appointment as an Assistant Sub-Inspector had been passed by the Deputy Inspector-General.
Secondly, the provisions of Rule 139[2] as applicable in case of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police in Haryana are vitally different from those in force in the State of Punjab.
In the rules as applicable in the State of Haryana, it is specifically provided that "Substantive promotion shall be made by the Deputy Inspector-General in accordance with the principles prescribed in rule 131 and officiating promotion shall be made in accordance with the sub-rule 134[2]."
Such is not the position in case of rules as applicable to the officers in the State of Punjab.
The clear difference in the language of the rules makes it clear that the decision in Karnail Singh's case has no application in the State of Punjab.
Accordingly, the contention raised by the learned counsel has no merit and deserves to be rejected.
15.
The learned counsel for the petitioner then points out that vide letter dated November 14, 1991, the Special Secretary [Home] has directed the Director-General of Police, Punjab to re-examine the matter in the light of the decision in Karnail Singh's case.
The letter as produced by the learned counsel is placed on record as Mark `A'.
A perusal of this letter shows that the Special Secretary had merely desired the Director-General of Police to re-examine the particular case.
No general instructions holding out the Deputy Inspector-General of Police is the appointing authority in case of Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police, have been issued.
Accordingly, no benefit can be derived from this communication.
16.
Further, as already noticed, the petitioner's record of service is replete with adverse reports.
His integrity has been doubted.
His performance has not been found to be up to the mark.
In such a situation, the appropriate authority was fully justified in coming to the conclusion that it is in public interest to prematurely retire the petitioner.
I can find no infirmity in the action taken by the respondents.
17.
Mr. Gurnam Singh contends that there was no material on the basis of which his integrity could have been described as `doubtful'.
The contention has no merit.
The remarks were recorded by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
The representation of the petitioner against the adverse remarks was rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Thereafter, the orders of premature retirement has been passed.
The petitioner's representation against that order has been examined in detail by the Director-General of Police and found to be wholly lacking in merit.
There is no suggestion of any bias against any particular officer.
In such a situation, in exercise of writ jurisdiction, the Court does not sit to hear an appeal with regard to the remarks recorded in Confidential Reports.
No infirmity can be found in the action taken by the Respondents.
The petition which is wholly lacking in merit, is dismissed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition dismissed.