RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed by the Ferozepur Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Ferozepur (hereinafter called the Bank), impugning the order of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, dated 17th July, 1991 (Annexure P-5) by which respondent Sukhdev Singh was ordered to be reinstated in the service, but without any arrears of pay for the period he remained out of service.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to the present petition are that respondent Sukhdev Singh was employed by the Bank as Senior Clerk on 11th November, 1965.
According to the averments made in the petition, he was promoted as Senior Accountant by the Bank with effect from 15th January, 1970, subject to the approval of the Registrar.
He was confirmed as Senior Accountant vide Resolution of the Bank, dated 6th February, 1971.
Further averments made in the petition are that the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, did not approve the promotion of respondent Sukhdev Singh which was conveyed vide letter dated 21st July, 1971, and the respondent was reverted to the post of Senior Clerk with effect from 1st July, 1971 and he was paid the salary of Senior Clerk after that date.
It has further been pleaded that service conditions of respondent Sukhdev Singh were governed by the Rules known as Punjab Cooperative Financing Institution Service Rules, 1958 (hereinafter called the 1958 Rules).
In contemplation of a departmental enquiry, respondent Sukhdev Singh was placed under suspension by the Managing Director of the Bank, vide order dated 2nd August, 1971.
This order was passed on the basis of the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Bank.
He was served with a charge-sheet on 15th November, 1971, but after being allowed many extensions to file reply, no reply was filed by the said respondent.
The Committee found the respondent guilty of the charges and recommended his dismissal.
A show cause notice was issued as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
Accordingly, after considering the reply to the show cause notice, the Executive Committee of the Bank decided to dismiss the respondent from service with effect from 28th February, 1972.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that respondent filed an appeal against the order of his dismissal under Rule 10 of the 1958 Rules before the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, but the same was dismissed in default of appearance on 3rd September, 1974.
It has further been stated that a further revision under Section 69 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter called the Act), filed by the respondent, was dismissed by the Government as not maintainable.
4.
The charges against respondent-Sukhdev Singh were pertaining to some alleged embezzlement.
A criminal case had also been initiated against him by the Bank, but ultimately he was acquitted.
The said respondent was also involved in a murder case.
He was initially convicted by the Sessions Judge, but later on acquitted by the High Court on 11th July, 1986.
Thereafter, the respondent filed an application before the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, that since he had been acquitted in the criminal proceedings, he should be reinstated in service.
After hearing the representative of the Bank, the Registrar passed the impugned order, as observed above.
5.
In the written statement filed by respondent-Sukhdev Singh, it has been averred that it is wrong on the part of the petitioner-Bank to state that the Registrar had not approved his appointment vide letter dated 21st July, 1971.
In fact he has attached the said letter as Annexure R-3, in which it is not stated that the appointment of said respondent-Sukhdev Singh is not being approved.
It has further been highlighted that the appeal filed by the said respondent against the order of dismissal passed by the Bank was never decided by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies and in fact on 12th September, 1974, a letter was addressed by the Registrar to all concerned, including Sukhdev Singh-respondent, that the appeal will be decided by the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh, after the criminal case pending against the appellant, i.e. Sukhdev Singh was decided.
It was after the decision of the criminal cases against the respondent that he approached the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, that he should now be reinstated, he having been acquitted in the criminal case.
It was after hearing all concerned that the Registrar passed the order of reinstatement of said Sukhdev Singh.
It has further been pleaded that by respondent-Sukhdev Singh that moment he was promoted as Senior Accountant, though the promotion was subject to the approval of the Registrar, he had become a member of the common cadre created under Section 84-A of the Act thereafter was governed by the Rules known as the Punjab State Co-operative Financing Institutions Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Common Cadre Rules').
It may be observed here that under the 1958 Rules, each Co-operative Bank has a separate entity so far as the service conditions of the employees are concerned and it is the Board of Directors of the Bank which is the appointing/Punishing Authority of its employees.
When the common cadre was created, all the employees of the various Financial Co-operative Institutions from the rank of Senior Accountant and above were merged into one cadre and their appointing/Punishing Authority became the Board of Directors of the apex Bank, i.e. the Punjab State Cooperative Bank Limited, Chandigarh.
6.
The case of the respondent is that the Board of Directors of the Bank ceased to have any disciplinary or, administrative control over him after he had been promoted as a Senior Accountant and had become the member of the common cadre.
Thereafter it was the Board of Directors of the apex Bank who could take any disciplinary proceedings against him.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the promotion of respondent-Sukhdev Singh as Senior Accountant was subject to the approval of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies and till the approval was not accorded, respondent could not be deemed to have become member of the common cadre.
In fact, according to him, a letter had been received from the Registrar disapproving the promotion of respondent-Sukhdev Singh and in this view of the matter, the question of respondent becoming a member of the common cadre did not arise.
Therefore, the jurisdiction to take disciplinary action against the respondent lay with the petitioner-Bank under the 1958 Rules and not with the apex Bank under the Common Cadre Rules.
He has further argued that the respondent's application for reinstatement was not under any provision of law and the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, had no jurisdiction to pass an order of reinstatement on the application of the respondent, and, consequently, the impugned order, Annexure P-5, is liable to be quashed being wholly jurisdiction and having been passed under no provision of law.
8.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent argued that in fact the respondent's promotion as Senior Accountant was never disapproved, as would be evident from the letter of the Registrar, dated 21st July, 1971 (Annexure R-3).
He rather argued that one Shri Mohan Lal Gupta was also promoted along with the respondent, which promotion was also made subject to the approval of the Registrar.
Vide letter dated 21st July, 1971, the promotion of said Shri Mohan Lal Gupta was not approved.
Disciplinary action was taken by the Bank against said Shri Gupta under the 1958 Rules and ultimately he was punished by the Bank.
He filed a writ petition in this Court, inter-alia, claiming that the Bank had no authority in law to take disciplinary action against him, inasmuch as after promotion as Senior Accountant, he had become the member of the common cadre and only the apex Bank could take action against him.
Though his writ petition was dismissed, but he succeeded in the Letters Patent Appeal, wherein it was held that even though his promotion was subject to the approval of the Registrar and further that the approval had not been granted by the Registrar, but on coming into force of the Common Cadre Rules on 21st April, 1971, he had become a member of the common cadre and it was the apex Bank which could take action against him.
The judgment is reported as Shri Mohan Lal Gupta v. The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab and others, 1974 SLWR 887.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the writ petition.
In the present case, as observed above, there is no order or communication by the Registrar of the Co-operative Societies disapproving the promotion of the respondent.
Even if for argument sake it is presumed that the Registrar had not approved the promotion of the respondent as Senior Accountant, even then as per the judgment of the Letters Patent Bench in Shri Mohan Lal Gupta's case (supra) the respondent had become a member of the common cadre and was to be governed by the Common Cadre Rules.
Admittedly under the Common Cadre Rules, it is the apex Bank that has to take action against the members of the common cadre.
In this view of the matter, the initial order passed by the Bank dismissing the respondent under the 1958 Rules, was without jurisdiction.
It has further been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent by reference to Annexure R-4 that the Registrar had informed the respondent that his appeal would be decided after the criminal trial against him is over.
Consequently no decision on merits was arrived at by the Registrar.
It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent that without the knowledge of this communication from the Registrar, his client had filed a revision petition to the Government, which, in law, did not lie.
According to the learned counsel, after the acquittal from the criminal trials, the representation which he had filed was in fact for deciding his appeal which had since been pending before the Registrar.
I agree with the learned counsel for the respondent.
I also agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the reasoning given in the impugned order is not sound that since one of the co-accused with the respondent in the embezzlement case had been acquitted by the Criminal Court and he had been reinstated by the Bank, respondent-Sukhdev Singh should also be reinstated on humanitarian grounds.
The Registrar Cooperative Societies really did not go into the point whether the order of dismissal passed by the Bank under the 1958 Rules was within its jurisdiction or whether the respondent was to be governed by the Common Cadre Rules.
In view of the Division Bench judgment in Shri Mohan Lal Gupta's case (supra), in which it has been held that persons like the respondent were the members of the common cadre and were to be governed by the Common Cadre Rules, I have not thought it fit to remand the case to the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, as the point has already been decided by a Division Bench of this Court.
As observed above, I am not agreeing with the reasoning of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies for reinstating the respondent, but I am agreeing with the conclusion of ordering reinstatement of the respondent and further that he would not be entitled to the pay for the period he had remained absent.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.