JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The plaintiff - appellant is an Instructor in Weaving at the Haryana Agricultural University, the present respondent.
His claim for a declaration to the effect that he was entailed to the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 sanctioned by the UGC w.e.f.
August 14, 1973 and that the order of the University rejecting his claim was illegal, was decreed by the trial Court.
The appeal filed by the University having been accepted by the lower appellant Court the appellant has come up in this second appeal to this court.
A few facts may be so noticed.
2.
The appellant was appointed as an Instructor (Weaving) in the pay scale of Rs. 300-25-600 in the college of Home Science vide order dated July 25, 1973.
The order of appointment is Exhibit P-1.
One of the stipulations made in this order was that the appellant may be called upon to do teaching, research, extension work in your subject as determined by the Vice-Chancellor from time to time".
It was further provided that "the University will have the right to change the designation depending on the work you are assigned but your rank of Instructor, emoluments and conditions of service will not be varied to your disadvantage."
3.
Claiming that he had been teaching classes of Home Science College upto B.Sc in the subject of Handloom/Weaving and that he had been attending to extension work as determined by the authorities from time to time the plaintiff-appellant sought a declaration and decree to the effect that he is "entitled to the UGC Grade of Rs. 700-1600 from the date of his appointments as this grade has been adopted by the University w.e.f.
1.1.1973 .......".
The claim made by the plaintiff-appellant having been controverted on behalf of the defendant-respondent, the trial Court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the UGC grade of Rs. 700-1600 as illeged ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the impugned order of Vice-Chancellor dated 13121977 is illegal, bad in law, against the Constitution discriminatory, against rules of natural justice etc ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is a teacher as alleged?
OPP.
4.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form as alleged ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the plaintiff has waived his right ?
OPD.
4.
After examination of the evidence, the learned trial Court held that the plaintiff was a teacher and was entitled to the grade of Rs. 700-1600.
The findings given by the learned trial Court of issue Nos. 1, 2 and 3 were reversed by the learned lower appellant Court.
As a result the suit was dismissed.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the learned lower appellant Court the plaintiff-appellant has come up in this second appeal.
6.
The primary contention raised by Mr. Surjit Singh the learned counsel for the appellant is that he possesses the highest qualification in his field of specialization; that he is actually performing all the duties assigned to a teacher; and that even his confidential reports have been recorded on the premises that the appellant is a teacher.
He further submits that the action of the University in treating the appellant differently and not allowing him the scale of Rs. 700-1600 in spite of the fact that the said scale has been allowed to other Instructors like Mr. AK Paul, as Instructor in Fine Arts, is discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He further submits that at the time of the appellant's appointment as an Instructor in the year 1973, all persons working as Instructor or Lecturers were placed in an identical scale of pay viz. Rs. 300-600 and that while revising the scale, the persons working as Lecturers have been granted the scale of Rs. 700-1600 while those like the plaintiff-appellant have been placed in the scale of Rs. 550-900 arbitrarily.
7.
The claim as made on behalf of the appellant has been controverted by Mr. Harbhagwan Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University.
8.
The principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' is not only a fair doctrine but also one of the mandates provided by the Constitution.
Still this principle cannot be interpreted to mean that school teacher is entitled to parity of treatment with a University professor.
All that this principles implies is that unless various person doing teaching work can be reasonably classified on the basis of their qualifications the job requirements, the responsibilities attached to the post and the nature of duties performed by them, they should get parity of treatment on the matter of pay if they perform similar or identical duties.
Is it so in the present case?
9.
Admittedly the appellant is a Graduate and also possesses the qualification of Diploma in Weaving and Hosiery.
He possesses no Post Graduate Degree of qualification.
As against this the minimum qualification for a person working as a lecturer is a Post Graduate degree of MA or MSc.
It is well known that even persons who have done MPhil.
or even P.hD.
are now not getting jobs as lecturers at various places in the country.
Consequently, it is appears reasonable to assume that the appellant is not qualified for appointment as a lecturer as he does not possess a Post Graduate qualification like MA or MSc.
10.
It is equally settled that a differential treatment in the matter of scales of pay can be accorded on the basis of academic qualification.
Consequently if the University chose to accept the commendation of the University Grants Commission and revised the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 meant for the post of lecturer to that Rs. 700-1600 but restricted the pay scale of Instructors to Rs. 550-25-750/30-900 the classification was based on well founded criterion viz the academic qualifications.
In such a situation the differential treatment cannot be said to either arbitrary or false.
The academic qualifications provide a reasonable basis for the grant of different scales of pay.
This is precisely what the University appears to have done in the present case.
11.
Mr. Saurjit Singh, the learned counsel for the appellant, contends that the appellant is not only performing duties identical to those of a lecturer but he is even doing extension/research work and even his confidential report viz. Exhibit P-3 to P-7 have been recorded on the premises that he is actually working as a teacher.
12.
There is no quarrel with the factual premises on which the argument has been raised.
It does appear that the appellant has been assigned teaching work.
One of the document on the record produced in its behalf is university order dated October 27, 1979 (Exhibit P-11).
It is also correct that the confidential reports of the appellant were recorded on the premises that he is a teacher.
In fact, an Instructor is meant to instruct the students in the particular field assigned to him.
However, the difference between instructors and other teachers lies in the educational qualifications that they possess and the posts that they hold.
If the University on the basis of academic treatment to persons belonging to the two categories viz.
Instructions and Lecturers, its action, as observed above, is not vitiated on account or arbitrariness or violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
13.
Mr. Saurjit Singh, however, points out that Mr. AK Paul, an Instructor in Fine Arts has been given the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600.
He contends that Mr. Paul was appointed as an Instructor in the same manner as the appellant and that there is no basis for according differential treatment between the two.
14.
Mr. Paul has appeared as DW-3.
He has categorically stated that in the year 1975, he was selected as an Art Lecturer.
He has also categorically stated that he was granted the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 when the University had recognised his qualifications viz.
Diploma of 5 years in Fine Arts as equivalent to MA He was specifically asked as to how the University satisfied itself regarding the qualifications.
He has answered the question by pointing out that the clarification had been sought from the Haryana Government in response to which the University was informed that persons possessing 5 years diploma were entitled to the scale of Rs. 700-1600.
It is thus, clear that the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 was granted to Mr. Paul only after the University was satisfied that his qualifications were equal to a degree of MA  15.
The plaintiff has not produced anything on record to show that the qualification possessed by him were equal to those of MA or MSc.
In such a situation, no parity exists between the two cases.
Consequently the charge of discrimination as sought to be made out on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this appeal.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.