Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Superintending Engineer in the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), prays for the issue of a writ quashing the charge-sheet dated July 10, 1990 (annexure P.1 with the writ petition) and the consequential departmental proceedings initiated against him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a Sub-Divisional Officer in the year 1960.
He was promoted to the post of Executive Engineer in the year 1973.
He was still further promoted its Superintending Engineer in the year 1988.
He is working as such.
It is averred that in March 1982 Certain contractors made a complaint against him that he had constructed a house on Plot No. 1003, in Section 27-B, Chandigarh and if an enquiry was made, it would be found that the petitioner's assets were disproportionate to his known sources of income.
The Vigilance Department registered a regular enquiry No. 7/1982 against him.
According to the petitioner, the case was entrusted to Mr. Mohinderpal Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, who after thorough investigation, submitted a report in September 1984 observing that the complaint was false.
Certain objections having been raised against this report, the matter was entrusted to one Shri Garib Singh, Sub-Inspector, who submitted a report in September 1986 reiterating the findings recorded by his predecessor.
The petitioner alleges that in a wholly arbitrary and illegal manner, the department again entrusted the enquiry to Mr. Harbans Singh, Inspector.
In October 1987, Mr, Harbans Singh submitted a report exonerating the petitioner.
The matter was then entrusted to another Deputy Superintendent of Police, who found that the petitioner's income from known sources was well in excess of the expenditure.
The petitioner alleges that he along with his wife owns about 210 kanals of agricultural land, besides the land held jointly by him along with his brother etc.
The petitioner has given details of various properties and claimed that the income therefrom fully justified the conclusions recorded by the various enquiry officers.
In spite of the above facts, a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner in July, 1990 alleging that his income during the period 1971 to 1981 was Rs. 2,46,70217 Ps.
while the total expenditure amounted to Rs. 3,59,23400 Ps.
On this basis, it was alleged that the petitioner has spent an amount of Rs. 1,12,53183 Ps.
in excess of his income.
Accordingly, action was proposed to be taken against him under the provision of Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
3.
In an effort to explain the factual position, the petitioner has averred that the petitioner's income from agricultural land has been shown to be Rs. 77,690.64 Ps.
while actually the income received by him after deducting the expenditure was Rs. 3,10,76200.
Similarly, the petitioner states that his wife's income was actually Rs. 1,88,71300 while the respondents had actually taken into consideration an amount of Rs. 471769 Ps.
On this premises, it is averred that if the actual income is taken into consideration, the charge would be apparently untenable.
Further more, the petitioner has also averred that "the respondents are insisting on having the income from agricultural land not on the basis of the actual records and documents but after calculating it on the basis of the settlement yield.
This calculation is made on the yield settled in the records of the administration.
It is submitted that this settlement yield was calculated before partition and has never been revised so far.
Now the actual yield from the land is far in excess of the settlement yield and it is wholly arbitrary on the part of the respondents to calculate this income on the basis of settlement yield."
It has also been averred that the petitioner has made a query from the Chief Agricultural Officer at Ferozpur regarding the average yield of different crops of Abohar area for the years 1971 to 1982.
A copy of the reply received from the Chief Agricultural Officer, Ferozpur indicating the average yield of different crops has been produced as Annexure P4.
On the basis of this, it is claimed that the petitioner and his wife's share of income for the relevant period would be Rs. 2,20,31336 Ps.
Besides this, he had also derived income of Rs. 33,50000 from the land situate at village Bhikhi Wind in District Amritsar.
On this premises, it is claimed that the charge levelled against the petitioner is baseless.
It is also averred that the charge-sheet has been issued after inordinately long delay and on that account also, the action is vitiated.
According to the petitioner, the delay was caused by the department and is not attributable to him.
The petitioner has also averred that he had received a loan of Rs. 20,000/- from one Harminder Singh and on account of the long lapse of time, the evidence is not available to him.
Still further, Mr. Shamsher Singh, who was the Commission Agent of the petitioner has died and as such crucial evidence has been lost.
The petitioner also claims that on account of the long lapse of 21 years, his memory has faded which would hamper his defence.
On these premises, the petitioner claims that the charge-sheet issued to him as also the enquiry initiated by the respondents are vitiated.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by Mr. SM Dua, Joint Secretary, (Vigilance).
It has been averred by way of preliminary objection that no legal or fundamental right of the petitioner has been violated and as such he is not entitled to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court.
It has been further averred that the departmental enquiry has been entrusted to a high ranking and responsible officer, who is a member of the Indian Administrative Service.
The petitioner will get full opportunity to vindicate his position.
In view of this position, it is claimed that the writ petition is wholly incompetent.
On merits, it has been averred that the enquiry was entrusted to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Mr. Mohinderpal Singh.
The report submitted by the officer to the Director Vigilance Bureau "is confidential and is privileged document and nobody can inspect this report/record without the prior permission of competent authority.
The petitioner was never granted any permission to inspect the record of RE No. 7/82 Ferozepur and it is surprising as to how the petitioner is mentioning some facts of the confidential record without inspecting it."
The report was examined by the competent authority and it has prima facie been established that the petitioner has disproportionate assets beyond his known sources of income.
It has been further stated that after examining the investigation report, certain observations were made and Sub-Inspector Garib Singh had submitted reply to those observations.
The respondents state that the Vigilance Department has not marked this enquiry to Mr. Harbans Singh, Inspector, Ferozpur.
However, certain observations were made by the Vigilance Bureau and Shri Harbans Singh had submitted his reply thereto.
The correspondence between the Vigilance between the Vigilance Bureau and the subordinate office is confidential.
It has been admitted by the respondents that 4th enquiry report "was submitted by the DSP after holding enquiry into the allegations against the petitioner.
The report of DSP is not final one.
The competent authority after examining the matter and keeping facts and figures relating to income and expenditure of the petitioner came to the conclusion that the details mentioned in various investigation reports were incorrect and the expenditure of the petitioner during the check period was worked out to Rs. 3,59,234/- whereas the income was Rs. 2,46,702.14 Ps.
As such the allegation against the petitioner having assets beyond his known sources of income is fully proved.
The respondents maintain that the petitioner was given sufficient time to submit his reply to the charge-sheet, but he having failed to do so, the department was entitled to appoint an enquiry officer.
The claim of the petitioner that his income was in excess of that taken into consideration by the respondents has been controverted.
It has been averred that "the income from land is calculated on the basis of the settlement yield (Takhmina Pedawar) in the Vigilance Department and this practice is still prevailing in this department as well as in the Punjab Revenue Department....
The average yield got prepared by the petitioner from the Chief Agricultural Officer, Ferozepur (Annexure P.1) is not relevant."
The plea that the charge-sheet had been issued after inordinately long delay has been controverted by asserting that the petitioner "was not co-operating in the matter and as a result of which delay was being caused in finalising the enquiry.
In this connection, a DO letter dated 22988 was written to the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department for instructing the petitioner to co- operate the enquiry so as to avoid delay in enquiry."
On these premises, the claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been contested.
5.
The petitioner has filed a replication reiterating the averments made in the petition.
6.
The respondents were granted an opportunity to file an affidavit indicating as to how the petitioner had contributed to the delay.
An affidavit dated January 20, 1993 was filed by Mr. SM Dua.
In this affidavit, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner did not co-operate with the Investigating Officer and as a result the enquiry was delayed.
Reference has been made to a letter dated December 18, 1984 written by the Investigating Officer to the petitioner vide which he was asked to give certain information.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R.II.
As the petitioner had failed to give a reply, a reminder was sent to him vide letter dated January 8, 1985.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure RIII with the affidavit.
This was followed by letters dated February 26, 1985 and July 28, 1986.
After receipt of the petitioner's reply, the enquiry officer had sent the report.
Certain objections were raised by the Head Office and notes dated January 27, 1987 and April 27, 1988 were sent to the Investigating Officer for compliance.
The officer met the petitioner on June 14, 1988, July 11, 1988, July 25, 1988 and July 30, 1988, but the petitioner did not give his view points on one pretext or the other.
A letter dated August 23, 1988 was then written by the Superintendent of Police to the Chief Director Vigilance Bureau.
In pursuance to this, the letter dated September 22, 1988 was written by the Chief Director to the Chief Engineer.
On this basis, it is claimed that the petitioner was responsible for the delay.
The petitioner has filed a reply to this additional affidavit asserting that the requisite information was furnished by him at the relevant time and that he cannot be accused of having delayed the enquiry proceedings.
7.
I have heard Mr. PS Patwalia for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli for the respondents.
Mr. Patwalia contends that the enquiry proceedings are vitiated on account of inordinately long delay caused by the respondents and that on this ground alone, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
On the other hand, Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondents submits that the petitioner was himself responsible for the delay and cannot be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong.
8.
On a perusal of the pleadings of the parties, the facts that clearly emerge are that on receipt of a complaint in March 1982, the Vigilance Department had registered an enquiry.
The investigation continued and it was finally in July, 1990 that the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
It is also the admitted position that the charge against the petitioner relates to the period from the years 1971 to 1981.
It is in the background of this factual position, that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties have to be considered.
9.
Every civil servant is expected to work honestly and diligently.
Any complaint casting a shadow on an officer's integrity has to be promptly examined and in case the allegations in the complaint are found to be prima facie correct, an enquiry in accordance with the rules should be promptly initiated.
It is probably with this object that the Vigilance Department has been constituted.
It has the expertise as well as the man power to investigate every complaint and to initiate appropriate action.
At the first stage, it has to conduct a sort of preliminary enquiry.
If the allegations in a complaint are prima facie established, the regular enquiry normally follow.
Except in rare cases, where the quantum of evidence may be voluminous and the number of witnesses too large, the primary enquiry should not take much time at all.
10.
What has happened in the present case ?
Admittedly, the complaint was received by the respondents in March 1982.
After that, according to the respondents, the first letter was sent to the petitioner on December 18, 1984.
There is nothing on record to indicate as to what steps were taken by the Vigilance Department from March, 1982 to December 18, 1984.
Still further, a reminder was sent to the petitioner on January 8, 1985 followed by another one on February 26, 1985.
Thereafter, it appears that there was a full for one year and five months, when a letter dated July 28, 1986 was sent to the petitioner.
The respondents admitted that the petitioner had made a statement dated August 26, 1996, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R.VI.
Certain observations were, thereafter, made in the two notes dated January 27, 1987 and April 27, 1988.
There is no explanation whatsoever with regard to the time spent after the petitioner had given his explanation.
It has been asserted that the Investigating Officer met the petitioner on different occasions during the months of June and July, 1988 when he did not give his "view points and clarifications on one pretext or the other knowingly."
Then it letter dated September 22, 1988 was sent by the Chief Director Vigilance Bureau to the Chief Engineer to call upon the petitioner to cooperate.
This sequence clearly shows that the enquiry proceedings were conducted by the respondents in a very leisurely manner.
The respondents have been unable to give any explanation as to what steps were taken by them from March 1982 when the complaint was received till December 1984, when the first letter was written to the petitioner.
Even thereafter, certain letters have been written to the petitioner at different intervals of time.
The sequence of events shows that the department wits taking its own sweet time to proceed in the matter.
It did not Act as promptly as it should have.
11.
Mrs. Charu Tuli submits that the delay was caused by the petitioner.
Assuming it was so, nothing stopped the respondents from proceeding to charge-sheet the petitioner in accordance with the rules.
After all, the Vigilance Department was initially conducting only a preliminary enquiry to decide as to whether or not a regular enquiry should be initiated.
It the authorities felt that the petitioner was not co-operating and was actually adopting dilatory tactics nothing stopped them from taking further action in the matter and initiating a regular enquiry On receipt of the complaint, the department could have proceeded to ask for the petitioner's explanation and if on preliminary investigation, it was not found to be satisfactory, the petitioner could have been served with the charge-sheet.
This was not done.
In fact, the sequence indicates that the different officers were entrusted with the investigation at different stages.
Initially, the enquiry was entrusted to a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Then the matter was being examined by a Sub Inspector, Garib Singh.
Thereafter, it appears to have been referred to Mr. Harbans Singh, Inspector and then to some other Deputy Superintendent of Police.
The lackadaisical manner in which the whole proceedings have been conducted clearly shows that there was no serious effort to expeditiously decide the matter.
The job of the Vigilance Department is to exercise vigilance over the civil servants.
One does not know as to who can keep vigilance over this department itself.
Be that as it may, it appears clearly that the respondents did not proceed with the investigation as expeditiously as they ought to have.
12.
It is true that mere delay may not itself be sufficient to vitiate a charge-sheet or the initiation of the departmental proceedings.
No rule or law prescribes any period of limitation for this purpose.
At the same time, it cannot be forgotten that delay can prejudice the interest of an officer.
Long lapse of time can result in loss of evidence, documentary as well as oral.
Even human memory can fade.
The exact details can be forgot ten.
In such a situation, the rights of a civil servant can be prejudiced.
This is what appears to have happened in the present case.
One of the points which arises for consideration is regarding the actual income derived by the petitioner from his lands.
The Commission Agent to whom the petitioner claims to have been selling his crops had died.
On account of lapse of time, the evidence has ceased to be available.
Still further, the charges relate to the period from 1971 to 1981.
The charge-sheet has been given to the petitioner in the year 1990.
He cannot be accused of feigning loss of memory.
It is reasonable to expect that the details regarding the factual position may have been forgotten.
The documents may have been lost or destroyed.
Even if the petitioner had become aware of the complaint in December 1984 when the letter was sent to him, a fairly long time had elapsed.
In such a situation, it appears unreasonable and unfair to hold that the departmental enquiry can continue against the petitioner.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to different decisions to contend that delay vitiates the enquiry proceedings.
Both sides have referred to decisions.
On perusal of these cases, no inflexible rule can be inferred.
Each case depends on its own facts.
However, the preponderance of judicial opinion appears to be that wherever delay is likely to prejudice the interest of an officer, the enquiry proceedings shall be vitiated.
Such appears to be the situation in the present case.
14.
It is true that one hears more and more about the evil of corruption creeping into our system.
It is also correct that whenever a case comes to the notice of the Court, a guilty person should not be allowed to go unpunished.
However, it is equally important that the employee has a fair chance to establish his innocence.
In a case, like the present one, where the department takes inordinately long time without a satisfactory explanation to initiate proceedings, and the factual position indicates the likelihood of prejudice being caused to the employee, the Court should step in to protect the rights of the civil servant.
15.
Irrespective of the above, there is another aspect of the matter.
The charge against the petitioner in nutshell is that he spent Rs. 1,12,53183 Ps.
in excess of his known sources of income during the period of ten years from 1971 to 1981.
The claim of the petitioner is that the respondents have not correctly assessed his in come from lands.
He has categorically asserted that the income from land was assessed on the basis of the, settlement yield, which was fixed before partition.
This specific averment of the petitioner in paragraph 9 of the petition has not been specifically denied by the respondents.
It is well known that agricultural yield has considerably increased on account of variety of reasons, like improved seeds and other methods of cultivation.
The yield which was available to the farmer before partition was certainly much less than what he gets out of land now.
The explanation given by the petitioner in this behalf appears to be reasonable and plausible.
If this is accepted, his income would certainly be well above that fixed by the respondents.
In that event, even the charge should be prima facie not tenable.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is held that the enquiry proceedings cannot go on against the petitioner.
Accordingly, the charge-sheet (Annexure P-1) as also the enquiry proceedings are quashed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.