RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was posted as a Sub Divisional Engineer in Construction Sub Division No. 8 at Patiala in the year 1973.
At that time a new Bus Stand was being constructed in Patiala.
It is not disputed that the work of construction of the Bus Stand was under the Construction Sub Division No. 3, Patiala, of which one Shri AN Baldia was the Sub Divisional Engineer.
For a short period of about two months, i.e. 19111973 to 2811974, the work of construction of the Bus Stand was transferred from Construction Sub Division No. 3 to Construction Sub Division No. 8, of which the petitioner was the Sub Divisional Engineer.
2.
It has been averred in the petition that some time in the year 1974, the petitioner learnt that there was an allegation that poor quality steel pattern R.C.C.
work had been done at the Bus Stand and it was in this connection that Shri Gurdial Singh, the concerned Sectional Officer, had been suspended.
The petitioner apprehending that his name was being unnecessarily dragged into the controversy, he himself wrote a letter on 5th September, 1974 to the then Executive Engineer, Construction Sub Division No. 2 at Patiala, intimating that in fact the petitioner had been the Incharge of the work for about two months and during that period no steel pattern R.C.C.
work had been done at the site.
A copy of this letter has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
3.
A charge-sheet dated 12th August, 1991, was served on the petitioner (copy Annexure P-3) attributing some negligence in getting the work of construction done by him regarding the construction of the Bus Stand at Patiala in the year 1974.
The charge-sheet reads as under :-  "On the basis of allegations appended herewith Shri MS Paul, Sub Divisional Engineer, National Highways Sub Division PWD B&R Br., Patiala while incharge of Construction Sub Division No. 8 Patiala is charged for the following :-  Shri MS Paul, Sub-Divisional Engineer, has been found negligent for not getting work of Construction of New Bus Stand at Patiala executed in accordance with PWD specifications and also not performing his duties in accordance with para 55(a) of PWD B&R Manual of orders and hence has rendered himself liable for disciplinary action under the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970."
4.
The statement of allegation, which accompanied the charge-sheet, is reproduced below :-  "Shri MS Paul, Sub Divisional Engineer, National Highway Sub Division, Patiala while in charge of construction Sub Division No.8 got executed the work of Construction of New Bus Stand, Patiala.
During the execution of work he got executed work of Construction of stair and beams in this building through Shri MS Bindra, Contractor (deceased) the record entries for these items of work made by Shri Gurdial Singh SO In MB No. 1121 pages 86 to 97 were checked by him but the Superintending Engineer Patiala Circle, PWD B&R Br., Patiala during his inspection on 29.6.74 had observed this work to be of poor quality.
Thus he has failed to perform his duty in accordance with para 55(a) of PWD (B&R Manual of Orders).
For allowing execution of poor quality work he is considered to be responsible for not performing his duty properly."
5.
On the basis of the charge-sheet, it was proposed to take action against the petitioner under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The present writ petition has been filed for quashing the charge-sheet.
6.
It has been averred in the writ petition that on receipt of the charge-sheet, the petitioner vide letter dated 30th August, 1991 had asked Respondent No. 3 to supply certain record to enable him to file a reply to the charge-sheet.
He received a reply that since the Division had been shifted from one floor to another floor, the records will be shown to the petitioner as and when the same will be available.
Further, according to the averments made in the petition, the record was not shown to the petitioner and since the time for filing reply to the charge-sheet was expiring, the petitioner submitted reply without seeing the record.
The reply was filed on 18th September, 1991, which according to the petitioner, was an interim reply.
No further action was taken thereafter.
The petitioner, therefore, filed the present writ petition for quashing the charge-sheet itself.
7.
The primary argument for the learned counsel for the petitioner is that no charge-sheet could be served on the petitioner after lapse of such a long time.
The alleged negligence is of the year 1974, whereas the charge-sheet was served in the year 1991, i.e. about 17 years of the alleged happening.
According to the learned counsel it is by now well settled by the Apex Court that the delay itself in initiating the departmental proceedings is fatal to the continuation of the departmental proceedings.
In this connection, he relied upon a judgment of the Apex Court in The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and another, JT 1990(2) SC 54, and two Division Bench judgments of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 17429 of 1991 (NS Brar v. State of Punjab), decided on 6th February, 1992 and C.W.P.
No. 3404 of 1992 (SS Seera v. The State of Punjab and others), decided on 23rd July, 1992.
In both the cases before the Division Benches, primary reliance has been placed on Bani Singh's case (supra).
8.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is that no doubt there has been delay in taking action against the petitioner, but the same has occurred because of the special circumstances, which have been mentioned in para 4 of the written statement and the same as reproduced below:  "4.
That in this regard, it is respectfully submitted that the fact of delayed action is admitted which, however, is not intentional under the special circumstances stated below:  The sequence of circumstances from 1974 to 1990 have been examined thoroughly and it is found that the petitioner himself vide his application dated 591974 submitted that he is not guilty in this case.
In the meantime the concerned Sectional Officer, Shri Gurdial Singh was placed under suspension in 6/74 and Shri HPS Bagga and Shri AN Baldia, S.D.E.
were also proceeded against for the serious lapse on their part.
The concerned record remained enclosed in the files and no further action against the petitioner could proceed.
There was a reshuffling in the offices of the Executive Engineers and their jurisdiction of the works.
In the year 1980, the concerned record was transferred from the Executive Engineer, Construction Division No. 2, Patiala, to Executive Engineer, Construction Division No. 1, Patiala.
Then the explanation of the petitioner along with Shri HPS Bagga, SDE was called by the Executive Engineer Construction Division No. 1, Patiala.
vide his letter dated 331981 (Annexure R-2 ibid) and then vide letter dated 2261983 (Annexure R-3 ibid).
The petitioner has never cared to reply the same even until now.
Finding this situation, the Superintending Engineer, Patiala Circle, PWD (B&R Branch) Patiala, was asked to call the explanation of the delinquents vide Chief Engineer PWD (B&R) Patiala letter dated 1251983 Annexure R-4.
As already stated above that there was transfer of the record including the relevant record of the petitioner from the office of the Executive Engineer, Construction Division No. 2, Patiala to Executive Engineer, Construction Division No. 1, Patiala, during June, 1980, the case could not proceed further as the record remained misplaced.
Subsequently, on locating the concerned file, the reply to Chief Engineer, PWD (B&R) Branch.
Patiala, letter dated 1251983 was given vide Superintending Engineer, Patiala Circle PWD (B&R) Banch, Patiala letter No. 67 dated 24.4.1990 and then the charge-sheet after getting approval from the Government could be issued during 12/90.
It is also added that the concerned measurement book required by the petitioner for inspection remained tied with another enquiry case which was located during 2/92 after making frantic efforts by Respondent No. 3, and the petitioner was directed vide his letter dated 331992 Annexure R.1 ibid to inspect the relevant record.
As such the petitioner is at liberty to inspect the record in accordance with the provisions of the charge-sheet.
The fact of the interim reply is admitted.
It is, however, stated that the reply of the petitioner will be considered on merits after he submits complete reply covering all the charges of the charge-sheet.
Rest of the Para as stated is wrong, hence denied."
SP10  9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In Bani Singh's case (supra) a departmental enquiry against the delinquent officer had been initiated by issuance of a charge-sheet on 22nd April, 1987 in respect of certain incidents that happened in the year 1975-76.
This action was challenged by the delinquent officer before the Central Administrative Tribunal, which quashed the charge-sheet.
The matter was taken to the Supreme Court by way of appeal by the State of Madhya Pradesh and while upholding the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, the Supreme Court observed as under:  "The appeal against the order dated 16121987 has been filed on the ground that the Tribunal should not have quashed the proceedings merely on the ground of delay and laches and should have allowed the enquiry to go on to decide the matter on merits.
We are unable to agree with this contention of the learned counsel.
The irregularities which were the subject matter of the enquiry is said to have taken place between the years 1975 = 77.
It is not the case of the department that they were not aware of the said irregularities, if any and came to know it only in 1987.
According to them even in April, 1977 there was doubt about the involvement of the officer in the said irregularities and the investigations were going on since then.
If that is so, it is unreasonable to think that they would have taken more than 12 years to initiate the disciplinary proceedings as stated by the Tribunal.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge memo and we are also of the view that it will be unfair to permit the departmental enquiry to be proceeded with at this stage.
In any case there are no grounds of interfere with the Tribunal's orders and accordingly we dismiss this appeal."
10.
The Division Bench of this Court in NS Brar's case (supra), after relying upon Bani Singh's case (supra) quashed the issuance of the charge- sheet, solely on the ground that the same had been issued after about six years of the alleged happening.
Similarly, in SS Seera's case (supra), the charge-sheet which was served after eight years of the alleged happening, was also quash.
11.
From the statement of the allegations, reproduced above, it will be clear that the Superintending Engineer, Patiala Circle, had checked the work during his inspection on 29th June, 1974, and had observed the work to be of poor quality.
So it is clear that regarding the poor quality of work, the Authorities had come to know in June, 1974 itself, if that is so, it was incumbent upon them to take expeditious steps to find out as to who were responsible for the poor quality of work.
In fact, the explanation of the petitioner was already there in the year 1974 itself.
According to para 4 of the written statement, which has already been reproduced above, an explanation was sought from the petitioner in the year 1981, and according to the respondents, the petitioner did not give any explanation.
This would further go to show that according to the respondents there was some material against the petitioner.
In spite of this, the respondents waited for another 10 years before serving the charge-sheet.
It was specifically mentioned by the petitioner in his representation dated 5th September, 1974 that at the time of taking over the charge of the construction on 19th November, 1973, "All the columns completed upto ceiling of Ist Floor, Partition walls completed upto DPC Foundations of outer stair case complete."
At the time of handing over on 5th February, 1974, the position of work was as under :-  "All the columns completed upto ceiling of Ist floor partition walls completed upto DPC Steel reinforcement for only Ist flight of outer stair-case laid in the position.
In addition to this the transfer and carriage of steel from Delhi and Main Store was also arranged."
12.
The explanation given by the respondents in the written statement as to why the charge-sheet could not be served on the petitioner earlier is hardly any explanation.
Even as per this explanation, as observed above, in the year 1981 the petitioner was called upon to give explanation regarding the work, which, according to the respondents, the petitioner failed to give, yet no action was initiated till the year 1991.
It is not the case of the respondents that they have only come to know regarding the involvement of the petitioner in the year 1991.
Relying on the ratio of the judgment of the Apex Court in Bani Singh's case (supra) and two judgments of this Court, referred to above, I am of the view that the proceedings against the petitioner in pursuance of the charge-sheet, dated 12th August, 1991 cannot be allowed to continue.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and the charge-sheet, dated 12th August, 1991 (Annexure P-3) and the further proceedings in pursuance thereof are hereby quashed.
The petitioner will be entitled to the costs which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.