MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of CWP Nos. 1721, 5617, 5619, 6558, 7503, 7604, 7605, 11774 and 15792 of 1990, as common questions of fact and law are involved in the same.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioners in all these petitions were employees of the District Board/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis etc.
Earlier to the provincialisation of their services by the State Government, vide order dated 26th November 1973, those employees who had not retired from service on 26th November, 1973 but retired after the provincialisation of their services with effect from the said date, became employees of the State Government of Haryana and as a necessary consequence became entitled to the retiring benefits like pension, gratuity, leave encashment, etc.
But those employees who had retired from service of the District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis prior to 26th November, 1973 and whose services were not provincialised, obviously didn't become the employees of the State Government of Haryana and in their case, the question of grant of retiring benefits could not arise.
In the cases of those employees whose services had been provincialised and who had been retired by the State Government after 26th November, 1973, whether their entire service rendered by them with the erstwhile District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis had to be counted for the grant of pensionary benefits or not, was the moot point giving rise to the present petitions Single Bench decision of this court in C.W.P.
No 11644 of 1986, Kesho Ram v. State of Haryana dated 10th May, 1990, has been relied upon by the petitioners in the present petitions.
3.
During the pendency of the writ petitions, the State Government itself has issued, order, vide memo.
No. PA2-91/80393-80407, dated 22nd November, 1991 whereby the State Government has decided to grant the benefit of previous service towards pension gratuity, etc. from the date of appointment of the employees in the erstwhile District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis.
This order reads, as under :-  "In supersession of the previous instructions regarding extension of pensionary benefits to the employees of erstwhile Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis issued vide letter No. Al-81/21401-2, dated 30481, the Government has, after considering the matter, in view of the Civil Writ Petitions filed by the employees of District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis in which the Hon'ble High Court has admitted the claim of these employees regarding benefits of service rendered with District Boards, Zila Parishads, Panchayat Samitis towards pension, family pension and gratuity to be given from their date of appointment in these bodies, decided that the employees of erstwhile District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis who have been absorbed in Government service or are likely to be absorbed in government service may be allowed the service benefits of previous service towards pension/family pension/gratuity from their date of appointment in the said bodies.
These benefits will be given subject to the condition that if employees of these bodies were the members of contributory provident fund, they shall have to deposit the share of the contribution made by these bodies along with interest in lump sum in government treasury, otherwise such amount will be deducted from their gratuity and they will have to give an undertaking to this effect.
If the amount of contributory provident fund with interest is more than their gratuity then such excess amount shall be deposited by the pensioners in the government treasury beforehand.
The details of contributory provident fund with interest should be made available to this department before sending the revised pension/gratuity case.
In this matter the concurrence of Finance Department has been obtained vide their UO No.13(46)-89-2FR-II, dated 20891."
4.
However, Mr. Kamal Sharma, learned Additional Advocate-General, Haryana, pleads that since the services of the employees of erstwhile local bodies like District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis were provincialised with effect from 26th November, 1973 it could not be said with certainty as to whether all the petitioners in the present writ petition were actually in service on 26th November, 1973 or had retired from the service of their parent local body earlier.
Otherwise, so far as the claim of the petitioners with regard to their legal entitlement was concerned the aforesaid judgment of this Court in Kesho Ram's case as well as the latest decision of the Government dated 22nd November, 1991 (quoted above), shall have to be applied.
5.
We find merit in the submission of the learned Additional Advocate- General and dispose of these petitions with the direction, that in case any petitioner in these petitions, or any other employee who is similarly situated, was actually absorbed in the service of the State Government with effect from 26th November, 1973 and retired thereafter, he shall be entitled to the grant of the retiring benefits in the same terms as have been incorporated in the fastest memorandum dated 22nd November, 1991 and, if, any petitioner in the present writ petitions, was not absorbed in the service of the State Government with effect from the said date and had retired earlier during his employment with the parent local body, his case shall not be covered by the aforesaid judgment of this court in Kesho Ram's case and the memorandum dated 22nd November, 1991.
Necessary benefit admissible to the petitioners found entitled thereto in view of the aforesaid direction, shall be released forthwith, preferably within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.