Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By the present judgment, we propose to dispose of Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 988, 989 and 1121 of 1991.
The facts have been culled out from LPA No. 1121 of 1991.
2.
The respondents, who were the writ petitioners, were working as Tubewell Operators in the Irrigation Department of the Punjab Government when they were absorbed in the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation Limited (hereinafter called the Corporation) on 10th December, 1983.
As there appeared to be a dispute between the Corporation and the respondents with regard to the terms and conditions of their absorption, a spate of litigation followed in which the respondents were invariably successful.
A substantial part of the litigation, however, ended when the Supreme Court rendered its decision in Gurmail Singh & others v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1991(1) SC 351 : 1991(2) SCT 739 and it was held as under :  "For the reasons discussed above, we declare that the appellants will be entitled to add their service in the Government to their length of service in the Corporation for purposes of computation of their salary, length of service and retirement benefits.
The Corporation is also directed to ensure, as far as possible, that none of the appellants are retrenched as surplus on account of any closure of tubewells or other like reason until they retire or leave the service of the Corporation voluntarily for any reason."
3.
While the dispute with regard to the matters in Gurmail Singh's case was pending either in the Court or before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the respondents herein raised another dispute with regard to their age of superannuation.
It was the case of the respondents that although the age of superannuation in the Irrigation Department was 58 years, yet on their absorption as employees of the Corporation this age was to be taken as 60 years in view of Bye-Law 17 and, as such, they were entitled to continue as Tubewell Operators upto that date.
This stand was controverted by the Corporation on the plea that the Board of Directors of the Corporation in a meeting held on 23rd July, 1984 had substituted Bye-law 17 and reduced the age of superannuation to 58 years.
The validity of the amended Bye-law 17 was as-sailed by the respondents therein by way of the writ petition out of which the present appeals arise.
Tire learned Single Judge held that the amendment made in Bye-law 17 was contrary to the interim directions of the Supreme Court given on 9th December, 1983 in Gurmail Singh's case reproduced below :  "The other terms and conditions will be decided later on but for the time being they will be governed by the present terms and conditions of Corporation."
4.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion, and in our opinion, rightly so, that the amendment made on 23rd July, 1984 was subsequent to the passing of the interim order, quoted above, and the amendment being contrary to the directions set out was only illegal but also contemptuous.
The petitions were accordingly allowed and a direction was issued that the respondents be allowed to continue in service till they attained the age of 60 years.
Aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge, the present appeals have been filed.
5.
It has been contended by Mr. SS Nijjar, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the Corporation, that the order dated December 9, 1983, is no longer in existence as the matters before the Supreme Court have been finally decided in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) and, as such, the reasoning adopted by the Single Judge was no longer applicable.
In answer to this argument, Mr. SD Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has urged that although the interim order dated December 9, 1983, was admittedly no longer in existence yet the respondents who were workmen could not be made to suffer prejudice as they had been employed in the Corporation at the time when the age of superannuation was 60 years and as such, were entitled to continue upto that date.
In elaboration, he has argued that Bye-law 17 could not come into operation as it had not been certified as a Standing Orders as required by Sections 4 and 5 of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (hereinafter called the Act of 1946).
He has also urged in addition that if any change in the working conditions of the respondents was to be made, a notice under Section 9-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, (hereinafter called the `Act') was required to be given and the two requirements mentioned above, not having been complied with, the amendment made in Bye-law 17, on these additional grounds not sustainable.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length and have also gone through their pleadings.
Admittedly, the interim order dated December 9, 1983 which was the sole ground for the success of the writ petitions no longer exists.
The only other point that is to be seen is as to whether the order of the learned Single Judge is liable to be sustained on the grounds that have now set out by Mr. Sharma.
It is to be noticed that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) treated the respondents as having been absorbed as the employees of the Corporation and it was on that basis that they were allowed to add their service in the Government to their length of service in the Corporation for purposes of computation of their salary, length of service and retirement benefits.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that a fair reading of the directions of the Supreme Court would only lead to the conclusion that the respondents were entitled to have their service benefits construed as absorbed employees and, as such, they were to get benefits of the absorption in terms of the Supreme Court judgment, but also carry with them the disadvantage which in this case was that they were liable to be superannuated at the age of 58 years as that would have been the age of superannuation had they continued to be Government employees.
7.
In the light of what has been held above, we are of the view that in reducing the age of superannuation from 60 to 58 years by the amendment there has been no change in the service conditions of the respondents.
The arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents emanating from the Act of 1946 or the Act to which reference has been made above therefore do not merit our attention.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow the appeals, set aside the judgment of the Single Judge and dismiss the writ petitions with no order as to costs.