VK Bali, J (Oral) - Petitioner, Ashok Kumar, seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash award (Annexure P-8) as in so far as the relief or reliefs maintained by him in his application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter to be referred as the Act) have been declined.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner, who has Industrial Training Institute diploma in the trade of Turner and has got a national apprenticeship certificate, in which he had secured 70% marks, was appointed as apprenticeship turner on August 23, 1975 by the Batala Co-operative Sugar Mills, Batala.
He worked upto November 15, 1977, whereafter he was not permitted to join his duties.
Taking aforesaid action of the management to be a retrenchment, the petitioner sought a reference under Section 10 of the Act and vide order dated December 4, 1981 (Annexure P-1), it was expressed that the petitioner shall be called by the management to work on temporary basis on his previous conditions of service when the working of the sugar mill starts, keeping in view the seniority at the time of termination of his services.
The aforesaid award came into being on the statements made by the representatives of the parties.
The award, which runs in few lines, reads thus :-  "On 4.12.1981, representatives of the parties made a statement that the workman would be called by the respondent on the work on temporary basis and on his previous conditions of service when the working of the sugar mill starts, keeping in view his seniority at the time of termination of his service.
In view of the statement of the representatives of the parties, the award is given accordingly."
2.
The positive case of the petitioner is that after the award (Annexure P-1 dated 4.12.1981), he had reported for duty, but was deliberately kept out of service.
Once the workman/petitioner had been restored his previous status and was not permitted to join, he had no choice, but for to make an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act for granting him wages till the date of application at the rate other similarly situated employees were getting.
The aforesaid application was made on April 5, 1983 and vide order dated March 18, 1987 (Annexure P-5) he was granted award upto March 31, 1983 at the rate of Rs. 180/- per month.
Once again the petitioner reported for duty, but the management adopted the same course of not permitting him to join.
This constrained the workman-petitioner to file yet another application under Section 33-C(2) which covered period from August 1, 1983 to December 31, 1986.
The application aforesaid was filed on September 11, 1987.
After recording the contentions of the representatives of the workman and the management, the Labour Court vide order dated August 20, 1990 came to the conclusion that he is entitled to the wages from December 4, 1981 to December 31, 1986 (6 months wages for a year).
The Management was directed to make the payment to the workman for 30 months and 6 days as wages @ Rs. 18960 per month.
It is against this award that the present petition has been filed.
It requires to be mentioned here that even after this award, the workman-petitioner had endeavored to join his duty but was again prevented by the management from doing so.
Vide interim order passed by this Court on November 14, 1991, the workman was directed to report for duty with the respondents on November 25, 1991 wand the respondents in turn were directed to take the petitioner back in service.
It is admitted position between the parties that the petitioner was taken in service on November 25, 1991, but the respondents have been paying him 60 per cent of the grade of a Turner.
3.
The main case of the petitioner is that he is entitled to full back wages and not for the crushing seasons alone and also that the wages, he was getting way back in 1975, have since been revised from time to time and it is the revised scale of pay that he is entitled to get.
Inasmuch as full wage for the entire year, which was not granted by the Presiding officer of the Labour Court, the prayer of the petitioner is for modifying the award accordingly.
4.
The matter has been contested by the management and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2, it is pleaded in the preliminary objections that as per award (Annexure P-1) the petitioner has received salary from May 24, 1982, to July 31, 1983 and thereafter he never applied for job.
It is also pleaded that as per award (Annexure P.8) the petitioner had received salary without work from December 4, 1981 to December 31, 1986, amounting to Rs. 585232 against receipt (Annexure R-3) and, thus, could not make any other claim.
However, the main defence as per written statement is that the petitioner was engaged as apprentice Turner for training in the trade of Turner and because of his slow picking up in training, another period of six months was extended and no completion of training he was relieved on November 16, 1977, vide Annexure R-2.
It is also pleaded that the workman never remained in service of the Mills, but on December 4, 1981, in the Labour Court he was offered to work in the Mill on the previous conditions of contract as Apprentice and award (Annexure P-1) was passed.
As per award, he was to be engaged as Apprentice in the Mills and as there was no post existing, the management paid him stipend from May 24, 1982 to July 31, 1983, amounting to Rs. 185232 as per award (Annexure P-5) without working in the Mills.
In ultimate analysis, the prayer of the respondents is to dismiss the petition as the award (Annexure P-8) has no scope for any interference.
5.
Mr. Govind Goyal, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that vide Annexure P-2, the petitioner was restored his status of Apprentice Turner and vide Annexure P-5, which was a decision rendered by the Labour Court, on an application filed by the workmen under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, it was held that the persons junior to the petitioner were still in the employment of the management and that being so, there was no question for the Labour Court not to have granted wages to the petitioner at the rate, the person junior to him was getting and also to limit salary of the petitioner, i.e. for six months a year.
Points raised by learned counsel for the petitioner are refuted by Mr. RC Chaudhary, counsel for the respondents, who contends that the petitioner was appointed as Apprentice and under the Apprenticeship Act after the period of contract was over, the management was well within its right to discharge him from service.
Reliance for the aforesaid contention has been placed on Sections 18 and 19 of the aforesaid Act.
It is not doubt true that apprentices are trainees and not workers and inasmuch as the Apprenticeship Act is a Special Act, the definition of workman as spelled out in Apprenticeship Act would apply.
This, however, would be of no consequence in the facts of the present case.
It is amply made clear in the award, which is a judgment inter parties that the petitioner was restored his status of Apprentice Turner and that too with back wages.
If contention of Mr. RC Chaudhary is correct, then apprenticeship period was over which is stated to be upto November 15, 1977 after giving him extension, there was no question for the management to make such a statement before the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court, When order (Annexure P-1) was passed.
The management is thus, held bound by the statement culminating into an award dated December 4, 1981.
The matter does not rest there and it shall be seen that thereafter on the basis of Annexure P-1, the workman successfully maintained the application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, which was allowed on March 18, 1987 (Annexure P-3).
If the contention of Mr. RC Chaudhary is correct then in that case, the management should have at least agitated the award (Annexure P-1) by styling the same as illegal as period of apprentices of the petitioner had come to an end and he was no more apprentice as per the provisions contained in the Apprenticeship Act.
The contention of Mr. Goyal that the petitioner is entitled to get the wages for the whole year and too at parity with the persons who are his juniors is only partially correct.
It is true that vide orders dated 4.12.1981 (Annexure P1), the petitioner was restored his earlier status but that was on temporary basis i.e. he was to be employed only during the crushing season even though his seniority from amongst those who were seasonal employees was protected.
The petitioner, therefore, would be deemed to be in continuous, service of the management but he was to be employed during the crushing season which, as admitted between the parties, lasts for only six months in the year.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the wages for the whole year.
However, in so far as the claim of the petitioner with regard to wages that are being paid to a Turner are concerned that stands on a solid wicket.
The previous status with regard to wages if changed during the intervening period, the petitioner would be clearly entitled to the same.
The effect of order Annexure P1 is that the petitioner is deemed to be in continuous service of the management.
Had, in fact, been in continuous service he would have been certainly given enhancement in wages as and when the same were so enhanced.
6.
In fact, during the course of arguments, Mr. Goyal has given up the claim of the petitioner with regard to wages for the whole year and rather contended that the workman should be entitled to wages inclusive of allowances for six months during the crushing season as is being paid to other persons.
There cannot be any exception to what has been stated by Mr. Goyal.
It is, thus, ordered that the management would keep on employing the petitioner during the crushing seasons and pay to him same wages as are being paid to the persons of the same category.
7.
In view of what has been said above, the petition is partly allowed in the manner indicated above.
There shall be no order as to costs.
In so far as the current wages are concerned, the same may be paid to the petitioner at the rate indicated above forthwith, i.e. from September 1990 and so far as arrears are concerned, the same may be paid within a month.
It is clarified that the petitioner would get wages in the manner indicated above for the period, he claimed his wages culminating into award (Annexure P8) and till date.