JL Gupta, J - The petitioner herein is a widow.
Har claim for family pension and arrears of salary which had fallen due to her husband, Prem Sagar, having been declined by the respondents, she has approached this Court through this petition.
2.
Prem Sagar was recruited as a Patwari on July 17, 1954.
While working as such, he was placed under suspension on November 4, 1968.
While he was still under suspension, Prem Sagar died on February 20, 1978.
The petitioner claims that the department did not grant her family pension by taking into consideration the period of service rendered by her husband, Prem Sagar, from November 4, 1968 to February 20, 1978, i.e. period during which he remained under suspension.
Furthermore, in view of the provision of Rule 73B(2), the petitioner claims that she is entitled to the payment of full salary for the period.
of suspension.
The petitioner having made representations without any fruitful results, has approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, preliminary objection suggesting that the writ petition involves disputed questions of fact which cannot be gone into under Article 226 of the Constitution has been raised.
It has also been averred that the petition is barred by limitation.
On merits, it has been averred that the pension or family pension has to be settled by the Accountant General and not by the respondents.
The respondents further point out that the matter regarding the period of suspension has been decided by the Director, Land Records, vide his order dated August 17, 1988.
As a result, Prem Singh has been granted full pay for the period of 120 days viz. November 4, 1968 to March 2, 1969, half pay for 280 days viz. March 3, 1969 to December 7, 1969 and for the period from December 8, 1969 to February 19, 1978 has been treated as without pay.
It has been further averred that vide letter dated December 3, 1991, the pay of the official has also been refixed at Rs. 145/- per month with effect from February 1, 1969.
As a result, the arrears of pay have been paid to the petitioner.
The respondents further aver that the family pension of the petitioner could not be revised in accordance with the formula.
It has been further averred that Rule 7.3-B(2) of the Civil Service Rules is not applicable in this matter.
On these premises, the petitioner's claim has been controverted.
4.
I have heard Mr. Sanjay Bansal for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
5.
Under the law, an employer has a right to suspend an employee.
The suspension is normally ordered when the disciplinary proceedings are either contemplated or are actually continuing.
Presumably, in exercise of its disciplinary jurisdiction, the respondents had suspended the petitioner's husband, Prem Sagar.
This suspension lingered on for an unduly long period of more than nine years from November 4, 1968 to February 20, 1978.
It is also the admitted position that during the period of suspension, Prem Sagar was paid only the subsistence allowance.
6.
In the normal course of events at the conclusion of the enquiry or the disciplinary proceedings, an employee is ordered to be reinstated or otherwise punished.
In the event of reinstatement, the Authority has to pass an order deciding as to how the period of suspension shall be treated.
If it is found that the employee was not at fault and that the suspension was wholly unjustified, the employee becomes entitled to payment of full salary for the period of suspension.
Even at this stage, the employee is entitled to an opportunity to explain his position and to show that his suspension was wholly unjustified.
This principle has been recognised by the apex Court in the M.G.
Krishna Naidu v. State of MP, 1967 S.L.R.
800 and by the Punjab High Court in Prem Singh v. The State, 1968 S.L.R.
399.
However, in a case where an employee dies while he is still under suspension, the Punjab Civil Service Rules as in force in the State of Haryana do not prescribe the procedure that the appropriate authority has to follow.
Rule 7.3-B(2) is applicable in the State of Punjab and not Haryana.
In the present case, the pleadings of the parties show that almost 10 years after the death of Prem Sagar, the Director Land Records passed an order on August 17, 1988, by which it was decided to grant 120 days leave on full pay and 280 days leave on half pay while the remaining period was to be treated as without pay.
Neither before passing this order nor today at the hearing the respondents have been able to show as to on what basis this decision was taken.
Furthermore, it is also clear that even the present petitioner, the widow of Prem Sagar was not afforded any opportunity in any from whatsoever, at any stage before the order was passed.
7.
When an employee dies, the widow and the children of the employee in the normal course become entitled to the payment of whatever arrears of salary were due to the employee concerned.
In the present case, the widow had become entitled to the payment of whatever was due to her husband while he had been in service.
If her right thereto was to be affected in any manner whatsoever, the respondents were under a duty to grant her an opportunity to explain the position.
If an opportunity had been granted, she may have succeeded in showing that her husband was treated arbitrarily, that the suspension was wholly unjustified and that he was entitled to the payment of full arrears of salary for the period of suspension.
She could have also shown that the period should not be treated as leave of the kind due but should have been treated as period spent on duty which should qualify for being taken into consideration for the grant of pension etc.  8.
Mr. Sanjay Barisal contends that the petitioner was granted no such opportunity.
He states that even the order dated August 17, 1988 was not conveyed to the petitioner, On the other hand, Mr Jaswant Singh on instructions from M/s RK Gupta and Raj Singh, Assistants in the office of Director, Consolidation, states that the petitioner was granted full opportunity before the Director Land Records passed the order, dated August 17, 1988.
9.
Mr. Jaswant Singh states that the said order has not been challenged in this writ petition.
10.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner is a widow and that she has been waiting for the last about 14 years to get the dues settled, as also the fact that this petition has been filed through legal aid cell, I think it would be in the interest of justice if the controversy is resolved without delaying the matter any further.
Consequently, it had been made clear to Mr. Jaswant Singh that the entire claim of the petitioner shall be decided now itself and, therefore, the department is at liberty to produce any record that it may wish to show.
However, the department is directed to produce the record showing that the petitioner was granted an opportunity before the passing of the order dated August 17, 1988.
To come up on August 12, 1992.
Order accordingly.