GC Garg, J - The petitioners, who are seven in number, were appointed as Child Development Project Officers (for short the CDPOs) in the Department of Welfare (Social Welfare Branch) in the State of Punjab in May 1984.
In order to understand the controversy raised, it is necessary to notice few facts.
2.
Applications were invited for filling up the posts of CDPOs on purely temporary basis, through advertisements dated August 28, 1983 and December 25, 1983.
The petitioners who were eligible and qualified as per requirements in the advertisement, applied for the said posts.
They were interviewed by a duly constituted Departmental Selection Committee comprising of four officers and on being found fit, were appointed as CDPOs in May 1984, by issuing appointment letters.
One such letter of appointment is Annexure P-3.
Their appointment was initially made for a period of six months or till the candidates recommended by the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short the Commission) join, whichever was earlier.
The petitioners continued in service as the term of their appointment was being extended from time to time.
One such letter extending their term is Annexure P-4 to the petition.
In July, 1989, some posts of CDPOs were required to be advertised by the Commission and immediately thereafter, the petitioners made a representation to the State Government praying therein that they were continuing for more than five years and were eligible in all respects, and the Government having spent sufficient amount on their training, their services be regularised.
The representation as made by the petitioners was accepted.
The Government vide its letter dated March 19, 1990 wrote to the Commission that it had decided to take out seven posts of CDPOs from the purview of the Commission as the ad hoc CDPOs were working against these posts from 1984 to 1990 i.e. for the last 5-1/2 years and the Commission had not advertised the posts in spite of requisitions sent twice on October 24, 1984 and September 4, 1987.
The posts have not been advertised even now though requisition was sent on July 11, 1989.
It was also indicated therein that the officers working against these posts have gained sufficient experience and the Government has made a lot of expenditure on their training and that it may happen that the Commission may not select these officers.
It was thus, requested that approval to take seven posts of CDPOs out of the purview of the Commission may be accorded.
Somehow the Commission did not accord the approval.
The Commission ultimately advertised 21 posts in May, 1990 and this led the petitioners to file the present writ petition in June 1990.
3.
In the return filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that ad hoc appointments were made so that the work of the department may not suffer.
Acceptance of the representation of the petitioners was not denied.
It was, however, stated that since the Commission did not accord approval to take these posts out of its purview, the posts were advertised.
The letter declining approval by the Commission has been placed on the record as Annexure R-1.
4.
The undisputed facts are that there are 20 posts meant for direct recruitment out of which 21 posts were advertised including those held by the petitioners and the Commission has recommended the names of 29 candidates though 21 posts were advertised.
Petitioner Nos. 3 and 6 have already been selected by the Commission and they fall within the first 21 selected candidates.
Petitioner No. 7 has since left the service and gone abroad.
The present dispute in thus, confined to petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 only.
All these four petitioners are now over-aged their dates of birth being between June 2, 1956 and April 13, 1959.
All of them fulfil the requisite qualifications for the said post and have been working on the said posts for the last about eight years, though because of the stay order passed by this Court on August 2, 1990.
They have thus, obviously acquired sufficient experience on the said posts and would be over-aged and ineligible for government service in future, if thrown out of job.
5.
A Division Bench of this Court in Parkash Vir and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SLR 157 : 1992(1) SCT 700 has held that the appointments beyond the posts initially sought to be filled in is not legally sustainable and that the number of posts advertised could be deviated from only marginally and to take the advertisement liberally and permit the appointment of any incumbent beyond the advertised posts would be to give a carte blanche to the authorities to perpetuate injustice and to act arbitrarily.
In the present case, 21 posts were advertised.
It is thus, open to the Government to appoint 21 candidates selected against the posts advertised in the order of their merit.
If any of the candidates who is offered appointment against these 21 posts, fails to join or found otherwise ineligible, it shall be open to the State Government to offer the appointment to the next candidate in the order of merit.
The Government may, however, consider to fill up more posts marginally but in any case, it will not go beyond the figure of 25, thereby leaving four posts for petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 in view of the conditions hereinafter detailed.
6.
The apex Court in Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 4075-78/1982 (Rajinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others) decided on October 25, 1991, was faced with almost the same situation as in the present case.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court disposed of the petition in the following terms :-  "Heard counsel on both sides.
The petitioners/appellants are 210 ad hoc Lecturers in Government Colleges in the State of Punjab.
They have been selected as ad hoc Lecturers during the period 1979-86.
They have got to their credit the experience of teaching since then.
They are seeking regularisation of their services on the ground, among others that they have been in service for a number of years as ad hoc Lecturers and they cannot be denied of that benefit since they are overaged.
Indeed, they are now overaged for any fresh recruitment.
But this Court cannot direct the regularisation of their services since they had chances for appearing before the Public Service Commission for regular selection.
It is, however, reasonable and proper to give them one more opportunity to appear before Punjab Public Service commission for regular selection.
There shall be relaxation of age and the qualification existing at the time of their initial appointment.
The selection should be exclusively confined to those who are in service and they should not be made to compete with the fresh candidates.
Till the result of the selection is published, the petitioners/appellant shall be allowed to continue in their respective posts and the Government will have the liberty to take appropriate action in respect of those who become unsuccessful in the selection.
We order accordingly."
As already noticed, the petitioners are now overaged for any fresh recruitment and this Court obviously cannot order regularisation of their services though they are qualified for the same.
It would thus, be reasonable and proper, as was done by the Supreme Court, to give one more opportunity to petitioners 1, 2, 4 and 5 to appear before the Commission for regular selection.
The Government will send a requisition for filling four posts of CDPOs by relaxing the condition of age and the qualification if any, as existed at the time of their initial appointment.
The selection shall exclusively be confined to the petitioners who are in service and they shall not be made to compete with the fresh candidates.
Till the result of the selection is published the aforesaid four petitioners shall be allowed to continue in service in their respective posts.
It shall, however, be open to the Government to take appropriate action in respect of any of the four petitioners who is found unsuccessful in the new selection process.
The requisition shall be sent to the Commission along with relevant record of the aforesaid four petitioners, as expeditiously as possible, preferably within six months.
7.
Before parting with the judgment, it is observed that this order has been passed keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case only, especially, the fact that the petitioners have been continuing in service for the last about eight years; they are now overaged for any fresh recruitment and that they were appointed to the posts after the advertisement and interview by a duly constituted Departmental Selection Committee.
8.
The writ petition is disposed of with order and directions indicated above.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Writ petition qua petitioners 3, 6 and 7 is, however, dismissed being infructuous.
Order accordingly.