HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - Petitioner, Kanshi Ram Verma, has filed the present petition for quashing of the award (Annexure P-1) of the Labour Court, whereby while deciding the entire case in his favour reinstatement has been denied and a compensation of Rs. 2000/- ordered in lieu thereof.
2.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was employed as Overseer by respondent No. 3 Dayanand Medical College & Hospital, Ludhiana, on 31.7.1971.
His services were terminated on 31.12.1971, but he was thereafter, reinstated though without back-wages on 1681975.
The services of the petitioner were thereafter once again terminated on 161976 without issuance of any notice, charge-sheet or an enquiry, which led to the raising of an industrial dispute between the petitioner and respondent No. 3 culminating the Award, Annexure P1.
The Labour Court found that the order terminating the services of the petitioners was unjustified as the retrenchment compensation due to him had not been paid or tendered because the petitioner had admittedly put in more than 240 days of service.
The argument of the Management-respondent that as the workman had been paid 15 days' wages in lieu of notice period, it amounted to sufficient compliance of the terms and conditions of appointment, was also negatived by the Labour Court.
Having held as above, the Labour Court found that as the relations between the petitioner and his employer were somewhat strained, it was not in the interest of industrial harmony to order reinstatement and so, it was ordered that he be paid compensation to the extent of Rs. 2000/-.
3.
It is well settled that where the services of a workman are illegally terminated, the normal rule is reinstatement to the service with full backwages.
This principle can, however, be deviated from if the Court finds that the reinstatement would not be in the interest of the institution where the workman was earlier working.
This was so held in Cawnpur Omnibus Service Limited v. Cawnpur Omnibus Service Employees' Union, 1951(2) Labour Law Journal 483.
The relevant portion is reproduced hereunder :  "The Tribunal held that where a dismissal was found to be wrongful, the usual remedy therefore, was reinstatement, but the interest of harmony in the industry were also to be looked to and if the facts disclosed that a harmonious relationship cannot be brought about, the remedy was to direct payment of compensation on a suitable scale.
The Tribunal in this case found that the behaviour of the employee was provoked by the conduct of the Managing Director and that the compensation of four months awarded by the adjudicator was inadequate and awarded Rs. 2000/- as compensation."
In Hindustan Steels Limited, Rourkela v. AK Roy and others, 1970(1) Labour Law Journal (SC) 228, the Supreme Court reiterated what has been stated in Cawnpur Omnibus Service Limited's case (supra).
It was stated that though normal relief in the cases where the services were found to have been wrongly terminated, was reinstatement, yet there could be exceptional cases where this could not be in the interest of the parties concerned, and once such relation was weighed, the relations between the employer and the employee were strained.
It has been found by the Labour Court that the services of the petitioner had also been terminated once earlier, relations between the employer and the employee were strained, and therefore, reinstatement was not called for.
I too feel that the keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, it would not be in the interest of an employee who is unwanted in the institution and the employer to have a person not desirable back in service on reinstatement.
It may also be noted that services of the petitioner were terminated as far back as year 1976 and reinstatement today after a lapse of 16 years, would be putting an unnecessary burden on the employer.
I am, however, of the view that the compensation awarded by the Labour Court is too paltry a sum.
I accordingly direct that a compensation of Rs. 25,000/- should be paid to the Petitioner excluding Rs. 2000/- which has already been given to the petitioner.
The aforesaid amount will be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
With the observations made above, the present writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.