NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Patiala, dated 6th November, 1978, affirming the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to this appeal are that the plaintiff- respondent filed suit for declaration to the effect that he was entitled to Rs. 50/- as special pay from 25th March, 1973, with the benefit of fixation of pay in the grade of Rs. 350/600 as A.D.A.
II with effect from 1st April, 1974, with all rights, benefits and privileges including special pay of Rs. 50/-.
The plaintiff further sought relief of mandatory injunction directing the defendants to pay his salary accordingly.
It was further averred by the plaintiff that he was appointed Prosecuting Sub Inspector and posted at Patiala on 17th March, 1972.
As per terms and conditions of service and the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') he was entitled to get Rs. 50/- per month as special pay after completion of training in Police Training College, Phillaur, and practical training as provided under the Rules.
The plaintiff, who was sent for training to Police Training College, Phillaur on 1st October, 1972, came back and resumed his duties on 25th March, 1973.
Further the case of the plaintiff is that he completed his practical training at Police Station, Sangrur, in the month of September, 1973.
It is further his case that he was appointed as Assistant District Attorney, Grade II on 1st April, 1974, in the grade of Rs. 350/600 and was posted at Sangrur fixing his pay at Rs. 350/- per month without including special pay of Rs. 50/-.
3.
On 20th June, 1974, the plaintiff was informed by the Superintendent of Police through District Attorney (Legal), for the first time, that since he could not qualify, thus was not entitled to the special pay of Rs. 50/-.
Consequently, the plaintiff filed the present suit.
4.
The State of Punjab contested the suit and pleaded that though the plaintiff completed the practical training at Police Station, Sangrur, in the month of September, 1973, but since he did not complete his police training at Phillaur, he was not entitled to the grant of special pay.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  "1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to draw Rs. 50/- as special allowance even if he has not passed the P.S.I.
Training Course at Phillaur ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is deemed to have passed the examination when he was not intimated the result of his failure of that examination ?
OPP 3.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD 4.
Relief."
6.
The trial Court under issue No. 1 held that even if the plaintiff had not passed the training course at Police Training College, Phillaur, he was entitled to draw Rs. 50/- as special pay.
Under issue No. 2 the Court held that the plaintiff shall be deemed to have passed the training course at Phillaur when no intimation with regard to the result of his failure in the examination was conveyed to him.
Issue No. 3 was decided against the defendant having not been pressed.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed by the trial Court.
7.
Before the lower appellate Court, the matter was once again examined in the light of the provisions contained in Rule 1928 of the Rules on the te basis of which the Court came to the conclusion that it was incumbent upon the authorities to inform the plaintiff about the result to the plaintiff.
Since there was no communication by the authorities and in view of the changed position that the plaintiff could not be sent for a fresh test at Phillaur as the Prosecuting Agency had since been separated from the Police Department with effect from 1st April, 1974, the lower appellate Court held that the plaintiff could not be deprived of his right to claim the special pay of Rs. 50/- as prosecuting allowance.
8.
The sole point which needs consideration is whether it was incumbent upon the police authorities to convey the result of the test and if so whether it was conveyed to the plaintiff and when.
The relevant provisions governing the same are contained in Rule 1928 of the Rules, which for facility of reference are reproduced hereunder :  " 1928  (1) xx xx xx (2) xx xx xx (3) xx xx xx  (4) Candidates who obtain 50 per cent marks in each subject and 60 per cent in the total aggregate shall be held to be qualified for employment as Prosecuting Sub-Inspectors.
Those who obtain 60 per cent in each subject and 70 per cent in the total aggregate shall be considered to have passed with credit.
A Prosecuting Sub-Inspector may not be promoted to the rank of Prosecuting Inspector unless and until he is certified to have passed the Prosecuting Sub-Inspectors' Examination with credit.
If he fails to achieve this standard in the first instance, he may thereafter be given two further opportunities of doing so.
(5) The examination papers will be set by selected officers of the department to be nominated by the Inspector General of Police.
These officers will forward their papers in sealed covers to the Principal of the Police Training School at least a fortnight before the date fixed for the examination.
The Board shall hear and award marks for the opening speech; the answers of the candidates in other subjects shall be marked under the supervision of the Board of Examiners.
The result of the examination shall be forwarded to the Inspector General of Police, who will himself decide whether candidates shall be passed or rejected."
9.
A bare perusal of the above-mentioned provisions clearly reveals that in case a candidate is unable to achieve the desired standard in the first instance, he is further entitled to be given two more opportunities to do the same, which in the facts of the present case were not granted to the plaintiff.
Secondly, as per clause (5), it is Inspector General of Police who is to decide whether a candidate shall be deemed to have passed or rejected.
This would be suggestive that the final decision in this regard was to be taken by the Inspector General of Police which admittedly was conveyed to the plaintiff on 20th June, 1974 by which time the Prosecuting Agency had already stood separated from the police department.
Fault, if any, lay with the defendants who failed to convey in time thereby depriving the plaintiff to avail two more chances in terms of Rule 1928 of the Rules.
I accordingly find no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same.
Appeal dismissed.