RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 as also Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 namely Swaranjit Kaur, Parveen Kaur and Beant Kaur had been employed on various dates in Shri Dashmesh Pita Girls High School, Goslan, District Ropar somewhere in the year 1987.
The Managing Committee of the school approached the Director Public Instructions (Schools,), Punjab, Chandigarh for taking over the school and a resolution had also been passed by the Managing Committee on 451987 to hand over the school to the Government.
A statement was sent to the Director Public Instructions by the Managing Committee on 3rd July, 1987 duly counter-signed by the District Education Officer(s) and the Head-mistress of the School showing the names of staff members.
The names of the petitioners in the former petition i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 found mention in that statement.
In fact another list-of the staff members was also sent by the School on 921988 in which the names of the above petitioners also existed.
The school was in fact actually taken over by the Government on 1781989 and an agreement was also executed between the Government and the Management.
3.
According to the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990, before the School was actually taken over, the petitioners' services were shown to have been terminated along with some other persons and in place the petitioners in the other Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 namely Surinder Kaur, Harjit Kaur, Harjinder Kaur and Amrit Kaur were appointed.
The Managing Committee had forwarded to the Government a list of the staff members as on 3171989 in which the names of the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 were mentioned.
This list was, however, not countersigned by the District Education Officer.
The Government did not absorb the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 on the ground that their names were not there in the earlier lists which were sent on 3rd July, 1987 and February 9, 1988.
The employees including petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 whose names had been excluded by the Management in the staff statement made representation to the Government against the alleged mala fide action of the management.
The matter was got enquired through the Deputy District Education Officer, Ropar, who investigated the matter and reported that the action of the Management in changing the staff was mala fide and irregular.
It was on this ground that the Government decided not to recognize the appointments of the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990.
On the basis of the above report, the Joint Secretary Education passed an order dated 4th April, 1990 (Annexure P-7) which, when translated, reads as under :-  "Please refer to your Memo No. 1049(E) 6/9-85 S.E.
(1) dated 2290 on the subject cited above.
2.
The Government agrees with the Inspection report submitted by your office.
Only that staff is eligible for being taken over in service whose names already existed in the first staff statement.
Therefore, the new appointments could not be recognized.
As regard the position of terminated staff members, it is a case between them and Managing Committee and they can prove their claims in the court."
The petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 challenged this order and the Motion Bench granted stay of termination of their services.
4.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990, the claim of the petitioners is that their services had been wrongly terminated by the Management of the School and since their names existed in the lists of the staff members which were sent to the Government in July, 1987 and February, 1988.
They were entitled to be taken over by the Government as staff members along with the school and the private respondents (writ Petitioners in the other writ petition) were not entitled to be taken over along with the School by the Government.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 has submitted that in accordance with the agreement of taking over the School which is dated 781989, Government had no option but to take over the staff of the School which was there on the date of taking over.
The Government had only the power to see the qualifications and the suitability of the members of the staff and the Government had no jurisdiction to go into the time, manner or the mode of the appointment of the petitioners.
According to the learned counsel, simply because the petitioners had been appointed after the first two lists had been sent by the Managing Committee to the Government, is no ground to exclude them from being taken over by the Government along with the School.
He further argued that the Deputy Education Officer who was nobody to go into the matter whether the services of the petitioners in the other case (Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990) had been wrongly terminated or the induction of the petitioners in the present writ was in any manner irregular.
The learned counsel relied on a judgment of this Court in Manjit Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, (CWP No. 1647 of 1982) decided on 2nd April, 1984.
6.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents (writ petitioners in the other case) submitted that under Clause 8 of the agreement of taking over, the Government was fully competent to resolve the dispute as to whether the writ petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 had been regularly and properly appointed and further whether the services of the respondents i.e. the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 had been wrongly terminated.
7.
After hearing the learned counsels for the parties, I am of the view that the contention of the counsel for the writ petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 must prevail.
It is not disputed that on the date of School was taken over the names of the writ petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 was there in the list of the staff members though in the earlier lists sent in July, 1987 and February, 1988, their names were not there.
In fact their names could not be there in the earlier lists as they were appointed after February, 1988.
The learned Single Judge of this Court in Manjit Kaur's case (supra) while dealing with the similar agreement held, that :-  "The respondent-authorities were not well advised to look into the time or the mode or manner of the petitioner's entry into service.
The fact that the petitioners had actually been appointed as teachers subsequent to 3778, the date when for the fist time the authorities started negotiations for the taking over of this school did not matter for purposes of considering or screening the cases of the petitioners for being retained in Government Service.
It is not laid down in the agreement/gift deed Annexure R.4 that the respondent-authorities would be entitled to shunt out any of the employees of the school employed after a particular date."
The official respondents, under the agreement, had only the authority to look into the qualifications/ suitability of the staff members that was there on the date of the taking over, the list which was attached to the agreement by the Management.
The Government had no authority to go into whether the petitioners had been regularly appointed or there was anything wrong in the mode or manner of their appointments.
The official respondents could only be bothered about the suitability/qualifications of the staff members that was to be taken over.
8.
I do not agree with the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents (writ Petitioners in CWP 10011 of 1990) that under Clause 8 of the agreement, matter could have been decided regarding the appointment of a particular individual.
Clause 8 of the agreement reads as under :-  "All the disputes and difference arising out of or in any way touching or concerning this deed shall be referred to the role of arbitration of the Secretary to Government Punjab, Education Department acting as such at the time of reference.
It will be no objection to such appointment that the arbitrator so appointed is a Government servant he has expressed his views on all or any of the matter in dispute or difference.
The award of such arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to this deed.
In witness whereof the parties to those present have here unto set their hands and seals on the dates against their respective signatures."
Even if it is assumed that there was a dispute arising out of the agreement between the Management and the Government, at no point of time, the State Government had referred the matter for arbitration under clause 8.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondent argued that the matter can now be referred for arbitration under above-stated clause at the instance of the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990.
I am afraid, this cannot be done as the disputes which could be referred, must be those disputes which arise between the Management and the Government and not the persons otherwise affected by the agreement.
Consequently, if the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 felt that their services had been wrongly terminated perhaps the only remedy for them was to file a Civil Suit.
I may observe here that if they choose to file a Civil Suit now, the time spent in this Court in pursuing the remedy by way of writ petition would be excluded.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, Writ Petition No. 5181 of 1990 is allowed and the order of the State Government dated 4th April, 1990 (Annexure P.7) to the writ petition is quashed.
Writ Petition No. 10011 of 1990 is dismissed subject to observation made above.
There will be no order as to costs in both the writ petitions.
Petition allowed.