NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge by which the judgment and decree of the trial Court dismissing the suit of the plaintiff was reversed.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff filed suit for declaration to the effect that the order of Superintendent of Police, Ambala, dated 14th March, 1972, terminating his services is illegal, void, in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and of Police Rules and against the principles of natural justice, equity and good conscience.
3.
The defendant put in appearance, denied the allegations of the plaintiff and pleaded that the suit was not maintainable.
It was further pleaded that enquiry was conducted by Shrimati Raj Vasudeva, District Inspector of Police under the orders of Superintendent of Police, which was strictly in accordance with law, who afforded full opportunity to the plaintiff, and that the plaintiff was dismissed legally.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  "Whether the order dated 14th March, 1972, whereby the plaintiff's services were terminated passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ambala, is illegal, unconstitutional, void and liable to be set aside on the grounds pleaded in the plaint ?
O.P.D.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
O.P.D.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is not properly valued for purposes of Court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD 4.
Relief."
5.
The trial Court, on the basis of documentary and oral evidence, found the termination order in accordance with law and consequently dismissed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 23rd December, 1976.
6.
In appeal, the learned Additional District Judge reversed the findings of the trial Court in respect of issue No. 1 on the ground that the Punishing Authority, while passing the order of termination, had not taken into consideration the length of service of the plaintiff and his claim to pension thereby infringing the requirement of Rule 16 2 sub-clause (1) of he Punjab Police Rules.
7.
In this appeal, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant, with some amount of vehemence, has challenged the findings recorded by the learned Additional District Judge.
In support of his contention the learned counsel relied upon State of Orissa and others v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra, A.I.R. 1963 SC 779 and Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1985(2) All India SLJ 1.
Bidyabhushan Mohapatra's case (supra) has been cited for the proposition that once an authority prima facie comes to a conclusion on the basis of enquiry that person is guilty of the charges levelled, then it is not within the ambit of the Court to find fault with the punishment awarded by the authority concerned.
The lower appellate Court for its view that it was incumbent upon the authority before awarding the punishment to take into consideration the length of service and claim to pension of the plaintiff, relied upon the judgment reported as Gurdev Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1976(2) SLR 442.
The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the view taken in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) has been reversed by the Division Bench in Baldev Singh's case (supra) and in this view of the matter prayed that the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.
8.
Shri DS Bali, Senior Advocate, the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has not been able to cite any judgment taking a contrary view to the one taken by the Division Bench in Baldev Singh's case (supra).
However, the learned counsel for the respondent has urged that the misconduct of the respondent cannot be termed as grave for the reason that plausible explanation for this long absence of about 92 days was given by the respondent before the enquiry officer.
Thus in view of the explanation given for this long absence from duty supported by medical certificate issued by the private practitioner and statement of witnesses, the absence cannot be said to be of the gravest kind suggesting incorrigibility.
9.
The plaintiff remained absent for 92 days and during all this period did not care to inform the department about his ailment or to apply for leave.
No plausible explanation has been given for not getting himself examined by a doctor in a government dispensary/hospital.
10.
Both the Courts have found no substance in any of the contentions and the point which weighed with the lower appellate Court stands overruled by the Division Bench.
Even otherwise, on a careful perusal of the documents on record, i.e. charge sheet Exhibit P-8, findings of the enquiry officer Exhibit P-10 and order of termination Exhibit P-13; I am of the view that the plaintiff-respondent was given full opportunity to place his view point.
The enquiry officer vide his report Exhibit P-10 has minutely examined the contentions raised by the delinquent official.
Even the order of dismissal passed by the Superintendent of Police is a speaking order.
The Superintendent of Police has noticed that the plaintiff had defaulted on as many as 19 earlier occasions and had been awarded punishments several times.
The concluding paragraph of his order reads as under :  "From what has been stated above, I have come to the conclusion that the defaulter is guilty of absence from duty for 92 days without any leave and without any reasonable ground.
From the evidence of A.S.I.
Atma Raw P.W. 2, it is clear that he is habitual of absenting himself and had absented himself on no less than 19 earlier occasions.
The punishments awarded to him on earlier occasions which included major punishments as well, had no effect on him to bring about any reformation in his conduct.
I, therefore, order that Constable Tek Singh will stand dismissed from the force with effect from today F.N."
11.
Since the basis of the impugned judgment was the judicial pronouncement in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) which has since been overruled by the Division Bench judgment in Baldev Singh's case (supra), this appeal merits acceptance which accordingly, I accept and set aside the judgment and decree of the learned Additional District Judge, Ambala, dated 30th July, 1979 and restore the judgment and decree of the trial Court dated 23rd December, 1976 dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.