Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Change in seniority and the consequential order of reversion from the post of Assistant Director to that of District Welfare Officer have compelled the petitioner to approach this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant in the office of the Commissioner in the year 1955.
Vide order dated January 14, 1956, the petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Welfare Officer, Jind.
On the merger of erstwhile States of Pepsu and Punjab, the petitioner was integrated with the persons working in the department of Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes in the State of Punjab.
Vide orders dated November 7, 1972, the petitioner was promoted as District Welfare Officer.
This appointment was made on ad hoc basis.
For reasons which are not clear on the record, his appointment has continued to be ad hoc even though a period of more than 18 years has elapsed.
It appears that vide orders dated December 13, 1978, the seniority list of District Welfare Officers/Lady Welfare Officers depicting the position upto November, 1978 was released.
After this, some posts of District Welfare Officers were filled up by direct recruitment, and others by promotion.
Vide order dated April 17, 1986 the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Director.
Respondent No. 5 was also promoted along with him.
Thereafter, vide orders dated November 21, 1986 a tentative seniority list showing the position upto July 31, 1986 was issued.
In this list, the petitioner's name appeared at Serial No. 4, while those of respondent Nos. 2 to 12 appeared below him from serial Nos. 5 to 15.
The petitioner was satisfied with the position assigned to him and consequently had no occasion to represent against it.
This seniority list was finalised vide orders dated January 9, 1987 and the petitioner was assigned seniority at serial No. 11.
In this list, respondent Nos. 2 to 6 were shown senior to him while respondent Nos. 7 to 12 continued to be junior to him.
A copy of this list is at Annexure P-5.
As a consequence of the finalisation the seniority list, the petitioner who has been promoted as Assistant Director vide orders dated April 17, 1986 was reverted as District Welfare Officer vide orders dated March 30, (sic).
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-6.
Aggrieved by the orders at Annexures P-5 and P-6 the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
A short reply has also been filed by Mr. Dalip Singh Virk, respondent No. 6.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of other respondents.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been inter alia averred that vide orders dated September 19, 1986 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
Nos. 2162 and 3483 of 1986, the High Court had directed the Department to determine the seniority of the District Welfare Officers within a period of 3 months.
Accordingly, a seniority list had been finalised after inviting objections from all the concerned officers including the petitioner.
It has been further averred that the petitioner was personally heard on December 20, 1986 before the finalisation of the list.
It has been further averred that the petitioner had been originally placed at Serial No. 4 in the tentative seniority list.
However, in view of the representations submitted by various persons, the department proposed to put the petitioner at Serial No. 11.
This was in view of the fact that Sarvshri Gurcharan Dass and Jagdish Singh who were senior to the petitioner in the seniority list of the Tehsildar Welfare Officers were promoted on ad hoc basis for 6 months against the posts meant for direct quota.
The petitioner was promoted against a regular post meant for the promotion quota.
In fact, Sarvshri Gurcharan Dass and Jagdish Singh who were senior to the petitioner had at prior right to be appointed against a post falling within the quota of promotees.
They had thus a right to be considered for promotion against the post falling within the promotion quota prior to the petitioner.
Even though they had expired, in the seniority list they were entitled to be adjusted against the posts falling to the share of the promotees above the petitioner.
Consequently, in the final seniority list, the petitioner has been placed below respondent Nos. 2 to 6.
It has also been averred that in the year 1972 Sarvshri Gurcharan Dass and Jagdish Singh were promoted and the rules called the Punjab Welfare Department Class III Service Rules, 1962 were applicable.
It is the case of the respondents that "according to the prescribed method, 25% posts were filled by promotion and 75% posts by direct recruitment."
The two posts which fell vacant in 1972 were to be filled by direct recruitment.
Sarvshri Gurcharan Singh Dass and Jagdish Singh, Tehsil Welfare Officers were promoted on ad hoc basis against these posts vide orders dated March 3, 1972.
Separate action to fill up these posts by direct recruitment on regular basis was also initiated separately.
Thereafter, on August 4, 1972, a new post of District Welfare Officer was created and according to the prescribed procedure this post was earmarked for the quota of promotion.
Against this post, the petitioner was promoted vide orders dated November 7, 1972.
Ultimately, Sarvshri Gurcharan Dass and Jagdish Singh died on June 13, 1982 and December 26, 1972 respectively.
The post against which the petitioner had been promoted had a right to be adjusted against this post.
Accordingly, the petitioner's seniority was relegated to the post falling to the quota of promotees.
It has also been averred that the Punjab Public Service Commission has not yet approved the appointment of the petitioner as District Welfare Officer, as a result of which he continues to work on ad hoc basis.
It has been pointed out that the posts of District Welfare Officer which were originally borne on Class-III Service governed by the 1962-Rules were upgraded to Class-II.
The members of the Class-II service are governed by the rules called the Punjab Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes Department (Class-II) Service Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the 1978 Rules).
Under these rules, the posts of District Welfare Officers have to be filled up by promotion and by direct recruitment or by transfer on deputation in the ratio of 50 :50.
His seniority is stated to have been finalised in strict conformity with the provisions of the rule.
5.
I have heard Mr. Gurnam Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and Messrs TS Dhindsa and SC Pathela for respondent Nos. 1 and 6 respectively.
A perusal of the record and particularly the orders at Annexure P-5 by which the final seniority has been determined show that the petitioner's name appears at Serial No. 11 while those of respondent Nos. 7 to 12 appear below him.
Consequently, the petitioner can have no grievance vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 7 to 12.
It is only in respect of respondents Nos. 2 to 6 that his grievance regarding seniority has to be considered.
The factual position respondent Nos. 2 to 6 and the petitioner as apparent from the final seniority list, is as under :  Sl.
No./Name Present post Date of birth Date of appointment Date of confirmation Remarks xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 5.
Raj Kakkar Lady Welfare Officer 10.6.31 4.11.59 12.7.71 Post of LWO was merged with the posts of DWO w.e.f.
2.3.78 6.
Avtar Singh Dhor DWO 9.1.37 Feb 79 - SC (through direct recruitment) 7.
Niranjan Singh D.W.O.
8.1.36 -do- - Through direct recruitment 8.
Deepak Kumar Astt.
Director 2350 -do- - -do- 9.
Jagdish Singh D.W.O.
17.8.32 18.3.72 - SC died on 261279.
10.
Dalip Singh D.W.O.
15.3.37 11.10.79 - SC (through direct recruitment) 11.
Ram Dass Singh Astt.
Director 2.3.31 17.11.72 - SC Provisional seniority.
6.
A reference to the relevant provisions of 1962-Rules as well as the 1978-Rules may also be made.
Under the 1962-Rules, the method of appointment to the various posts in service was laid down in rule 8 and the seniority of the members of the service had to be determined under rule 10 by the dates of their continuous appointment to the service.
The relevant part of the provisions contained in rule 8(1)(g) and clauses (2) and (3) may be usefully reproduced :  "8(1)(g) - In case a District Welfare Officer for Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes :  (i) by promotion from among Tehsil Welfare Officers for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and Male Social Workers; (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official working in any other Department of Punjab Government or under the Government of a State other than Punjab or of the Government of India provided he is a Graduate and has at least three years experience of Social Work among Harijans; and (iii) by direct appointments; (2) All promotions from one grade to another shall be made by selection based on merit and taking into consideration seniority and seniority alone shall not give any right of appointment.
(3) No member shall be eligible for promotion to the following posts unless he has the experience indicated against each :  (i) Superintendent -Five years' experience as Head Assistant or a total experience as an Assistant for ten years.
(ii) Head Assistant -Five years experience as an Assistant.
(iii) Assistant -Five years' experience as a Clerk, Store-keeper, Stenographer or Steno-typist.
(iv) Lady Welfare Officer -Seven years' experience as a Female Social Worker.
(v) District Welfare Officer for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes -Seven years' experience as Tehsil Welfare Officer and Male Social Worker."
A perusal of the above provisions shows that no quota for direct recruitment had been fixed under the rules.
There is nothing on record to show as to on what basis, it has been averred in the written statement of respondent No. 1 that  25% posts were to be filled up by promotion and  75% by the direct recruitment.
The rule does not prescribe any quota.
7.
A reference may also be made to the relevant provisions of 1978-Rules.
The method of appointment to the post of District Welfare Officers is laid down in rule 9.
Rule 9(i)(c) and (ii) read as under :  Method of appointment  "9(i) Appointments to the posts in the Service shall be made in the manner indicated below :  xx xx xx  (c) In the case of District Welfare Officers : (i) 50 per cent of the posts by promotion from amongst the Tehsil Welfare Officer; and (ii) 50 per cent of the posts by direct appointment or by transfer on deputation from other departments of Punjab Government.
(c) In the case of Lady Welfare Officer by direct appointment or by transfer on deputation from other departments.
(ii) All appointments to the posts in the Service by promotion shall be made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and no member of the Service shall have any right for promotion merely on the basis of seniority."
8.
Method for determination of seniority is laid down in rule 11 which reads as under :  "The seniority inter se of Members of the Service in each cadre shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in that cadre of the service :  Provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment the order of merit determined by the Commission, or other recruiting authority, as the case may be, shall not be disturbed in fixing their seniority.
Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :  (a) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member appointed otherwise; (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer; (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointments; and if the rate of pay drawn are also the same then by their length of service in those appointments; and if the length of service is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Note : Seniority of members appointed on purely provisional basis shall be determined as and when they are regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointments."
A perusal of the above provisions shows that appointment to the posts of District Welfare Officers can be made by promotion or by direct recruitment or transfer, etc.
In the ratio of 50 :50.
Furthermore, the seniority has to be determined by the length of continuous service on a post.
The seniority of members appointed on purely provisional basis has to be determined as and when they are regularly appointed.
The 1978-Rules were published in the Govt. gazette of March 10, 1978.
By rule 20, the provisions of 1962-Rules in so far as they related to the posts.
Included in 1978-Rules were repealed.
The basic premises on which the govt. has finalised the seniority is that under the 1962-Rules.
A quota of 25% had been fixed for promotion and 75% for direct recruitment.
The rules do not contain-any such provision.
No executive order showing the fixation of such a quota was placed before me.
Inevitably, the very premises for the fixation of seniority appears to be non-existent.
Furthermore, the quota appears to have been laid down for the first time under the 1978-Rules.
These Rules were promulgated on March 10, 1978.
The quota prescribed under the 1978-Rules would be applicable only to the vacancies arising on or after March 10, 1978.
9.
A perusal of the seniority list at Annexure P-5 shows that Sarvshri Attar Singh Dhoor, Niranjan Singh, Deepak Kumar and Dalip Singh have been considered senior to the petitioner on the ground that they are direct recruits.
Otherwise, their continuous appointment is from the year 1979 while in the case of the petitioner, the date of continuous appointment is from November 17, 1972.
Persons who had been appointed to the service prior to March 10, 1978 had to be assigned seniority without any consideration of quota.
It is only in respect of the vacancies which had arisen after March 10, 1978 that the quota rule of 50 :50 had to be applied.
As such, the seniority list at Annexure P-5, in so far as the petitioner and respondent Nos. 2 to 6 are concerned, appears to have been fixed on a totally wrong premises.
The petitioner and other persons who had been appointed to the service prior to March 10, 1978 have to be considered senior on the basis of the date of continuous appointment as prescribed under the 1962-Rules.
Thereafter, the quota rule may become relevant for determining the seniority of persons who had been appointed to the service after March 10, 1978.
In this view of the matter, the seniority list at Annexure P-5 cannot be sustained.
10.
It has been pointed out in a written statement that the petitioner is still working on ad hoc basis.
It is thus suggested that in view of the Note under rule 11 of the 1978-Rules, he is not entitled to be assigned any seniority.
The pleading of the parties do indicate that the petitioner has continued to work as District Welfare Officer on ad hoc basis since November, 1972.
However, there is nothing on record to show as to why the Punjab Public Service Commission has not granted the approval to his appointment in service.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the petitioner has been considered as unsuitable for appointment to the post.
In fact, the petitioner's averment in paragraph 3 to the effect that he has been serving the department since 1956 "to the entire satisfaction of his superiors in the State of Punjab.
His record has been satisfactory without any bad record whatsoever" has not been denied.
On the contrary, this averment even though specifically made, has not been controverted.
In this situation there appears to be no justification for treating the petitioner as ad hoc for a period of more than 18 years.
In any case, there is no explanation for the long delay in finalising the case for his regularisation.
In any event, the seniority of the petitioner had to be determined under the 1962-Rules.
Under rule 10, the seniority was to be determined on the basis of the continuous appointment.
The rule did not contain a provision like the Note appended to rule 11 under the 1978 Rules.
That being so, the Petitioner's seniority has to be determined on the basis of his continuous appointment from November 7, 1972.
11.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner has averred that the seniority as originally fixed by the department was changed without any notice to him.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the petitioner was heard before the finalisation of the seniority list on December 16, 1986.
Even a copy of the notice sent to the petitioner has been produced on record as Annexure R-6.
This is a teleprinter message which has been sent to the various persons including the petitioner.
It reads as under :  "Secretary Social Welfare Department Punjab has called a meeting on 26.12.1986 at 3.30 P.M.
In his office in SCO No. 7, Sector 7 Chandigarh to consider issue regarding finalisation of seniority list of District Welfare Officers.
You are directed to attend the meeting on the said date and time to express your views in that regard."
By this notice the petitioner was called upon to attend the meeting on December 26, 1986 in the office of the Secretary, Social Welfare Department, Govt. of Punjab, Chandigarh.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that this was not an adequate opportunity as in fact no notice of any of the representations had been given to the petitioner.
12.
In the seniority list as originally fixed in the year 1978, the petitioner had been placed at Serial No. 4.
This position was maintained even in the tentative seniority list issued in the year 1986.
The petitioner was satisfied with the position assigned to him and consequently had no occasion to represent against it.
Certain other persons like respondent Nos. 2 to 12 appeared to have submitted certain representations.
The petitioner in the very nature of things had to meet the points which had been raised in those representations.
Admittedly, no notice of any those representations was ever given to the petitioner.
In such a situation, an opportunity for personal hearing which is stated to have been given to the petitioner on December 26, 1986 was a farce.
Nobody could have put forth all the relevant facts without knowing as to what had been stated in the representations submitted by the affected persons.
In the circumstances of the case, I am satisfied that the opportunity for personal hearing given to the petitioner was not an adequate opportunity.
13.
In view of the above, the order at Annex P-5 in so far as it relates to the petitioner and respondent No. 2 to 6, cannot be sustained.
It is consequently quashed to that extent.
The State of Punjab is directed to redetermine the seniority in accordance with the above observations.
The needful shall be done immediately.
The petitioner's case for promotion as Assistant shall be considered in accordance with the seniority list that may be finally prepared by the Government.
In the event of his getting seniority above any of the respondent Nos. 2 to 6 his claim for promotion shall be considered with effect from the date a person junior to him had been promoted.
In case the petitioner is declared senior and is promoted retrospectively, consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary and seniority shall also be given to the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of this judgment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
Order accordingly.