VK Bali, J - The petitioner is aggrieved of the award rendered by the award rendered by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar, dated (Annexure P8) and clamours for setting aside the same, with a direction to respondent No. 3 to restore his service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Facts of the case would go to show that the petitioner was appointed under the Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Chandigarh, respondent No. 3, as Field Inspector on 31st March, 1970.
He was charge-sheeted by the Manging Director of the Markfed to which charge-sheet he submitted a reply on 7th July, 1970.
Sh. BN Madhok was appointed enquiry officer and after the resultant departmental enquiry, the petitioner was dismissed from service.
An appeal to set aside the order of dismissal was carried before the Administrator but the same was dismissed, information of which was given to the petitioner vide letter dated 14th November, 1979, (Annexure 6).
It is thereafter that the petitioner filed a writ petition CWP 987/1979 in this court which, on account of preliminary objection raised by the respondents to the effect that the matter could not be agitated in writ jurisdiction for availability of an alternative remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, that the petitioner went before the said forum but lost his cause even there.
As referred to above, the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar, vide award dated 1st August, 1986, did not find favour with any of the contentions raised by the petitioner against his dismissal from service.
3.
Even though the impugned orders have been challenged on variety of grounds, Mr. Khoji, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has confined his arguments to the principal point involved in the petition that inasmuch as neither a show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner after the enquiry officer held him guilty nor the enquiry report was supplied to him, the principles of natural justice have been violated thus, rendering the subsequent order of dismissal to be illegal.
It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner was not given show-cause notice by the punishing authority and the Managing Director straightaway passed the order of dismissal after receipt of the enquiry report.
In the written statement the averments, as reproduced above, have been replied by simply saying that this ground has been wrongly taken and is, therefore, denied.
It has been further stated that the records of the case show that the order of dismissal was passed after considering the entire material on record which included the enquiry report as well as reply to the show-cause notice submitted by the petitioner.
From the perusal of the reply aforesaid, it is straightaway made out that no reply has been given to show that the averments of the petitioner that after the enquiry officer had found him guilty, no show-cause notice was given by the punishing authority.
For the reason that no reply has been given to the basic averments of the petitioner it shall amount to admission.
Further, from the perusal of the order of dismissal (Annexure P.5) passed by the punishing authority it is not made out from anywhere that show-cause notice was given to the petitioner after receipt of the enquiry report.
It is also not made out if a copy of the enquiry report was sent to the petitioner.
In view of the facts as have been stated above, the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : 1991(1) SLR 159 would straightaway be attracted.
It has been authoritatively held that the principles of natural justice necessarily require sending of the enquiry report to the delinquent and permitting him to make a meaningful representation before any adverse orders are passed.
The fact that the aforesaid decision came to be rendered in the case of the Government servant, whereas the petitioner was an employee of the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd would not make any difference as held by a Division Bench of this Court is CWP 4573 of 1979 (Madan Lal v. The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab and others, decided on 15th July, 1991).
4.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is allowed and the award of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Amritsar (Annexure P8) vide which the dismissal of the petitioner dated 3rd June, 1978, was upheld is set aside.
The order of dismissal of the petitioner is held to be illegal and inoperative.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service and entitled to all consequential benefits of service, including back wages.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.