VK Bali, J - Petitioners seek a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order Annexure P/8 dated August 14, 1987 passed by respondent No. 2 i.e. Chairman, Punjab School Education board, SAS Nagar (Mohali) vide which the services of petitioners and some others who were working on daily wage clerks were terminated.
The facts of the case need be referred although in brevity.
2.
All the petitioners were appointed by the Punjab School Education Board as all of them are stated to be fulfilling all the necessary qualifications required for appointment to the posts of Clerks.
They were appointed on different dates as would be made out from Annexure P/1 which is a "Chart" containing the particulars of all the petitioners with their names, date of joining and qualifications.
All that is required to be mentioned here is that all these appointments were made from June 1, 1983 to December 24, 1986.
It is pleaded that there was a complete ban on the recruitment of Class III Employees in all the Government departments including the Board and other statutory bodies.
The said ban was lifted in 1986 and inasmuch as the excigencies of the work of the Board required certain posts to be filled up, for lack of which the Board was suffering, the Chairman of the Board made appointments of the petitioners on daily wage basis instead of ad hoc/temporary/permanent basis as otherwise there was absolutely no difference between the requisite qualifications that were required for appointment of Clerks on temporary /permanent basis.
Ever since the dates as reflected in Annexure P/1, all the petitioners are said to be continuously working even without notional break.
However, inasmuch as the appointments were for small durations, the period of their appointments was extended from time to time.
Vide Annexure P/2 dated April 20, 1987 the services of the petitioners were extended upto June 30, 1987.
Still thereafter vide orders dated June 17, 1987 the services of the petitioners were extended upto August 31, 1987.
By the time order Annexure P/8 came into being, some of the petitioners had completed more than four years of service without any break.
The petitioners further plead that the instructions dated March 28, 1985 are applicable to all the ad hoc/temporary/employees of Class III service in Punjab Government offices and Boards etc. and the temporary class III employees who have completed a minimum period of two years on April 1, 1985 shall have to be considered for regularisation of their services.
On the persistent demands made by class III employees, the Punjab Government reduced the period from two years to one year as per notification dated August 8, 1985.
Copy of the aforesaid instructions has been placed on record as Annexure P/4.
When this reduction of two years to one year was also not to the liking of class III employees and the matter was still agitated, Punjab Government is said to have issued another circular dated September 1, 1986 by which the Selection Committees of each department were to all employees for interview who had not even completed one year of service and those who had been appointed as ad hoc/temporary employees after April 1, 1984.
Even though the aforesaid instructions are binding upon the respondent-Board yet no departmental Selection Committee was constituted and no appointments on regular basis were made.
Whereas the petitioners who had continuously worked for a period of four years or more had been shown the door, the respondent-Board recruited respondents No. 4 to 16 on the posts of Clerks which according to the petitioners not only violated the instructions, referred to above, but also resulted into irregular appointments.
Some of the persons who were appointed on the posts of Clerks similarly as the petitioners were appointed, although after the appointment of the petitioners were retained in service, the services of the petitioners we terminated.
The petitioners, according to their knowledge plead, that respondents No. 4, 6, 12 13, 14 and 15 who were much junior to them and they too were appointed as Clerks on daily wage basis have been retained in service.
Prior to termination, the petitioners have been repeatedly making representations to regularise their services but with no results.
3.
This petition has been opposed by the respondents.
It has been pleaded in the written statement filed on their behalf that inasmuch as the petitioners were working on daily wages only, they have no right either under the terms of their appointment or under any other law to ask for regularisation of their services.
The appointments of the petitioners were made by the administrative head to meet the exigencies of the work irrespective of existence of posts.
The respondents deny that the petitioners had the requisite qualifications for appointment to the post of clerks.
The requisite qualifications have been spelled out in the written statement which, are as follows :-  ForClerks 1.
Matric 1st Division.
BA-I IInd Division or BA 2.
Punjabi upto Matric.
3.
Proficiency in Punjabi Type Writing of the standard as may be prescribed by the Punjab, Government from time to time.
4.
Age 18-30 years."
In so far as the claim of the petitioners with regard to their continuous service is concerned, the reply of the respondents is that the petitioners having been employed on daily wage basis had breaks in their service as they were paid for the day they worked and they were not paid for the day on which they did not work which amounts to an automatic break in their service.
However, in so far as the extended period of their appointments is concerned, the same has been admitted.
With regard to instructions that have been referred to in the earlier part of the judgment, the case of the respondents is that the same are not applicable to the daily wage employees.
The instructions are said to be applicable only in the case of a person who was either appointed on ad hoc basis or temporary basis.
Respondents No. 4 to 16 are stated to have been appointed on ad hoc basis by the Chairman of the Board and their appointments were later on approved by the Board itself.
The principle of seniority is contested by the respondents on the ground that such a seniority could not be compared in the case of daily wages on one side and employees appointed on ad hoc or temporary basis on the other.
In so far respondents No. 4, 9, 11 and 12 are concerned, the case of the respondents is that they were never appointed on daily wages.
Respondent No. 10 was a regular Class IV employee who was promoted as Clerk on ad hoc basis.
In ultimate analysis, order Annexure P/8 with regard to termination of petitioners is defended and is said to be justified on the pleadings reference of which has been given above.
4.
During the pendency of this petition, an affidavit has been filed by Jagjit Singh Sidhu, Secretary, Punjab School Education Board wherein it has been mentioned that respondent No. 4 Darshan Singh is a graduate and fulfils the requisite qualifications laid down for the appointment of Clerk.
In addition to this, Darshan Singh is an athlete of National Level and he was appointed as Clerk on June 3, 1987 by way of direct recruitment on ad hoc basis against a leave vacancy.
Respondent No. 5 Bahadur Singh is a Matric second class.
He fulfils the requisite qualifications for appointment as Restorer.
He sought appointment as Restorer from the Board.
He was appointed on July 27, 1987 as Restorer by way of direct recruitment against a vacancy caused by the suspension of a confirmed employee.
Respondent No. 6 Rajiv Sharma is matric second class and he fulfils the requisite qualifications, for appointment as Restorer.
He was appointed on January 2, 1987 by way of direct recruitment against a newly created post for six months.
Respondent No. 7 Bimla Devi is a graduate and belongs to backward class.
She fulfils he requisite qualifications for appointment as Clerk.
She is said to be a very good typist in English and Punjabi.
She was appointed as Clerk on January 16, 1987 by way of direct recruitment in the interest of Board against a leave vacancy.
Respondent No. 8 Rajinder Kaur was appointed as Clerk by of direct recruitment on January 14, 1987 against a leave vacancy.
She belongs to Scheduled caste.
She fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
She is stated to by Higher Secondary 1st Division.
Her appointment was made to meet the reservation quota for Scheduled Castes in the cadre of Clerks.
Respondent No. 9 Gur Prem Singh is stated to be BA and he fulfil the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
He was appointed as Clerk on December 19,1986 by way of direct recruitment to meet the reservation meant for handicapped as the is a handicapped person.
Respondent No. 10 Bhag Singh was promoted as Clerk from the post of Peon against 10% quota reserved for class IV employees of the Board for promotion as Clerk.
Respondent No. 11 Gurpreet Kaur was appointed as Clerk by way of direct recruitment on December 26, 1986.
She was not a daily wager like the petitioners.
She is Matric 1st Division and fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
Respondent No. 12 Manjit Kaur was appointed as Clerk by way of direct recruitment on December 30, 1986.
She is said to be BA and fulfils all the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
Respondent No. 13 Kanta Devi was appointed as Clerk by way of direct recruitment on November 11, 1986 against a leave vacancy.
She belongs to Scheduled Caste.
She is Matric 1st Division and fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
Respondent No. 14 Jasmeet Kaur sought appointment as Restorer.
She is Matric and fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post.
She was given the appointment on December 1, 1986 by way of direct recruitment against a newly created post as per Government instructions regarding appointments in services on priority basis to the riot affected persons.
Jasmeet Kaur is stated to be belonging to a riot affected family.
However, inasmuch as she has died, nothing more is required to be mentioned about her.
Respondent No. 13 Madan Lal was appointed as Clerk on November 28, 1986 against a leave vacancy.
He is a graduate and fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
Even his length of service as daily wager is more than that of the petitioners except petitioner No. 1 Paramjit Kaur and petitioner No. 2 Kanta Devi.
Respondent No. 16 Veena Rani was appointed as a Clerk on December 12, 1986 against a leave vacancy.
She is also BA and fulfils the requisite qualifications for the post of Clerk.
5.
It is pertinent to mention here that aforesaid information was supplied later on as the facts given in the written statement did not depict clearly as to in what manner these respondents came to be appointed.
This information was required more particularly when the case of the petitioners was that the persons juniors to them have been retained in service and such persons were also appointed like the petitioners on daily wages.
6.
Rejoinder was filed by the respondent-Board wherein it has been pleaded that it was not on account of ban that the petitioners were appointed on daily wages but the correct facts were that in the year 1985-86, the Punjab School Education Board had lot of preparatory work for the conduct of examination + 1 and + 2 in addition to work of conducting the examinations of 5th and 8th classes.
In the year 1986-87, the Board had actually conducted + 1 examination and it is because of this enormous work load that persons on daily wages were appointed and were permitted to be retained till such time the additional work load was to continue.
It is further pleaded that the services of the petitioners who were appointed on daily wages were dispensed with strictly in accord with their appointment letter when the examinations of 5th and 8th classes were scrapped.
There were 240 lacs candidates in the 8th class 3 examination alone in the year 1987 whereas in the examination of both + 1 and + 2 classes, there were 15 candidates.
After scrapping of the 5th and 8th classes examinations the scrapping staff had become surplus due to non-availability of work.
7.
On the basis of pleadings as contained in petition, reference of which has been given above, Mr. CM Sharma, the learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the action of the respondents-Board was arbitrary inasmuch as persons junior to the petitioners who were appointed in the same manner and on the same terms were retained whereas the petitioners were asked to quit.
He also contends that as per instructions and in particular instructions copies whereof have been placed on record as Annexures P/4 and P/5, the petitioners having served for a continuous period of one year or more deserve to be regularised as also the appointment of respondents No. 4 and 16 was irregular as the said respondents were not appointed through Departmental Selection Committee which had to be constituted by the Board for the purpose of recruitment of Class III and IV employees.
Mr. Goraya, the learned counsel for the Board, on the other hand, has argued that the action respondent-Board in appointing/retaining the services of respondents No. 4 to 16 and asking the petitioners to quit, in the facts and circumstances as made out in the written statement was entirely justified.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find no substance in any of the points raised by Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for the petitioners.
As is made out from the rejoinder to the replication filed by the respondent-Board, most of the petitioners came to be appointed or daily wages from the year 1985-86 onwards when the Boards had lot of preparatory work for the conduct of examination of + 1 and + 2 in addition to work of conducting the examinations of 5th and 8th classes.
In the year 1986-87, the Board conducted + 1 examination in addition to 5th and 8th Classes examinations and it was for this enormous increase in the work load that the persons on daily wages were appointed and even remained for some period simply with a view to cope with the additional/seasonal work load.
It is also made out from the pleadings that in the year 1987, examinations of 5th and 8th classes were scrapped, thus, rendering the services of the petitioners to be surplus.
The stand of the respondent-Board that the petitioners were appointed on daily wages simply with a view to overcome the difficulty which was not to last for long time appears to be plausible and well made out from the pleadings.
Respondents No. 4 to it who fulfilled the requisite qualifications for their respective post were appointed in the manner fully detailed above although on ad hoc, basis but by the administrative heads of the Boards and which appointments were later approved by the Board.
The petitioners on no cogent grounds whatsoever can maintain parity with respondents No. 4 to 16.
While appointing the petitioners, the Board had neither looked into the requisite qualifications strictly nor followed any procedure for appointment and, as referred to above, simply with a view to cope with the enormous work the Board appointed the petitioner on daily wages.
On the other hand, respondents No. 4 to 16 have been appointed on ad hoc/temporary basis and may be the Board has not regularised them also for the simple reason that even their requirement for long terms is also doubtful but it cannot be said that the petitioners simply on account of their earlier appointments had necessarily to be retained when respondents No. 4 to 16 were not asked to quit.
While applying the principle of first come last go, comparison in all regards has first to be made out.
The petitioners have failed to make out a case for applying the aforesaid principle in their case.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, relies upon the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1488 of 1986 decided by a Division Bench of this Court on July 10, 1991.
The facts of the said case would go to show that the petitioner of the said case was appointed as Chemist on June 16,1982 by the Director, Health Services, Haryana.
He continued on the post till March 17, 1986 whereafter vide orders Annexure P2, his services were terminated on the ground that his services were no longer required.
His primary contention was that 12 Chemists who had been appointed to their posts after him had been allowed to continue in service while he was singled out for arbitrary treatment although his service record stood unblemished.
It was admitted by the respondents of the said case that the persons junior to the petitioner had been allowed to continue and it was vaguely denied that the service record of the petitioner was unblemished.
The Division Bench while relying the ratio of Full Bench of this Court held that the respondents were unable to give any reason as to why the services of the petitioner had been retained in service.
The ratio of Full Bench on which reliance was placed runs thus :  "In the light of the discussions made above, we are of the view that the judgments of this Court in YK Bhatia's case (supra) and in Krishan Chand Goyal's case, (supra) lay down the correct proposition of law.
The mere fact that the services of a temporary Government employee are terminated in terms of his contract of service or the statutory rules govern it would not ipso facto be held to be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution, if his juniors are retained.
However, if a government employee can make out a case of discrimination by showing from the material placed on the record that he being senior and similarly circumstanced as his junior in service has been singled out for discriminatory treatment, the action of the Government can be struck down as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
9.
The aforesaid ratio of the Full Bench would not come to the rescue of the petitioner in the present case.
No material has been placed on the record to show that the petitioner was similarly circumstanced as compared to respondents No. 4 to 16.
That being so, the ratio of the Division Bench relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner which, in turn, proceeded to decide the matter on the ratio of Full Bench reproduced above would not apply to the facts of the present case.
In The State of Punjab and others v. Surinder Kumar and others, 1992(1) SCT 538 : JT 1991(6) Supreme Court 540 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that when persons accept the terms of appointments set out in their appointment letters, the specified terms on which the appointments are made can be enforced.
The petitioners were appointed on daily wage basis and that too with a view to cope up with the massive work which, as referred to above, was only for a temporary period.
The petitioners strictly in accordance with their appointment letters could ne asked to quit particularly when the work load of the respondent-Board decreased many fold on account of scrapping of examinations of 5th and 8th classes.
Respondents No. 4 to 16, on the other hand, were not appointed for the reasons and in the manner in which the petitioners were appointed.
They cannot possibly urge that there was no difference between them and respondents No. 4 to 16 and that being so, there is no discrimination involved in the facts of the present case.
10.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that in view of instructions Annexures P/4 and P/5 the services of the petitioners should be regularised has also no force.
Besides the fact that the stand of the respondent-Board that these instructions issued by the Government are not applicable or binding upon it, the fact that there is no post available so as to regularise the services of the petitioners is in itself enough to deny regularisation to the petitioner.
In Surmukh Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) SCT 188 : 1991(5) S.L.R.
194, this court has held that question of regularisation of services can only arise when a regular post is available and not otherwise.
It was also held in the case aforesaid that if no post is available, order of termination is proper.
11.
In so far as contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that respondents have not been appointed by Departmental Selection Committee is concerned suffice it to say that the respondent-Board has taken a specific plea in the written statement that appointment it of respondents No. 4 to 16 was made by the heads of departments and such appointments were approved by the Board.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has also cited the judgment of the Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, A.I.R. 1990 (SC) 371 to contend even if some of the petitioners at the time of their initial appointments were not having the initial minimum educational qualifications, the same should not come in their way with the view to retain them and they cannot be thrown out on the aforesaid ground at a later stage, has no bearing on the facts of this case.
The ratio of the judgment aforesaid would have been applicable only if first it was held that the petitioners were appointed in the same manner and on the same terms and conditions as respondents No. 4 to 16 were appointed.
That point having gone against the petitioners no useful purpose will be served in going in details with regard to lack of qualifications of the petitioners.
12.
Finding no force in this petitione I dismiss the same.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.