MR Agnihotri, J - By this writ petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for having a direction issued to the State of Haryana, through the Secretary to Government Haryana, Forest Department, as also the Haryana Public Service Commission for appointing the petitioner to the Haryana Forest Service (Group 'B' Service), on the basis of his position in merit, and according to the policy instructions of the State Government dated 26th May, 1972.
2.
Briefly stated, on 22nd November, 1985, the Haryana Public Service Commission invited applications for appointment against three posts of Haryana Forest Service (Group B).
Out of the three posts, two were reserved for the Scheduled Castes, whereas the third one was earmarked for the general category candidate.
The petitioner who at that time was already serving in the Forest Department, Haryana, as a Forest Ranger, and was fully eligible and qualified for being appointed against the post of Haryana Forest Service (Group B), also applied in response to the advertisement.
He qualified the written as well as physical tests and was called for viva voce test for 15th March, 1986.
According to the performance of the petitioner and the marks obtained by him, he was placed at number 2, that is, immediately below one Mohinder Singh Malik and above one Vijay Kumar Sharma.
Though originally only one post fell to the lot of general category, yet later on ten more vacancies were made available out of which six fell to the lot of general category.
In compliance with the Government policy instructions dated 26th May, 1972, the Haryana Public Service Commission was required to recommend five names in addition to the number of vacancies intimated by the Government at the time of placing the requisition.
However, even though nine more candidates were to be appointed on 17th March, 1986, in addition to the number of vacancies intimated to the Commission in the first instance, yet the Commission recommended the name of only one candidate, namely, Mohinder Singh Malik, and the name of the petitioner who was immediately below him at number 2, was not sent when he was fully eligible and qualified for the post.
Aggrieved against that, the petitioner made a representation against that on, 19th March, 1986, requesting therein that at least the names of two more candidates belonging to the general category should have been recommended, as sufficient number of posts were available against which appointments could be made on the basis of the same selection.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a number of reminders and ultimately the matter was examined by the State Government and after thorough consideration of the claim made by the petitioner in the light of the rules and the policy instructions issued by the State Government as well as by the Public Service Commission and the State Government desired the Haryana Public Service Commission to recommend the name of the petitioner, but in vain.
To the same effect is the case of the petitioner in the present writ petition.
3.
Though separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, yet the factual position stands admitted.
The action of the respondents in not recommending the name of the petitioner is sought to be justified on the ground that after the earlier competition there has been a subsequent selection also in which the petitioner too has appeared.
On that basis, it has been pleaded that the petitioner should be deemed to have forfeited his right to be appointed to the Haryana Forest Service (Group B) on the basis of the first selection.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the material on the record, I am of the considered view that the claim of the petitioner deserves to be allowed and his name should have been recommended for appointment to the Haryana Forest Service (Group B) on the basis of his earlier selection.
In fact, the objection of the respondents is hypertechnical and cannot stand the scrutiny of law.
Even on 25th January, 1990, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana, Chandigarh - Head of the Forest Department, addressed a communication to the Secretary to Government, Haryana, Forest Department (Annexure P6), making a strong recommendation in fvaour of appointment of the petitioner, as under :-  "3.
According to Haryana Govt. Policy letter No. 38/20/78-2 GSI, dated 921979, the quantum of reservation for direct recruitment will be as follows :- Total No. of posts available for direct recruitment 16 1.
Reserved for SC 2 (4th and 8th) 2.
Reserved for Ex-Servicemen 1 (12th) 3.
Reserved for B.C.
2 (10th and 16th) 4.
General 11 (1,2,3,5,6,7,9,11,13 14,15) After 921979 the following were appointed in H.F.S.
through direct recruitment :  1.
Sh. Mohinder Singh (1980) 2.
Sh. Subh Ram, (1982) 3.
Sh. Ravinder Singh Lamba](recommended against vacancy reserved for SC) 4.
Sh. Vinod Kumar Jhajjaria] 5.
Sh. Shyam Lal Kaushik.]
In the Selection of H.F.S.
made in 1982 four general category candidates (against 3 general and 1 for SC vacancy) were recommended by H.P.SC Sh. Shyam Lal Kaushik was recommended against 4th vacancy reserved for SC and this vacancy of SC was carried forward in the next advertisement of 1986.
The post of H.F.S.
is a Technical Post (Para 24 of Haryana Forest Manual No. II).
Even in the recent judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court the post of Forest Ranger has been classified as Technical Post.
With regard to Technical posts, para of Haryana Govt. policy dated 921979 referred to above states that in case of Technical Post, if candidates belonging to reserved categories are not available for the second time also, the posts shall be filled by candidates belonging to the general category."
Immediately acting thereupon, the Financial Commissioner and, Secretary to Government, Haryana, Forest Department, sought the confirmation of the factual position from the Haryana Public Service Commission, as according to the representation made by the petitioner, he had qualified both the written and the viva voce tests and was placed at number 2 in the merit list.
Despite this, just and genuine grievance of the petitioner stood unredressed and he has not been appointed to the post in question so far, even though his case is fully covered by the policy instructions of the State Government and the Haryana Public Service Commission.
This averment of the petitioner as made out by him and projected by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests before the State Government has not been denied by either of the respondents though detailed separate written statements have been filed by them.
In fact, the claim of the petitioner is very short and simple.
Firstly, he was in fact at number 1 in the merit list and should have been appointed in the very first instance.
Assuming for the same of argument that he was not at number 1 but was at number 2, even then following the law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 169, the respondents were duty bound to recommend the name of the petitioner and to appoint him against the second vacancy falling to the general category as a result of direct recruitment by open competition.
It has by now been settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Neelima Shangla's case (supra) incidentally a case of the Haryana Public Service Commission itself, that the duties of the Public Service Commission are confined to the holding of the written examination, viva voca and arranging the order of merit according to the marks of the candidates who have qualified.
The Commission is not required to make any further selection from the qualifying candidates and is not expected to withhold any names.
It is the State Government who has to make selection strictly in accordance with the merit prepared by the Commission, and it is the Government alone which can decide not to fill the vacancies, if so required, for any valid reasons.
5.
In the light of the above factual and legal position, I allow this writ petition and by issuing a writ of mandamus, direct the Haryana Public Service Commission to recommend the name of the petitioner to the State Government for appointment to the Haryana Forest Service (Group B) on the basis of the selection made in the year 1986, within one month, and further direct the State Government to make the necessary appointment of the petitioner against the aforesaid post, within two months of the receipt of the recommendation from the Haryana Public Service Commission.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.