BL Hansaria, CJ.
- The grievance in this application is about dismissal from service pursuant to the order of the Director-General of Central Industrial Security Force passed on 20th August, 1985.
The order of dismissal was in a way self-invited and came as a climax.
Let us start from the beginning.
The petitioner while serving as a confirmed constable in the aforesaid Force faced a departmental proceeding inasmuch as on 1.12.1963 he was asked to show cause against the charges levelled against him.
The crux of the charges was : (i) The petitioner had remained absent from Master Parade on 7101963 without any permission; (ii) though he was detailed for shift duty from 0500 hrs.
on 9101963, he reported for duty at 0645 hrs.
; (iii) he misbehaved with the Duty Officer at the Control Room in front of public on 9101983, and (iv) he had not rectified himself though he was charged with similar misconduct in the past.
The petitioner pleaded not guilty to the charges, and after an enquiry was held, the disciplinary authority awarded the punishment of compulsory retirement from service.
On appeal being preferred before the Deputy Inspector-General, the appellate authority, on the ground of extreme compassion, notified the punishment to reduction of pay at two stages for a period of two years without cumulative effect.
Not knowing that the stage had come to stop further approach to the higher authorities, he approached the Director-General against the appellate order.
The Director General took the view that in view of the gravity of misconduct and the repeated punishment awarded earlier, the petitioner deserved to be dismissed from service.
As enhancement of punishment was proposed, the petitioner was given an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
In the cause as shown, the petitioner pleaded, inter alia, that he had been adequately punished by the Deputy Inspector-General and he wanted mercy to reduce the punishment further and not to enhance the same.
The Director-General was, however, not moved and took the view that the punishment of compulsory retirement itself was bad enough and that the appellate authority in a total travesty of justice and misplaced sympathy toned down the punishment.
The Director-General took the view that the petitioner had certainly no place in a disciplined Force with all his record of service and that the delinquency was far too serious to be let off without anything other than dismissal.
He, therefore, enhanced the punishment and ordered for dismissal from service.
2.
The aforesaid thus show that the punishment of dismissal was self-invited.
Shri Panda has assailed the same on the following grounds :-  (1) the enquiry report being not made available to the petitioner, the entire disciplinary proceeding was vitiated; (2) the Director-General was not clothed in law with the revisional power in exercise of which the order of dismissal was passed; (3) the Director-General having passed the order of dismissal without giving a personal hearing to the petitioner, the same was hit by the principles of natural justice, apart from being against the proviso to Section 9(3) of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 and Rule 47(3) of the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969; and (4) the punishment of dismissal is shockingly disproportionate.
Let us examine the submission seriatim.
3.
Point No. (1) :- As regards the non-furnishing of a copy of the enquiry report, reliance is placed on the recent decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, AIR 1991 SC 471 : 1991 Lab IC 30 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
111, in which it was held that furnishing of a copy of the enquiry report along with the recommendation, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment to be inflicted is a part of natural justice, and the delinquent would be entitled to the same despite amendment of Art. 311(2) by the Forty-second amendment.
Relying on this decision, it is submitted by Shri Panda that as admittedly a copy of the enquiry report was not furnished in the present case, the whole proceeding is vitiated by violation of the principle of natural justice.
But then, in the aforesaid case, the Apex Court had made it clear that the enunciation of the law shall have prospective application and no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground.
Though Shri Panda has urged that the observation about prospective application in para 17 of the judgment has reference only to those decisions of the different High Courts and the Supreme Court wherein a contrary view was taken and would not apply to other proceedings, we are not in a position to agree with the learned counsel.
According to us, the observation made in that paragraph about prospective application with the rider that "no punishment imposed shall be open to challenge on this ground" refers to all the punishments awarded before the judgment had seen the light of the day.
The first submission of the learned counsel, therefore, cannot be accepted.
4.
Point No. (2) :- Before adverting to the submissions on this point, it may be stated that we are conscious of the fact that the petitioner had himself approached the Director-General invoking his power under Rule 24 and, as such, it can be said that he had acquiesced in exercise of this power by the Director-General.
But then, if the Director-General lacked jurisdiction, acquiescence cannot confer the same upon him as it would be a case of patent lack of jurisdiction.
We, therefore, propose to examine the contention advanced by Shri Panda in this regard.
5.
On this aspect, Shri Panda has first drawn our attention to Section 9(3) of the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (for short, "the Act") which has conferred the power of revision on the Central Government.
Our attention is then invited to Rule 49 of the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969 (hereinafter called "the Rules") which deals with the subject of revision and has stated that any authority superior to the authority making the order may, suo motu, if it considers necessary, revise an order, original or appellate, passed by such lower authority which comes to his notice within a period of one year from the date of the order.
It thus appears that Rule 49 confers revisional power on an authority other than the Central Government.
Shri Panda urges that Rule 49 is beyond the rule-making power of the Central Government and, as such is ultra vires.
We are referred to Section 22(2)(g) of the Act which states that the rules made by the Central Government may provide for authority to whom appeal shall be preferred from orders of punishment and the procedure to be followed for the disposal of appeals.
It is urged that Section 22(2) has not authorised the Central Government by any of its clauses to prescribe the authority to whom revision shall be referred; and, as such, conferring of revisional power on some authority by Rule 49 was beyond the scope of the Central Government's rule-making power.
6.
In countering this submission of Shri Panda, Shri Mohanty, the learned Standing Counsel (Central Government), draws our attention to clause-(i) of Section 22(2) of the Act which states that the rules made by the Central Government may provide for "any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which rules are required to be made under this Act".
In this connection, reference is also made to sub-section (i) of Section 22 which has conferred the general power of making rules "for carrying out the purposes of this Act".
Our attention is then invited to Section 4(2) of the Act which has stated that the Director-General and every other supervisory officer so appointed shall have, and may exercise, such powers and authority as are provided by or under this Act.
It is finally urged that even if there be any infirmity in the rule as framed by the Central Government, the same may be taken to have been duly taken care of by the requirement of laying of the rule before each House of Parliament, mention of which has been made in Section 22(3) of the Act.
7.
We have duly considered the aforesaid submissions of Shri Mohanty.
According to us, the power of revision conferred by Rule 49 on any superior authority cannot be said to be in exercise of the rule-making power conferred by clause (i) of Section 22(2) or, for that matter, the general rule making power mentioned in Section 22(i).
Had it been that the power of revision was confined to the Director-General or other supervisory officer, of which mention has been made in Section 4(1) of the Act, the matter would have been different.
The revisional power conferred by Rule 49 did not have in view either the Director-General or other supervisory officer.
Indeed, conferment of revisional power even on the Assistant Commandant of the Force who is also a supervisory officer was definitely not in contemplation of the rule-making authority.
We would, therefore, hold that in framing Rule 49(1), the Central Government transgressed the limit.
In saying so, we are conscious of the fact that a general rule-making power has been conferred by Section 22(1) of the Act on the Central Government; and, as such, even if a particular rule may not come within the fold of any of the clauses mentioned in sub-section (2) of this section, the same may yet be within the general rule-making power.
But even a general rule-making power does not enable the authority on whom the power is conferred to extend the scope of the general operation of the Act.
Therefore, such a power "will not support attempts to widen the purposes of the Act, to add new and different means to carrying them out, to depart from or vary its terms" as stated in Shasaben v. Scot, (1957) 95 CLR 245 at page 246 which was approved in Utah Construction v. Pataky, (1965)2 All ER 650 (PC) at page 653.
To illustrate, if a Panchayat Act vests the power of establishing Primary Health Centres in a Panchayat Samiti, the State Government cannot, under its power to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act, take upon itself the power to establish Primary Health Centres, as stated in Venkateswara Rao v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1966 SC 828.
Similarly, if a taxing Act makes the tax recoverable from a dealer, rules cannot be made under the general power to carry out the purposes of the Act so as to make the tax recoverable from the transferee of a dealer, vide Deputy Commercial Tax Officer v. Sukhraj, AIR 1968 SC 67.
Applying the analogy, we would say that if the Act has conferred the power of revision on the Central Government, the Central Government cannot, under its power to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act, confer the power on any other authority.
8.
As to the submission of Shri Mohanty relating to laying of the rules before each House of Parliament and taking care of any infirmity by this requirement, we may say that it is well settled in law that compliance with the laying requirement does not confer any validity to the subordinate legislation if it is in excess of the power conferred by the enabling Act.
See : Hukumchand v. Union of India, AIR 1972 SC 2427; Kerala State Electricity Board v. Indian Aluminium Co, AIR 1976 SC 1031; Altas Cycle Industries Ltd v. State of Haryana, AIR 1979 SC 149; (1979 Cri LJ 927); and Regional Transport Authority, Chittoor v. Associated Transport, Madras, AIR 1980 SC 1872.
9.
There is yet another infirmity in the investigation of revisional power with the authority other than the Central Government.
The same is founded on the maxim 'delegatus non-potest delegare' which means, "delegate cannot delegate an agent cannot delegate his functions to a sub-agent without the knowledge or consent of the principal, the person to whom an office or duty is delegated cannot lawfully devolve the duty on another, unless he be expressly authorised so to do."
(See Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edn.
page 384).
The Act being silent about conferment of revisional power on anybody else than the Central Government and the Central Government not having been specifically authorised to prescribe who shall be the revisional authority in contradiction to such a power conferred relating to appellate authority (See in this connection Section 9(1) and 22(2)(g) of the Act).
We are of the view that the conferment of revisional power on any authority mentioned in Rule 49 of the Rules is hit by the principle of sub-delegation.
10.
In view of all the above, we would hold that Rule 49 is ultra vires and as such, the Director-General had no authority to deal with the matter in exercise of the revisional power conferred by Rule 49, which alone has been brought to our notice in this connection.
We would, therefore, set aside the order of dismissal passed by the Director-General on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
11.
Having come to the aforesaid conclusion, it is not necessary to deal with the two other submissions advanced by Shri Panda in assailing the order of dismissal.
12.
The result is that the order of the appellate authority, namely, the Deputy Inspector-General, by which he had modified the punishment of compulsory retirement as awarded by the disciplinary authority by converting the same to reduction of the pay by two stages for a period of two years without cumulative effect stands.
The petitioner would, therefore, be reinstated and on reinstatement shall undergo the punishment as awarded by the Deputy Inspector-General.
The period between dismissal and reinstatement shall however be treated as dies non, and the petitioner would not be entitled to any salary for this period.
We have taken this view because we are setting aside the order of dismissal on a very technical ground.
We have also noted in this connection that the appellate authority, while setting aside the order of compulsory retirement and ordering for reinstatement of the petitioner, had also observed thus.
13.
The petition is allowed accordingly.
D.M.
Patnaik, J :- 14.
I agree.
Petition allowed.