Jawahar Lal Gupta, J -Aggrieved by the order of termination the petitioner approached the Labour Court.
On his claim having been declined on October 8, 1986 he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner was appointed as T/Mate in the respondent-Board on September 18, 1978.
While working as such, a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on May 6, 1983.
The petitioner was accused of being absent from duty and having beaten up Mr. Shiv Charan, Meter Reader, as a result of which, he suffered a fracture and other injuries.
The petitioner submitted a reply on October 31, 1983.
His reply having been found to be unsatisfactory, a show cause notice dated November 30, 1983 was issued to the petitioner.
A copy of this notice has been produced on record as Annexure P-2.
Vide orders dated January 18, 1984, the petitioner was held guilty of the charges leveled against him in the charge-sheet as also of having taken away Rs. 5,500/- from the table of the cashier on December 30, 1983.
In the order, it was inter alia, observed as under :  "From the above facts and materials on record, this misconduct on the part of Sh. Mata Din W/C T/Mata has been established due to which his services are hereby terminated with immediate effect."
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner had approached the Labour Court.
While considering the validity of the order of termination, the Labour Court, inter alia, observed as under :  "This state of affair would has been sufficient for Mata Din to succeed in the case and for me there would have been no difficulty in quashing the order of termination and further to reinstate him into his job with continuity and with full back wages also.
But on my way there is case of Ramesh Kumar v. HSEB reported as 1985(2) SLR 356."
In view of this, the Labour Court rejected the claim of the petitioner.
Aggrieved by the order of termination and the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner has approached this Court.
3.
I have heard Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, for the petitioner.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
The sequence of events as delineated above clearly shows that the services of the petitioner were not terminated by a simple and innocuous order.
In fact, a regular charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
A show cause notice was also issued to him and the order of termination clearly shows that it had been passed by way of punishment.
In this situation, it was incumbent on the respondents to have held an enquiry in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the rules.
Admittedly, none was held.
In my view, the order of termination is vitiated on two counts.
Firstly, because no enquiry was held and without an enquiry the charges cannot be said to have been established.
Secondly, the order was based not only on the grounds stated in the charge-sheet but also contains allegations beyond those mentioned in the charge-sheet.
Even an explanation of the petitioner was not sought with regard to the allegations of his having taken away Rs. 5,5000/- from the table of the cashier.
The order was patently by way of penalty and was in violation of the principles of natural justice.
It cannot, as such, be sustained.
4.
As for the decision in Ramesh Kumar v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, 1985(2) SLR 356.
I find that the order of termination was upheld by the Division Bench primarily on the ground that it was innocuous.
The facts in that case were clearly distinguishable.
It was not a case where the order of punishment contained a stigma against Ramesh Kumar.
Such is not the petition in the present case.
Consequently, the view of the Labour Court that the petitioner's case was covered by the decision in the Ramesh Kumar's case (supra) is not tenable.
5.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The orders at Annexure P-3 and P-4 are set aside.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service and is entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
It is, however, clarified that nothing said in this order would preclude the respondents from proceeding afresh against the petitioner in accordance with law.
In the circumstances of the case and especially as no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to oppose the petitioner, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.