RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 15103, 15111, 15131, 15181, 15280, 15281, 15282, 15318, 15358, 15382 15383, 15384, 15400, 15413, 15421, 15428, 15438, 15489, 15490, 15616, 15641, 15699, 15750, 15788, 15789, 15838, 15839, 15840, 15848, 15856, 15857, 115902, 15989, 16018, 16029, 16281, 16294, 16304, 16183, 16566 and 16576 of 1991, as common questions of law and facts are involved in these petitions.
2.
In all the writ petitions, excepting CWP Nos. 15848 15413 and 15641 of 1991, petitioners had sought admission in the 1st Semester in the Department of Laws, Panjab University, Chandigarh for the session 1991-92.
In CWP Nos. 15848 and 154143 of 1991 petitioners had sought admission in Bachelors of Library Science and Bachelors of Mass Communication respectively in the Panjab University for the Session 1991-92, whereas in C.W.P.
No. 15641 of 1991, petitioner has sought admission for session 1991-92 M.Sc.
Chemistry in Sanmati Government College of Science, Education and Research, Jagraon, District.
Ludhiana, which is affiliated to Panjab University.
3.
Before adverting to the points raised by the petitioners in these writ petitions, it would be necessary to give little background of the whole matter, which has led the petitioners to file these writ petitions.
In the Panjab University, prior to 1986, a candidate had to do 10 + 1 course before he was admitted to Three years degree course, which led ultimately to the award of the degree of Bachelors in Arts or Science as the case may be.
Much prior to this, the Bachelor of degree course consisted of two years study after Matric, (which was commonly known as Intermediate), and then two years further course leading to the award of the degree of Bachelor of Arts or Science, as the case may be.
These type of courses have been termed by the University as '14 years Degree'.
With effect from 1986, on the recommendation of the University Grants Commission, the Panjab University started another pattern of study leading to the award of degree of Bachelor of Arts/Science.
According to the now pattern before joining the Three Years' degree course, a candidate had to undergo 10 + 2 course and thereafter join the Three Years' degree course, leading to the award of degree of Bachelor of Arts/Science.
This has been termed by the University as '15 year Degree'.
This meant that after the year 1986, there was no admission to '14 year Degree'.
However, the students who were already undergoing 14 years Degree course were allowed to complete their course as such, as also those candidates were allowed to take the examination of such a course who might have appeared earlier in the examination of 14 years Degree course, but had failed.
4.
To bring the 14 year Degree course at par with the 15 year Degree course, the Vice-Chancellor of the University in the meeting of the Syndicate held on 23rd June, 1990, made a statement that from session 1991-92 the 14 year BA Degree holders would have to acquire extra qualifications for making their training equivalent to 15 year degree before they would be eligible for admission to MA/M.Sc/M.Com./LL.
B Courses.
This statement of the Vice- Chancellor took the shape of resolution of Syndicate in its meeting held on 28th July, 1990.
The said resolution reads as under :-  "36.
Considered recommendation of the Vice- Chancellor, and  RESOLVED :- That since the admission of 1991 to MA/M.Sc.
classes would be opened to the candidates who had passed BA/B.Sc.
Examination under the new 10 + 2 + 3 system, the candidates who had passed the examination of BA/B.Sc.
under the old scheme of 10 + 2 + 3 be allowed to Join MA/M.Sc.
Part I class after passing a Bridge Course consisting of English (Literature & Language) plus 2 elective subjects in the case of BA 3rd year Scheme).
Regarding the subjects to be passed by the B.Sc.
(Old) candidates for the Bridge Course the Vice-Chancellor was authorised to take a decision, on behalf of the Syndicate.
It was noted that the requisite provisions regarding the percentage of marks would be made in the Regulations."
It will be noticed from the above resolution that it talked about the admission to MA/M.Sc.
classes and not admission to any other courses.
Thereafter the matter was considered by the Regulation Committee of the University in its meeting held on 26th April, 1991 and the following Resolution was passed :-  "Copy of paragraph 9 from the minutes of the meeting of the Regulations Committee held on 2641991.
Considered, and  RESOLVED :- That the following Transitory Regulations be added to the Regulations for admission to MA/M.Sc.
Part I examination at pages 117, 123 and 131 for Master of Arts exanimation and Master of Arts/Science examinations (Semester System) and be given effect to from the April, 1992 examinations :  Transitory Regulation :- A candidate who has passed BA examination under the old scheme shall be eligible to join MA.
Part I class w.e.f.
admissions of 1991, after passing a Bridge Course consisting of English (Literature and Language) and 2 elective subjects of BA Third year New Scheme), the subjects being the same as he had passed in the BA (Old Scheme).
A candidate who has passed B.Sc.
examination under the old scheme shall be eligible to join M.Sc.
Part I class w.e.f.
admissions of 1991 after passing a Bridge Course consisting of English (Communication skill) and 2 elective science subjects of B.Sc.
Third year (New Scheme) one of which should be the one in which he wants to do M.Sc.
The percentage of marks required to join the MA./M.Sc.
Part I class shall be determined on the basis of the marks obtained by the candidate in the BA/B.Sc.
(old scheme) examination and the marks of Bridge Course taken together.
RESOLVED FURTHER that with effect from the session 1991-92 wherever for admission "to University courses BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
is the minimum requirement, the BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(14 years Degree) shall, stand replaced by BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(15 years Degree)."
When the matter came up before the syndicate in its meeting held on 24th August, 1991, regarding the recommendation of the Regulation Committee, the same were accepted.
The following resolution was passed on the subject :-  "6.
Considered recommendation of the Regulations Committee in its meeting dated 2641991 and 1761991, and  RESOLVED :- That the recommendations of the Regulations Committee made in its meeting dated 2641991 and 1751991 be approved, as per Appendix VI & VII."
Note :- Appendix VI was the resolution of the Regulation Committee, which has been quoted above.
5.
On 15th and 16th July, 1991, a notice issued by the University appeared in the Press recording admissions to various Post-Graduate courses in the University.
It was mentioned in the notice that for the courses with which the petitioners are concerned the last date of submission of applications was 3rd September, 1991.
It was further stipulated in the notice that detailed information regarding qualifications required for admission, Rules for admission and the details regarding the reserved categories etc. would be available in the Handbook of Information/Prospectus of the respective Departments.
In the prospectus, it was provided as under :-  WITH EFFECT FROM THE SESSION 1991-92 WHEREVER FOR ADMISSION TO UNIVERSITY COURSES BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
IS THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENT, THE BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(14-YEAR DEGREE) SHALL STAND REPLACED BY BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(15 YEARS DEGREE)."
Note :-The above quotation in Capital letters would hereinafter be referred to 'Regulation in Question'.
6.
It may be noticed here that all the petitioners before me possess '14 year Degree' though some of them have obtained degree of MA also.
In the Panjab University Calendar, Vol. II containing Regulations for admission to various courses, including the courses to which the petitioners were seeking admissions, the BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Degree which they possess (which is now being called by the University as 14 years Degree) entitled them to seek admission to various post-graduate courses.
By the introduction of the 'Regulation in Question' that BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(14 years Degree) shall stand replaced by BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(15 years Degree) in all the Regulations, the net result was that the petitoners who held 14 years Degree become ineligible to seek admissions to the post-graduate courses.
It may also be noticed here that by the time the admission had started for the post-graduate courses, in the Panjab University, it had not conducted any Bridge Course as contemplated by the Syndicate or held any examination for passing the bridge course.
It was perhaps under these circumstances that on 31st August, 1991, the University issued a Press Note reviewing its earlier decision to admit students to the post-graduate courses for the session 1991-92.
The Press Note reads as under :-  "(i) The normal schedule of admissions in respect of candidates who have passed + 3 examination under.
10 + 2 + 3 system of education shall stand as notified earlier.
(ii) Candidates who have passed BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
14 years course (under the old system) shall also be allowed to seek admission to MA/M.Sc./M.Com/LL.B.
etc. courses provisionally, subject to their passing the Additional course, as may be decided by the Panjab University.
A separate Notice in respect of these candidates giving information about the last date of receipt of Admission Forms, etc. shall be issued shortly."
7.
On 14th September, 1991, the University took decision to create 20% additional seats than the original seats in each post-graduate department, in which only candidates of the type of the petitioners, i.e. degree with 14 years' course, were to be provisionally considered for admission subject to their passing of a particular examination of the additional course as prescribed by the University during the tenure of their studies in the Postgraduate classes.
This was to make them equivalent to 15 years Degree holders.
Most of the petitioners had already applied for admission in response to the earlier notice regarding admission which had appeared in the Press.
However, few of them applied after 14th September, 1991, when additional seats were created for the particular category of the type of the petitioners.
The admissions were finalised on 29th September, 1991.
Petitioners remained unsuccessful to get admission in the additional seats, which led them to the filing of the present writ petitions.
8.
The number of students who were initially to be admitted in the Law Department was 300 (150 seats in the morning and 150 seats in the evening Session.)
A combined merit list was drawn regarding the 300 seats and the students were admitted in accordance with seats preference regarding morning or evening session.
Out of the 300 seats, 172 seats were in the open category, whereas the rest of the seats were reserved seats in various categories like sportsmen, Scheduled Castes, handicapped etc.
The eligibility as mentioned in the prospectus for admission to the Law Department, was as under :  "The percentage of marks required to join the MA/M.Sc./M.Com.
Part I or LL.B.
Class shall be determined on the basis of the marks obtained by the candidate in the BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(Old Scheme) Examination and the marks of Bridge Course taken together.
(a) a Bachelor's degree in any faculty of the Panjab University with at least 45 per cent of the marks in the aggregate; or (b) a degree in any faculty of any other University recognised both by Panjab University and the Bar Council of India as equivalent to the corresponding degree of the Panjab University with at least 45 per cent of the marks in the aggregate :  Provided that in case of candidates having Bachelor's degree of this University or any other University recognised by the Syndicate, through Mordern Indian Languages [Hindi or Urdu or Punjabi (Gurmukhi Script)] and/or in a Classical Language (Sanskrit or Persian or Arabic), the aggregate of 45% of marks shall be calculated by taking into account the percentage of aggregate marks that he had secured at the language examination, excluding the marks for additional Optional paper English and the elective subject taken together);  or (c) a post-graduate degree from the Panjab University; (d) a post-graduate degree from any other University recognised by the Panjab University and the Bar Council of India as equivalent to the corresponding post-graduate degree of the Panjab University."
9.
On the side of the petitioners, primarily the following points were raised to challenge their non-admission to the post-graduate courses :  1) That the University has not framed any Regulation, by which the 14-year Degree holders like the petitioners, have been made ineligible for seeking admission to the post-graduate courses.
To be precise, the 'Regulation question' never took the shape of a Regulation of the University and, consequently, the petitioners were eligible for admission in accordance with the Regulations contained in the Panjab University Calendar, Vol. II, regarding admission to various postgraduate courses.
2) A candidate holding a degree of Master of Arts/Science had been made eligible for seeking admission to the LL.B.
course, but they were wrongly compared for purpose of determining merit with the candidates having only BA degree (15 years' course).
3).
There is no difference between the degree held by the petitioners i.e. (14 years' course) and the degree which is obtained after doing 15 years' course ie.
10 + 2 + 3 and, consequently, the petitioners could not be held ineligible for seeking admission to post-graduate courses.
Note :- There are some additional/separate arguments in some cases, which I shall deal separately.
10.
In support of the first contention, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners referred to Section 31 of the Panjab University Act, 1947 (as amended uptodate) (hereinafter called the Act), which gives powers to the Senate to frame Regulations.
Particularly, reference was made to Section 31(1) and (2) sub-clause (n), which is reproduced below :-  "31 Regulations :- (1) The Senate, with the sanction of the Government may, from time to time, make regulations consistent with this Act to provide for all matters relating to the University.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for -  (n) the courses of study to be followed and the conditions to be complied with by candidates for any university examination, and for degrees, diplomas, licences, titles, marks of honour, scholarships and prizes conferred or granted by the University.
It is not disputed that Panjab University Calendar, Volume I contains Regulations framed by the Senate regarding admissions to various courses in the University and the affiliated Colleges.
Regulation 24 of the Regulations, occurring in Chapter II-A (i), which has also been termed under Section 31 of the Act, provides for the procedure for making Regulations.
Regulations 25 specifies the date from which a particular Regulation would take effect.
Regulations 24 and 25 of the Regulation of the University are reproduced below :-  24.
In making Regulations under Section 31 of the Panjab University Act, 1947, the following procedure shall be followed :-  (a) The Syndicate shall consider all amendments and draft regulations as recommended by the Regulations Committee and after making such alterations as it considers fit, shall submit the same to the Senate.
(b) The Senate shall consider all amendments and draft regulations as recommended by Syndicate and may make such alterations as it considers fit.
The decision of the Senate along with the proposed amendments and regulations shall be forwarded to the Government for sanction and when their sanction has been received, the common seal shall be affixed to the regulations.
The regulations as finally sanctioned by the Government shall be published in the Government Gazette.
25.
A regulation shall take effect from the date of its publication in the Gazette unless any other date is noted therein as the date upon which it is to come into force."
11.
On the basis of Regulations 24 and 25, quoted above, the argument advanced was that a particular decision would only become a Regulation after the procedure as envisaged by Regulation 24 has been gone into, i.e. after the decision of the Syndicate on the recommendations of the Regulation Committee, the Senate and the Government (in the present case it is the Central Government) has approved the Regulation or amendment thereto and the case is published in the Gazette.
It is only then that it can be enforced.
Of course, Regulation is to be enforced from the date of its publication in the Government Gazette or with effect from any other date mentioned therein.
It was submitted that as a matter of fact the Senate never approved the decision of the Syndicate dated 24th August, 1991, in which the Syndicate had approved the recommendation of the Regulation Committee to add the 'Regulation in Question'.
12.
It was further contended that the matter has not been approved by the Central Government and it has not been published in the Government Gazette and, therefore, the question of enforcing the 'Regulation in Question' could not arise for the admission in the session 1991-92.
13.
The learned counsel for the University produced before me the record.
In the meeting of the Senate held on 29th September., 1991, the matter which had been considered by the Syndicate in its meeting held on 24th August, 1991, regarding the 'Regulation in Question' was duly considered and the following resolution was passed :-  "Addition of Transitory Regulation to the Regulations for admission to MA/M.Sc.
Part I examination at paces 117, 123 and 131 for Master of Arts examination and Master of Arts/Science examination (Semester System) and be given effect to from the April, 1992 examinations."
From the above, it would be evident that the Senate had not approved the second part of the Transitory Regulation, which was in the following terms :-  "RESOLVED FURTHER :- That with effect from the session 1991-92 wherever for admission to University courses BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
is the minimum requirement, the BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(14-year degree) shall stand replaced by BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
(15-year Degree).
From the resolution of the Syndicate, which has already been reproduced above, the approval was only regarding Transitory Regulation for admission to MA/M.Sc.
Part I examination.
It is disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that till date no approval of the Central Government has come forth as required under Regulation 24 and the Regulation which was sought to be amended has yet to be published in the Government Gazette.
14.
On behalf of the Respondents, Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel, argued that Regulation 24 is directory in nature and the non-compliance thereof would not vitiate the action of the University if it had implemented the 'Regulation in Question in anticipation of the approval of the Senate/Government.
Further the argument was that Regulation 25 envisages that a particular regulation can even be given a retrospective effect and if in the present case when ultimately the Government gives its approval and the Regulation is published in the Government Gazette.
It would take effect from the admission of session 1991-1992.
Consequently, if in anticipation of such an approval and publication, the University has done the admissions on the basis of the Regulation sought to be amended or introduced, no fault could be found with the same.
According to the learned counsel, even ex-post facto sanction or approval by the Government would be sufficient compliance for acting upon a Regulation for which the approval of the Senate or the Government is yet to come.
In support of this contention, learned counsel relied upon a Supreme Court Judgment reported as Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Escort Ltd. and others, A.I.R. 1986 SC 1370.
15.
I find no force in the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondents and am inclined to accept the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The Panjab University itself by way of Regulation 24, had prescribed the procedure as to how regulations are to be made and enforced.
Checks and balances have been provided that the Senate would see whether the amendments/alterations/additions in the Regulations are called for or not.
The Government is to see whether due procedure has been followed for modifying/amending the Regulation and whether the same is consistent with the provisions of the Act and the other Regulations.
The enforcement of the Regulation without following the procedure for its framing is such an infirmity that the Regulation cannot be enforced as the same is void ab initio.
The proposed Regulation, which has not received the approval of the Senate and that of the Central Government and has not been published in the Government Gazette, is in the stage of embryo and is yet to take birth and, consequently, there is no question of enforcing the same.
No doubt, under Regulation 25, a regulation can be enforced with retrospective effect, but the action has to be taken on the basis of that regulation with retrospective effect after the regulation has been duly framed and published.
In other words, the regulation has taken birth and has come into existence.
No action can be taken beforehand because it is thought that when ultimately a Regulation is framed after following due procedure it would be enforced with retrospective effect.
Take for example; that in the present case, the Senate or the Central Government was not to grant the approval to the proposed amendment/addition to the Regulation, what would happen to the admissions already made.
These would be wholly illegal.
On the other hand, if a Regulation is enforced before it is approved by the Senate and the Government and is published in the Government Gazette, that would deprive, as in the present case, the right to seek admission to those candidates who were otherwise eligible, but for the proposed amendment.
The view I am taking in the matter, finds support from a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Jiwandhar Kumar v. The Panjab University ILR 1968(2) Punjab and Haryana 335.
In that case, the facts were that on 9th September, 1966, the Academic Council of the University had resolved that the pass percentage for various subjects prescribed for Pre-Engineering examination be raised to 35% and other connected modification be brought into effect from the examinations to held from the year 1967 (Previously the pass pecentage was 33%).
This proposal was approved by the Syndicate on 17th September, 1966 and later the same was duly approved by the Senate on 10th December, 1966.
Thereafter, the Central Government granted its approval on 16th May, 1967 and it was published in the Government Gazette on 5th August, 1967.
The petitioner in that case had taken the examination in all subjects.
Before the sanction of the Central Government could be granted, the petitioner had taken the Pre-Engineering examination and his result was declared on 14th June, 1967 and he was declared fail because he could not obtain 35% marks as required by the proposed amended Regulation.
After considering the provisions of Regulations 24 and 25, quoted above (which were then numbered as 21 and 22), the Division Bench observed as under :-  "From these provisions it is evident that before a Regulation framed by the Senate becomes operative or can be enforced, its sanction by the Government has to be obtained under Section 31, and it has to be published in the Gazette as provided in Regulation 22 reproduced above.
It is only on its publication in the Gazette that a Regulation becomes operative.
Admittedly, when the appellant's result was declared, the amended Regulation on the basis of which he was declared to have failed in the Pre-Engineering Examination, had not been published, and thus was not in force.
Having taken recourse to a Regulation which had not yet come into force, the University Authorities have clearly overstepped their jurisdiction as they were not competent to apply the Regulation in anticipation of its enforcement.
On this short ground the appellant's writ petition was entitled to succeed."
16.
Dealing with the similar contentions as raised by Mr. MM Kumar on behalf of the University that a regulation which is made enforceable with retrospective effect, can be enforced in anticipation of approval of Senate/Government and its publication in the Gazette, the learned Judges while repelling the same, observed as under :-  "Mr. Sodhi is no doubt right in contending that even under Regulation 22, a regulation or rule or by-law framed by the University would come into force not necessarily on the date of its publication, but on some other date if such date is specified therein but it must be remembered that even a provision which is expressly made retrospective cannot be applied before the date of its enforcement, and it is only after it is promulgated in accordance with law that it would operate retrospectively."
In view of the Division Bench judgment, no doubt is left in my mind that the 'Regulation in question' by which the petitioners have been made ineligible had not attained the status of a Regulation and the question of its enforcement did not arise.
The approval which has been granted by the Senate regarding the 'Regulation in question', has already been quoted above by me.
I do not find that this particular 'Regulation in question', which was recommended to be made by the Regulation Committee and approved by the Syndicate was ever approved by the Senate.
Even if it is assumed that the Senate had approved the same it was only on 29th September, 1991 when the admissions were over.
Even the classes started with effect from 30th September, 1991.
This, however, should not detain me any further, inasmuch as till date the approval of the Central Government has not come and this Regulation has not been published in the Government Gazette.
Therefore, the 'Regulation in question' never came on the Statute Book and the question of its enforcement could not arise.
17.
The authority of the Supreme Court (supra) cited by the learned counsel for the respondents has no bearing.
In that case a particular action had to be done with the permission of a particular Authority.
After dealing with the circumstances of the case and the language of the Statute and the purpose of the same, the learned Judges came to the conclusion that the word 'permission' did not mean previous permission, it could be ex-post permission Aso.
However, in the present case, Regulations 24 and 25 are very clear on the subject, which have already been interpreted by the Division Bench of this Court, referred to above.
18.
Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel for the University had also faintly argued that in fact there was no amendment to the Regulation, inasmuch as the petitioners were still eligible for seeking admission to the various Post- Gradute courses.
For illustrating, he submitted that in the Law Department, 300 seats had been reserved for candidates who had passed BA after 10 + 2 + 3 course i.e. 15 years' course and 20% seats thereof i.e. 60 seats for the candidates who have passed BA after 10 + 1 + 3/10 + 2 + 2 course i.e. 14 years course.
It is not disputed on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners have been made eligible provisionally for the 20% seats and they are to pass some examination of the bridge course during the tenure of their Post-Gradute studies, to make them equivalent to 10 + 2 + 3.
It is evident that the eligibility has not changed from 10 + 2 + 3, but the petitioners have been held only eligible provisionally till they attain the eligibility during the tenure of the post-gradute courses in which they get admission.
So it is not correct on the part of the respondents' counsel to say that the Regulation has not been amended to make the petitioners ineligible.
The petitioners have been held eligible to compete for all the seats and they can only provisionally compete for 20% seats and that too on the condition that they shall attain the eligibility though during the tenure of the post-graduate courses.
19.
Now coming to the second point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
For the view I have taken on the first point, I do not find it necessary to go into this point because if the petitioners are held eligible for admission on the basis of their qualifications of BA with 10 + 2 + 3 or 10 + 2 + 2 courses all of them would be getting admissions in various Post- graduate courses, because I am told that they are all getting more marks than the last candidates admitted in various courses.
However, I may observe that it is not denied on behalf of the respondents that for drawing the merit list, the candidate with MA.
degree was equated with a BA candidate who had done 10+2+3.
If the University was of the view that a candidate with BA (10 + 1 + 3 or 10 + 2 + 2) after doing the bridge course, would be equivalent to 10 + 2 + 3 and qua them the marks obtained by them in BA (10 + 1 + 3 or 10 + 2 + 2 Course) and the marks obtained in the examination of the bridge course would be taken into consideration, then it would be reasonable under the circumstances to similarly frame a formula to add MA marks to the BA marks (10 + 1 + 3) to determine their merit as would be done in the cases of those candidates who pass the bridge course.
I may make it clear that this is just a suggestion on which the University can work but by no means giving any directions to the University.
20.
As far as third point is concerned, again it is not necessary for me to deal the same for the view I have taken on the first point.
However prima facie I am of the view that it is for the University to say as to which two courses are equivalent and out of the two which is higher or lower, as it is the job of the academicians and not the Court.
21.
Now coming to some of the individual cases in which some additional arguments were there (C.W.P.
No. 15840 of 1991).
In this case, the petitioner has also applied in the category of Sportsmen.
This petitioner is getting 5815% marks in his BA Examination (10 + 1 + 3) and by adding 10% weightage as admissible to such students who had passed their BA Examination from the Panjab University, his percentage would come to 6323%, which is more than the last candidate admitted in the general category in the Law Department.
Consequently, the petitioner's counsel says that the petitioner's case may not at all be considered in the sportsmen quota as he would get admission in the general category if held eligible on the basis of his BA 14 year Degree.
Since I have held such candidates to be eligible, the petitioners case would be considered in this general category.
22.
CWP Nos. 15382, 15902 and 15989 of 1991.
The writ petitioners in these petitions belong to handicapped category.
They all have done BA after 10 + 1 + 3 course i.e. 14 years' course.
In the Law Department of the Panjab University, 9 seats (i.e. 3% of 300 seats) were reserved for the category of 'Handicapped' which has been defined in the prospectus.
There is no dispute before me that these candidates do belong to the category of 'Handicapped'.
The petitioners were not considered against these 9 seats on the ground that they were not BA with 10 + 2 + 3 course.
However, they were considered against the additional seats for handcapped out of 60 seats, which were reserved for BA 14 year Degree category but they could not make the grade.
The grievance of the petitioners is that in fact they should have been considered eligible against the 9 seats out of the 300 seats, reserved for the 'Handicapped' category and the University was not justified in treating them ineligible having passed BA with 10 + 1 + 3 course.
I have already held above that the University was not right in not considering the candidates with BA 10 + 1 + 3 course as eligible for seeking admission.
That being so, these petitioners would have got one of the nine seats inasmuch as only two seats were filled in from this category out of the 9 seats and the rest 7 were thrown open to the general category.
The further grievance of the petitioners was that while admitting the students, the marks obtained by them in the qualifying examinations have been given a go bye but only the degree of disability has been taken into consideration, which cannot be the basis and in any case such basis was not made applicable to the admission in the Law Department.
Be that as it may, since I have held that the petitioners were eligible for consideration against 9 seats and only 2 were admitted, they would be entitled to be admitted on that ground alone and no other ground need be gone into.
23.
CWP Nos. 15421, 15428, 16566, 15838 of 1991.
The petitioners in these writ petitions belong to Scheduled Castes category.
They are all BA with 10 + 1 + 3 course.
Out of the 300 seats in the Law Department, 68 seats were reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
It is not disputed that out of 68 seats only 32 were filled in from these categories and the rest were thrown open to the general category.
The grievance of the petitioners in these cases is that their cases for 300 seats were not considered on the ground that they were BA with 10 + 1 + 3 (i.e. 14 year Degree).
Had their cases been considered by treating them eligible, admitted in the category of Scheduled Castes, inasmuch as the last candidate admitted from the category of BA with 10 + 2 + 3 course got only 4333% marks.
Since I have held that the candidates who are BA with 10 + 1 + 3 course are eligible, naturally the petitioner's cases have to be considered for admission against the reserved category.
24.
CWP Nos. 15839, 16304 of 1991.
The petitioners in these cases belong to Backward class.
They had obtained Degree in BA which has been termed by the University as '14 year Degree'.
They had also done MA In BA the petitioners obtained 457% marks and 5617% marks respectively; whereas in MA they obtained 3888% marks or less.
There were 5% seats reserved for the members belonging to Backward Classes.
In other words, there were 15 seats in the Law Department reserved for this category.
Since the petitioners were having '14 Years Degree', they were not considered on that basis along with candidates having 15 years Degree for the 15 seats reserved for this category.
However, their cases were considered for one of the 15 seats on the basis of their MA qualifications, but could not wake a grade for the 15 seats on that basis.
The last candidate admitted in this category against 15 seats, got 4565% marks in BA (15 years Degree Course).
They did not make grade in the additional seats also.
Since I have held that candidates having 14 years Degree were eligible for seeking admission to the Post-Gradute Course including Law Course, the petitioners' case had to be considered on the basis of their BA marks.
Petitioner No. 1 BA marks come to 5028% after giving him weightage as he has done his BA from the Panjab University.
Petitioner No. 2's marks in BA are 5617%.
Since they have got more marks than the last candidate admitted in this category, they would be entitled to get admission in this category.
25.
Now coming to the relief that is to be granted to the petitioners on the facts and circumstances of the cases before me.
The learned counsel for the respondents argued that the admissions are over now and the classes have also started on 30th September, 1991 and, therefore, no relief should be given to the petitioners at this stage.
He further contended that it was way back on 15th July, 1991 that notices regarding admission were issued in the various newspapers and if the petitioners had any grievance they could have immediately come to this Court and should not have allowed the admissions to go on.
I do not find any force in these contentions.
In the notice which was issued on 15th July, 1991, it was nowhere mentioned that petitioners would be ineligible for admission to the various Post-Gradute courses on the ground that they were not B.As.
with 10 + 2 + 3 course.
The notice envisaged that the detailed information could be had in the prospectus and the last date for submitting applications for admission had also been mentioned as 3rd September, 1991.
So a candidate could reasonably wait to get the prospectus some time near the last date for the submission of the application forms.
Moreover, on 31st August, 1991, a Press Note had been issued that candidates like the petitioners would be eligible for the admission to various Post-Graduate courses, but their eligibility would be provisional subject to their passing some additional course as may be decided by the University.
It was not mentioned in this Press Note that they will be considered provisionally eligible only for 20% additional seats.
It was only on 14th September, 1991 that a Press Note was issued that candidates like the petitioners would be provisionally eligible only against the additional 20% posts.
The petitioners could reasonably wait till the admissions were finalised as they could have Sot admissions against the additional seats.
Immediately after the closure of the admissions, these writ petitions were filed.
Moreover, not much period has elapsed between the start of the classes and today.
The University itself envisaged that if after 17 days of the start of the classes, a student does not attend 33% of the lectures, then his admission is liable to be cancelled after affording him opportunity before cancellation by giving him a notice of about 4 days.
The seats so becoming available are to be offered to the candidates on the waiting list.
Evidently after about a month a candidate on the waiting list can be offered a seat so vacated by cancellation.
There would be nothing wrong if the petitioners are now given admissions.
On all these grounds I do not find that the petitioners are disentitled to the relief claimed.
26.
I do not intend to cancel the admissions of the students who have already been admitted by the University as there is no fault of theirs, though had the petitioners been also considered along with them many of them might not have been admitted.
The University/Colleges would not disturb the admissions of the candidates which have already taken place.
27.
For the foregoing reasons, these, writ petitions are allowed and a direction is given to the University/Colleges to consider the cases of the petitioners for admission in their respective categories on the basis of the marks obtained by them in their BA (10 + 1 + 3) and would be admitted in respective categories even by creation of additional seats, if necessary, only if the marks obtained by them are more than the marks of the last candidate admitted in the respective categories against the 300 seats, against which only candidates having BA with 10 + 2 + 3 or M.As.
were considered.
These directions be carried out forthwith.
There will be no order as to costs.
The Office is directed to send a copy of the judgment immediately to the respondents for compliance.
Petition allowed.