Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners herein were appointed as Masters on August 2, 1967 and October 19, 1966 respectively in two private schools in Jalandhar.
Even though the posts of Masters carried the scale of Rs. 220-500, they were paid fixed emoluments till August 3, 1975 and June 19,1974 when the regular scale was released to them on their having been awarded the Special Certificates.
The petitioners claim that they were working as Masters and were as such entitled to the grant of pay in the regular scale of Rs. 220-500 with effect from the dates of their initial appointment as Masters.
The action of the respondents in paying them fixed emoluments till they were awarded the Special Certificates has been challenged on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioners have also placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Tej Pal and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1980(2) SLR 630.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been, inter alia, averred that the petitioners did not possess the qualifications prescribed for the posts of Masters and as such they were not entitled to the salary in the regular scale of pay.
It has also been pointed out that they were given regular grade of Rs. 220-500 with effect from the date of the award of Special Certificates to them.
It has been further pointed out that in the case of Tejpal, the Circle Education Officer had inadvertently granted approval to his appointment while no such approval had been granted to the appointment of the petitioners on the dates of their initial recruitment to service.
On this basis, the claim of the petitioners has been controverted.
3.
I have heard Mr. Chopra for the petitioners and Mr. Jain for the respondents.
Undeniably, the petitioners were recruited as Masters.
It has also not been disputed that even other untrained Masters have been paid salary in the regular scale of Rs. 220-500.
This fact is also obvious from the judgment of the Apex Court in S.L.P.
Nos. 765 and 8597 of 1984 which had arisen out of the decision of this Court in C.W.P.
Nos. 1715 and 4159 of 1983.
Their Lordships were pleased to order as under :-  "The appeals above-mentioned being called for hearing before this Court on the 17th day of December, 1984, UPON hearing counsel for the parties herein, this Court in allowing the appeals BOTH ORDER (1) that the orders under appeal be and are hereby directed and instead it is hereby directed that the Government for the State of Punjab shall give the running pay scale of masters to all untrained masters from the date of their appointment in the same manner as they did in regard to the first group of trained masters as and by way of concession pursuant to the decision in Tilak Rai's case (2) the arrears of salary calculated on the basis mentioned in (1) supra shall be paid by the respondents herein to the untrained masters within 4 months from this the 17th day of December, 1984; (3) that there shall be no order as to costs of these appeals in this court.
AND THIS COURT BOTH FURTHER ORDER that this order be punctually observed and carried into execution by all concerned.
Witness in the Hon'ble Shri Yoshwant Vishanu Chandrachud, Chief Justice of India at the Supreme Court, New Delhi, dated this the 17th day of December, 1984."
4.
In view of the above, their pay in the scale of Rs. 220-500 has to be fixed by taking into consideration their appointments from August 2, 1967 and October 19, 1966.
Their pay in the revised scale has also to be accordingly refixed.
The respondents are directed to do so within three months.
However, the arrears of salary which accrue on account of the refixation of pay shall be granted to the petitioners only with effect from May, 1979 ie from the date 38 months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.