GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate from this Court to respondent No. 2 to declare the result of the petitioner of the semesters in which he had taken the examination.
2.
The facts :-  The petitioner was granted admission to BE course by respondent No. 1 against the reserved seat-rural area category.
His admission was subsequently canceled.
He came to this Court challenging the action of respondent No. 1 cancelling his admission.
On September 23, 1986, the Motion Beach permitted the petitioner to attend the cliams provisionally.
The petitioner not only attended the classes but also sat in the various semester examinations.
He has now completed the entire course.
The result of the 1, 11, 111 and IV semesters was declared by respondent No. 2 under the orders of this Court dated November 22, 1988.
The petitioner had been declared successful in the examinations.
The petitioner has also completed the course and the lectures of 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th semesters.
He has also appeared in the examinations, but his result has not been declared.
An application was moved in this court for a direction to respondent No. 2 to declare the result of 5th to 8th semesters.
When the application came up for hearing before me, I directed that the writ petition itself should be disposed of.
3.
The writ petition could not be disposed of expeditiously.
The resultant effect was that the petitioner was not only declared successful in the first four semesters but he was also allowed to attend the classes of 5th to 8th semesters and sit in the examinations which he has done under the orders of this court.
It will result in great hardship if the petitioner's result is not declared for the remaining semesters in which he has already appeared and completed his examinations under the orders of this Court.
The petitioner gained advantage of the interim directions given by this Court during the pendency of the writ petition.
If the writ petition had been disposed of expeditiously, the dispute could have been resolved on merits.
Under these circumstances there is no other alternative but to direct respondent No. 2 to declare the result of the petitioner of 5th to 8th semesters within two weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
However, it is made clear that this order will never be cited as a precedent and the directions have been issued on account of the peculiar circumstances of the case.
The writ petition is disposed of as indicated above.
Ordered accordingly.