MR Agnihotri, J - Petitioner Sadhu Ram has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for quashing the order dated 26th August, 1988, passed by the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 'MARKFED'), Annexure P.9, by which the petitioner has been dismissed from service of the MARKFED, which is an undertaking of the Punjab Government.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioner and Sarvshri Balwinder Singh, Field Assistant, and Jasminder Singh Sandhu, Senior Branch Officer, MARKFED, Baghapurana, District Faridkot were co-accused in a criminal case - F.I.R. No. 61, dated 6th February, 1985, Police Station Baghapurana, for the alleged shortage of wheat relating to the harvest season of 1982-83.
The petitioner was discharged by the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Moga, vide his order dated 28th May, 1986, whereas both his co-accused, namely, Balwinder Singh and Jasminder Singh Sandhu were tried for the offence under Section 409, Indian Penal Code.
The concluding para of the order passed by Sh. Harbhajan Singh, learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Moga, is reproduced below :  "As far as Sadhu Ram accused is concerned, he was not incharge of the open godown and the wheat found short was not in his custody.
Therefore, there was no entrustment to him.
He has handed over the charge of this godown to accused Balwinder Singh and Jasminder Singh on 12783 while the shortage was found in between 271283 to 28184.
Even Sadhu Ram was a member of the Weighment Committee who found the shortage of wheat.
Therefore, Sadhu Ram accused had no connection with this shortage and cannot be charged for that shortage.
There is no evidence to make out any charge against accused Sadhu Ram.
He is accordingly discharged."
Thereafter, the petitioner was charge-sheeted and a departmental inquiry was started against him.
As a result of the inquiry, on 26th August, 1988, the petitioner was dismissed from service.
3.
The petitioner has assailed the order of his dismissal from service on a variety of grounds, including the fact that when the MARKFED had no evidence whatsoever against the petitioner and even the Court had discharged him in the criminal case, there was neither any ground nor any justification for imposing the punishment of dismissal from service on him.
It has further been contended by the petitioner that co-accused Balwinder Singh had also been dismissed from service, but he challenged his dismissal before the Labour Court and the learned Labour Court accepted his claim and quashed the order of dismissal by its award dated 19th September, 1989.
According to the petitioner, the aforesaid award had been challenged by the MARKFED in this Court in C.W.P.
No. 5259 of 1990, which was dismissed in limine on 18th April, 1990.
On that basis, the petitioner has claimed similarity and equal treatment in dealing with his case also.
4.
In the written statement, though the factual position has been broadly admitted, yet the petitioner is sought to be non-suited on the ground that the other custodian of the wheat stocks, namely, Balwinder Singh, ex-Field Assistant, was dismissed from service along with the petitioner.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the inquiry report and the impugned order of dismissal passed thereon, I am of the considered view that the impugned order dated 26th August, 1988, Annexure P.9, is not sustainable in the eye of law.
According to the opening para of the unpugned order, common charges against Jasminder Singh Sandhu, Sadhu Ram (petitioner) and Balwinder Singh had been levelled.
Further, according to the report of the Inquiry Officer, all these officers had acted in a careless and irresponsible manner as all of them were responsible for maintaining the stocks.
There is no separate role assigned to the petitioner (Sadhu Ram) either in the inquiry report or in the impugned order of dismissal from service.
Rather, the learned Managing Director did not direct his mind to the finding arrived at by the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, to the effect that - "As far as Sadhu Ram accused is concerned, he was not incharge of the open godown and the wheat found short was not in his custody.
Therefore, there was no entrustment to him.
He has handed over the charge of this godown to accused Balwinder Singh and Jasminder Singh on 12783 while the shortage was found in between 271283 to 28184."
Otherwise also, when Balwinder Singh had been reinstated by the Labour Court, the petitioner, who was a Field Officer, and could not avail of the remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, being not a workman, was also entitled to be dealt with alike and he could not be singled out for imposing the punishment of dismissal from service.
In the absence of any special and particular role assigned to the petitioner, who, at the most, according to the respondent, was a co-accused, he could not be subjected to any punishment when Field Assistant Balwinder Singh had been reinstated into service.
The constitutional guarantee of Articles 14 and 16 is available to the citizens not only in the matter of equal treatment during the course of employment, but at the time of imposing the punishment in disciplinary proceedings also.
The view finds support from the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Sangara Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(3) S.L.R.
68, the relevant extract wherefrom is reproduced below :  "....... the treatment meted to the present appellants suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and Article 14 forbids any arbitrary action which would tantamount to denial of equality as guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution  Logically the appellants must receive the same benefit which those reinstated received, in the absence of any distinguishing feature in their cases.
Accordingly, the appellants would be entitled to reinstatement in service.
6.
Accordingly, I allow this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 26th August, 1988, Annexure P.9, by which the petitioner was dismissed from service of the MARKFED.
The respondent MARKFED is directed to reinstate the petitioner with effect from the date he was dismissed from service and on such reinstatement, he shall be entitled to all the arrears of salary and allowances along with benefit of seniority, length of service, etc. to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed from service in pursuance of the impugned order.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.