KP Bhandari, J - This writ petition has been filed by Darshan Singh, Ex-Inspector of Police, challenging the order of his dismissal from service, dated 18th March, 1984, passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Alongwith the petitioner Sham Nath, Inspector was also dismissed from service on the same charges.
The order of dismissal is based on the allegations that Sub-Inspector Bissu Ram was murdered in the bazar of Guru Har Sahai, on 18th December, 1983, and the petitioner and Sham Nath, Inspector, who were in the police station, did not take prompt action to capture the assailants.
The petitioner was dismissed from service by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, by invoking the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India, vide order dated 18th March, 1984 (Annexure P-1).
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the order of dismissal from service.
The said appeal was dismissed by the Inspector General of Police, vide order dated 18th April, 1988 (Annexure P-6).
The Inspector General of Police did not afford any personal hearing before passing the order Annexure P-6.
2.
Shri Sham Nath, Inspector who was dismissed on the same charges filed a civil suit.
The said suit was decreed and accordingly he was reinstated on 25th March, 1987.
Thereafter, the petitioner represented to the authorities for his reinstatement vide Annexure P-5, but to no effect.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the validity of the order of dismissal from service and the orders passed in appeal on the following grounds :-  (a) That the petitioner was appointed by the orders of the Inspector General of Police and he has been dismissed from service by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, an officer subordinate to the appointing authority and, therefore, the impugned order of dismissal from service is violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
(b) The petitioner claims that the order of his promotion was.
made by the Inspector General of Police vide order No. 20227-38-E1, dated 8.11.1978.
He further claims that the order issued by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, vide No. 17114/A-1 dated 1121978 is merely publication of the order of the Inspector General of Police appointing the petitioner.
(c) The Deputy Inspector General of Police has wrongly invoked the provisions of Article 311(b) of the Constitution of India when he had held inquiry against the petitioner and it was not practicable to hold an enquiry against him.
(d) The order of dismissal from service according to the provisions of rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 can only be passed for the gravest acts of misconduct.
The petitioner's record of service and length of service were not taken into consideration while passing the impugned order.
4.
The State of Punjab through its written statement filed by Sh. SK Verma, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepore Range, has opposed the stand of the petitioner taken in the writ petition.
The State has claimed that the impugned order of dismissal is valid.
They have also defended that the order dismissing the appeal is also valid.
5.
Shri G.S.
Grewal, Senior Advocate, vehemently contended that the petitioner has taken a categoric stand in the writ petition that he was appointed by the Inspector General of Police.
According to him, in the writ petition, he has stated that the Inspector General of Police passed the order of promotion vide No. 20227-38-E.1 dated 8.11.1978.
He further contended that the order of Deputy Inspector General of Police No. 17114/A-1 dated 1121978 is merely a publication of the order passed by the Inspector General of Police, promoting the petitioner.
6.
The present writ petition is one for the writ of certiorari for quashing quasi judicial proceedings of dismissal from service as well as the order passed on appeal.
It was incumbent upon the State to produce the entire record for the perusal of the court.
The State has failed to produce the order of the Inspector General of Police No. 20227-38-E.1 dated 8.11.1978, challenged by the petitioner in the writ petition on the basis of which he has been promoted by the Inspector General of Police.
This public record was in the custody of the State and it was incumbent upon the State to produce the same.
In the absence of the production of record, I am inclined to draw a presumption against the State that if the said record had been produced, the same would have gone against the State.
Even otherwise, it is well established that Inspectors of Police are promoted by the order of the Inspector General of Police and formal orders of promotion are recorded by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
In this view of the matter, I am clearly of the opinion that the petitioner has been appointed by the order of the Inspector General of Police and has been dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, an authority subordinate to the one who appointed the petitioner.
As such, the impugned order of dismissal from service passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, is clearly in violation of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India and is, therefore, null and void in view law laid down by the Privy Council in North West Frontier Province v. Suraj Narain Anand, AIR (36) 1949 Privy Council 112.
7.
It is settled proposition of law that if order of dismissal from service is void and is affirmed on appeal by higher authority, its consequence is that original order has to be passed by the competent authority (see State of UP v. Mohammad Nooh, AIR 1958 Supreme Court 86).
In this view of the matter, the impugned order of dismissal from service passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police is clearly bad in law.
8.
In the present case, the order of dismissal from service will show that the Deputy Inspector General of Police has conducted an inquiry on the spot and served a show cause notice.
It is difficult to appreciate when the evidence was available and the same was examined, how a conclusion can be reached that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in this case as laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
I am of the opinion that the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) have been arbitrarily invoked in this case.
The findings have been arrived at and recorded by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, on the basis of suspicion and confidential inquiry.
These inquiries cannot take the place of a regular inquiry as envisaged in Article 311(2) of the Constitution, read with Section 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
I am of the opinion that it was obligatory on the Deputy Inspector General of Police in the present case to hold an inquiry as laid down in Article 311 read with Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
Failure to hold an inquiry would render the impugned order of dismissal from service as illegal and void.
9.
I have carefully gone through the order of the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Considering the nature of the charges levelled against the petitioner, he has taken a view that he cannot take a lenient view of the matter.
Unfortunately, the Deputy Inspector General of Police did not address himself to the mandatory provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Rule 162(1) of the Rules, ibid, reads as under.
"(1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
The order has been passed without due regard to the provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The provisions of Rule 162 are mandatory and must be observed.
10.
The import of Rule 162 was recently considered by MS Liberhan, J in State of Punjab v. Balwant Singh, Ex-Constable, 1989(4) SLR 105.
His lordship observed as follows :-  "I find force in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent.
The punishing authority was not alive to the facts regarding length of service, previous service record and the conditions in which the incident of firing had taken place.
The part played by the delinquent was also not taken into consideration.
Even assuming the Act to be the gravest Act of misconduct, the second part of the rule, has not been complied with, as the complete unfitness for police service, the length of service, incorrigibility and claim to pension had not been considered.
In the order also there is no indication that the punishing authority was alived to the abovesaid element of the rule.
Apparently, there is complete violation of Rule 162 of the Police Rules.
The counsel for the appellant has not been able to point out anything to show that the rule has been either impliedly or in fact complied with.
The Division Bench judgment cited by him has no parallel on the facts of the present case and said judgment was on its own facts which are not pari materia with the facts of the present case.
In my considered view the State being a benevolent employer should have taken more practical view with respect to the impugned order of punishment.
When the State has accepted the other delinquent officers who were similarly situated (rather more serious art of firing was attributed to them) and retained them in service, there was no reason not to treat the respondent similarly.
Acceptance of this appeal will give rise to two contradictory judgments with respect to same order i.e. to the effect that the impugned order is bad in one decree and good in the other."
11.
I am of the opinion that the order of dismissal from service passed in this case is clearly opposed to the mandatory provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Lastly, it is difficult to appreciate when the Inspector Sham Nath has been ordered to be reinstated after the judgment of the District Judge dated 2681986 (Annexure P-2), and the order of the High Court dated 1611987 (Annexure P-3), why the petitioner who stands in the same position should be dismissed from service.
This shows that the order passed in this case is clearly discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Moreover, the appellate authority did not afford any personal hearing to the petitioner before dismissing the appeal.
It has been authoritatively laid down by the Supreme Court that in a case where pre-decisional inquiry is not held, as contemplated under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, it is obligatory on the appellate authority to give personal hearing to the officer concerned.
12.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not given personal hearing, so the impugned order passed on appeal is clearly invalid and cannot be sustained.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is allowed with costs and the impugned order of dismissal from service and the order passed on appeal are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner with full back wages with 12% interest per annum, within a month.
Petition allowed.