MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioners, who are Labour and Welfare Inspectors, employed in the Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court, for the removal of anomalies in their pay scale by granting to them the scale of pay of Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 1st January, 1978, on which date the pay scales of employees belonging to certain other categories who were earlier at par with the petitioners, were revised to Rs. 700-1200 without revising the pay scale of the petitioners.
2.
Before 1st January, 1978, the pay scale of the petitioners who are holding the posts of Labour and Welfare Inspectors with the Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board'), was Rs. 210-480.
The qualifications for this post, as prescribed by the Board, were as under :  "Graduate with Diploma in Labour Laws or LL.B.
with Labour Laws as one of the subjects."
There were a number of other posts which were grouped together and classified alongwith the posts of Labour and Welfare Inspectors at the time of revision of pay scales w.e.f.
1st January, 1978.
A number of such posts as Sports Assistant, Assistant Librarian, Sub Fire Officer, Head Officer Assistant, Artist-cum-Photographer, Instrument Technician, Research Assistant, Divisional Head Draftsman, etc. carried higher pay scale than that of the Labour and Welfare Inspector, that is, the pay scale of Rs. 210-480.
However, the pay scale of all these posts were revised to Rs. 570-1080.
The grievance of the petitioners is that as the workload and type of their work is comparable to the Personnel Officer, Bhakra Beas Management Board Law Officer, HSEB; Assistant Personnel Officer, BBMB; Assistant Director Attorney of Director Prosecution Department, Punjab (both Grade I and Grade II); legal Advisor of Pepsu Roadways Transport Corporation and Law Officer, Labour Department, Punjab, the pay scale of the petitioners' post should also have been revised to at least Rs. 700-1200, if not higher.
The nature of duties required to be performed by the petitioners is almost similar to the duties of Law Officers who have to draft pleadings and conduct cases before the Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal, etc.
Therefore, applying the principle, of "equal pay for equal work" as enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution the petitioners were entitled to draw the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200.
3.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondent Board has pleaded that no case had been made out by the petitioners for the revision of their pay scale to Rs. 700-1200.
According to the Board, the nature of duties required to be performed by the petitioner are different from the duties of Law Officers of other Departments.
In fact, Labour and Welfare Inspectors need not necessarily be Law Graduates which is the basic qualification of a Law Officer.
A Graduate with diploma in Labour Laws is also eligible for the post of Labour and Welfare Inspector, but he is not eligible for the post of Law Officer.
Strong reliance has also been placed by the Board on the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2896 of 1982 filed by Baldev Singh and others of the Board, in which SS Sandhawalia, CJ and SS Sodhi J while dismissing the writ petition on 14th September, 1982, observed as under :  "Different pay for different posts provides no occasion for invoking the writ jurisdiction of this Court even if at one time they may have happened to be in the same scale of pay.
The challenge here is to the different scales of pay for Under Secretaries and Accounts Officers.
Both these posts belong to different administrations, namely, the Secretariat Administration and the Accounts Administration.
The duties, responsibilities, qualifications and experience for these two posts are clearly different and distinct from each other.
In the matter of pay scales, the respondent-Punjab State Electricity Board has broadly followed the pattern accepted by the Punjab Government, particularly in respect to corresponding categories of posts.
There is thus no warrant for granting to the petitioners the relief claimed.
This writ petition is accordingly dismissed in limine."
It has further been stated by the Board that it is strictly following the State of Punjab in the matter of grant of pay scales to its employees and there is no valid ground with the respondent-Board to deviate from the policy of Government of Punjab for granting the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200 to the category of Labour and Welfare Inspectors, as the similar corresponding category (Labour Inspector Gr.
I) has been sanctioned revised scale of Rs. 570-1080 by the State Government.
Further, the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200 has been sanctioned to the categories of establishment who were at par with the pay scale of Line Superintendent/Section Officer (Civil) of the government.
4.
Reliance has also been placed by the learned counsel for the respondent-Board, Mr. MS Kang on the Single Judge Bench decision of this Court in C.W.P.
387 of 1987 (AL Mahajan and others v. The Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala), in which AL Bahri, J, while dismissing the writ petition of Shift Chemists/Laboratory Assistants on 22nd February, 1989, has held that, "on the ground that pay scales of other posts were revised, the petitioners could not ask for mandamus directing the respondent-Punjab State Electricity Board to revise the pay scales of Laboratory Assistants."
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the precedents relied upon by the respondent, I am of the considered views that no ground has been made out by the petitioners for the revision of their pay scale so as to equate the same with that of Rs. 700-1200.
The mere fact that the petitioners are Labour and Welfare Inspectors and at times are required to discharge certain legal duties also while appearing before the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal, etc. and for which purpose they have to be conversant with the provisions of Labour Legislation, like the Industrial Disputes Act, Factories Act, Workmen Compensation Act, etc., does not entitle them to claim higher pay scale which the employees working on the posts requiring purely legal duties are getting.
It has been settled now by the Supreme Court that revision of pay scale of a certain category of employees and the particular scale of pay in which the employees of certain categories are to be kept, are matters exclusively within the administrative sphere of the State Government or other semi Government undertakings, Corporations, Boards, etc. Courts are neither supposed to know the nature of duties the incumbents of various posts are required to perform and the qualifications those persons are required to possess while manning those posts, nor are the Courts well-equipped with the financial aspect of the matter to pronounce upon the correctness and justness of the pay scales of various posts.
A very limited scope is left with the Courts to interfere where a case of discrimination has been made out by the petitioner and where the employer has denied to the petitioner either equality of opportunity in the matter of employment or has denied equal pay for equal work.
Both these ingredients are missing in the present case.
6.
Keeping in view the aforesaid considerations, I do not consider it a fit case to exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.