Ashok Bhan, J - The petitioner after passing his MBBS from the Medical Colleges, Patiala in December, 1977 did his house job in Surgery and paediatric from Rajindra Hospital, Patiala from 1178 to 31.12.1981.
After completion of his course petitioner joined PCMS Class II on regular basis on 3011979 and continued to work on the said post upto 1711987.
On 1711987 the petitioner was selected for doing post-graduation in the department of ENT, Medical College, Amritsar after obtaining No Objection Certification from the Government.
The petitioner was designated as Medical Officer in the ENT  2.
That on 1101987, the Government issued an advertisement for the post of Registrar in the State Medical College and the petitioner was one of the appellants.
This application of the petitioner was forwarded from Medical College, Amritsar as well as from Medical College, Patiala.
Petitioner was selected as Registrar in General Surgery on 1111988 on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
As a consequence of the order issued by the State Government dated 1111988, petitioner joined as Registrar in Medical College, Amritsar on 21.1.1988.
While the petitioner was working as Registrar in the Medical College, Amritsar he was selected for admission to M.D./MS post-graduate diploma course.
This was in pursuance to the application made by the petitioner to M.D./MS post diploma course in 1988 session.
The petitioner was selected for the post of MS Surgery and was placed at serial No. 3 out of the ten candidates.
3.
Since the petitioner was doing MS in the ENT and had now joined as Registrar in Surgery, the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar on 2131988 addressed a letter to the petitioner in which it was mentioned that the petitioner was selected as Registrar in Surgery and it has come to his notice that in the application which was filled in by him, column No. 18 was left blank.
Column Nos. 12 and 18 of the application are reproduced below :  "12.
Present place of posting with date Medical Officer in Department of ENT w.e.f.
1781987."
"18.
Whether you are registered for Degree or Diploma Course if so indicate the name of the speciality and the date by which it will be completed.
It is also stated in the said letter that it is presumed that the petitioner has kept this information concealed knowingly and was directed to inform the office from which date he was registered in MS/ENT The petitioner was further directed to furnish information as to why column No. 18 was left blank.
4.
Petitioner submitted reply of the said letter to the Director of Research and Medical Education, Punjab explaining his position that the information asked for in column No. 18 had already been furnished in the earlier column No. 12 and that nothing had been concealed.
In column No. 12 he has specifically mentioned that he was working as Medical Officer, ENT, which is the official designation of the post he was holding while doing MS/ENT and nothing had been concealed.
Before this matter could be finalised one Dr. Surinder Singh Chawla filed Civil Writ Petition No. 895 of 1988 in this Court challenging the selection of the petitioner as Registrar on the ground that a person who was doing his MS, ENT (designated as Medical Officer, ENT) could not be appointed as Registrar in Surgery.
Surgery being a different speciality than that of ENT and for this reason according to the instructions prevailing at the time he could not be admitted in a speciality different from the one in which he was already admitted.
He could not be taken as Registrar in Surgery which was admittedly different from the one in which he was doing his MS i.e. ENT The matter came up for the hearing before a Division Bench of this Court and the said petition was dismissed by passing a speaking order on 321988 (Annexure P.8).
In this order it was specifically held by this Court that "there was no bar to the appointment of a candidate as a Registrar Surgery who was doing his MS in ENT" Dr. Chawla filed a Special Leave Petition against this order in the Supreme Court which was dismissed by the Supreme Court 181988.
5.
In the meantime and before the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition, petitioner received another letter dated 551988 (Annexure P.9) informing him that the appointment of the petitioner as Registrar Surgery stood cancelled on the ground that he had supplied wrong information/concealed facts in his application.
(This letter was presumably in furtherance to the letter dated 2131988, referred to in the earlier part of the judgment).
Petitioner challenged this order by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 4702 of 1988 in this Court.
Order dated 551988 was quashed by this Court in limine on 1761988 and the petitioner was directed to appear before the Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare on 27.6.1988 with a direction that he should render such explanation in writing or orally as he may consider necessary before the concerned Secretary and that Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare would pass a reasoned order one way or the other after hearing the parties.
6.
Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare passed an order on 2671988 after hearing the parties and came to the conclusion that the petitioner is guilty of deliberately concealing facts as he did not fill in column No. 18 purposely as he was aware of the fact that had he disclosed that he is a student of Post-Gradaute in ENT then he would not have been selected as Registrar in Surgery.
According to the instructions prevalent at that time, he could not be admitted for a speciality different from the one in which he was already admitted.
Admission and selection of the petitioner as Registrar in Surgery made on 1111988 was cancelled and it was held that he would no longer be eligible for selection to the post of Registrar/Demonstrator.
It may be mentioned here that is since the petitioner ceased to be a Registrar his selection to the course of MS Surgery would automatically fall.
7.
The petitioner has challenged the order (Annexure P12) being bad in law on the following grounds :-  (1) That there was no concealment on his part as he had given the complete information in column No. 12 of the application form wherein he had mentioned that he had joined as Medical Officer in the Department of ENT w.e.f.
1781987, which means that he joined as student of Master in Surgery in the ENT Department.
Petitioner joined this Department after obtaining No Objection Certificate from the Government.
(2) Non-filling of column No. 18 could be due to inadvertence and by no stretch of imagination this could be taken to be concealment or furnishing of wrong information in the application; (3) Apart from this, it was submitted by him that in the letter (Annexue P.2) i.e. from the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar to the Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, Chandigarh dated 26101987 on the subject of selection of Registrar/Demonstrators Session January, 1988 it is clearly mentioned that he is sending the application submitted by Dr. Ashok Kumar, Medical Officer (Post-Graduate student) ENT Medical College, Amritsar meaning thereby that the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar, was aware of the facts that the petitioner is a student of Post Graduate of ENT Medical College.
Principal, Medical College, Amritsar is a member of the Selection Committee for the post of Registrar.
Merely non-filling of column No. 18 would not mean tha the authorities did not know about the fact that the petitioner was a student of Post-Graduate of ENT Medical College, Amritsar.
8.
I have gone through the record very carefully and I agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that there was no deliberate effort on the part of the petitioner to conceal any facts.
In column No. 12 it was clearly mentioned that the petitioner had joined as Medical Officer in the Department of ENT w.e.f.
1751987.
Application of the petitioner was forwarded by the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar vide Annexure P2 in which it was clearly mentioned that the petitioner was working as Medical Officer (Post-graduate student) ENT Medical College, Amritsar.
It shows that the authorities concerned were aware of the fact that the petitioner is a Post Graduate student of ENT Letter (Annexure P2) must have been written by the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar after verifying the particulars of the petitioner and all this establishes that non-filling of column No. 18 did not make any material difference because the authorities concerned were aware of the fact that the petitioner was a student of Post-Graduate in the Department of ENT Even otherwise since the petitioner had filled in column No. 12 that he is Medical Officer, ENT by no stretch of imagination it can be said that the petitioner is guilty of any material concealment or furnishing of wrong information in the application form.
Non-filling of column No. 18 may have been through inadvertence and not by deliberate omission as held by respondent No. 1.
It has been held in Letters Patent Appeal No. 185 of 1989 Harnek Singh v. State of Punjab, decided on 161989 that the bar created by the instructions issued by the State that a person of one speciality cannot join another speciality in the Medical College is bad in law.
Even in the case of petitioner himself in the writ petition filed by Dr. Chawla it was held by the Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 895 of 1988 decided on 321988 as under :-  "......In the circumstances of this case, we are unable to accept the learned counsel's argument that for each of the disciplines, a separate person should be selected and that ENT Surgeon could not be appointed as Registrar of Surgery.
There are, therefore, no grounds to interfere.
The petition is accordingly dismissed."
9.
So the petitioner did not gain any mileage because of the alleged concealment.
10.
In view of my findings recorded above, order (Annexure P-2) is quashed whereby the selection of the petitioner as Registrar Surgery was conceled and it was further held that he would not be eligible for selection to the post of Registrar/Demonstrator.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
The respondents are directed to restore the post of Registrar Surgery to the petitioner forthwith.
11.
A prayer was made by the counsel for the petitioner that in case he succeeds then an additional seat be created for him in the current session as he has been deprived of his selection as Registrar and then as MS Surgery because of no fault and has been made to suffer for nearly two years unnecessarily.
For this he relies upon Deepak Sibal v. Panjab University and anr., AIR 1989 SC 903 and Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and ors., AIR 1981 SC 487, wherein in is similar circumstances the Hon'ble Supreme Court directed the admission of the students in somewhat similar circumstances.
I, therefore, direct that a seat be created for the petitioner in the current session and he may be permitted to join as Registrar Surgery and then be permitted to complete his studies in MS Surgery.
Petition allowed.