AL Bahri, J - This Regular Second Appeal is being disposed of at the motion hearing.
2.
After hearing counsel for the parties and going through the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3595 of 1973 Satya Pal Sharma v. the State of Punjab and ors., decided on February 5, 1982 by AS Bains, J it is noticed that the same covers the case in hand completely.
The claim of the appellant is that when he joined the service with the respondent, he was possessing qualifications of MA BEd, and according to the decision of the High Court, aforesaid, he was to be placed in the higher pay scale of Rs. 170-350 with five advance increments on account of higher qualification.
The suit was contested by the defendants inter alia alleging that the plaintiff accepted the lower grade at the time of joining and cannot take any benefit of Satya Pal Sharma's case.
The trial Court dismissed the suit and the Appellate Court also dismissed the appeal filed by the plaintiff.
3.
In Satya Pal Sharma's case it was specifically held that a person possessing higher qualifications i.e. BA BEd.
and MA Hindi could not be denied the said grade if his initial appointment was made as language/classical or vernacular teacher and when he was teaching the same subject in which he had obtained the degree.
The contention of the Government Pleader is only that OT (Oriental Training) in Sanskrit was not taken by the plaintiff and he could not be given the higher grade.
The contention, in view of the decision in Satya Pal Sharma's case, cannot be accepted as the plaintiff is MA in Sanskrit and is also to teach Sanskrit as a subject.
Thus, from the date of his appointment, he would be entitled to be placed in the grade aforesaid with five advance increments as per decision of the Government.
4.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, AAG Punjab on behalf of the respondents has argued that the appellant accepted lower grade at the time of appointment and is estopped from claiming higher grade.
There is no force in this contention.
The State cannot discriminate between the employees equally situated in the matter of pay.
Denial of higher grade and advance increments to the appellant, who is educationally qualified would amount to discrimination.
5.
For the reasons recorded above this appeal is accepted with no order as to costs.
The judgment and decrees of the Courts below are set aside and the suit filed by the appellant is decreed, holding him entitled to be placed in the grade of Rs. 170-350 along with five special increments of Rs. 7/- each from the date of his joining i.e. July 24, 1975 and thereafter he would be so placed in the revised pay scales.
Whatever amount he has been paid in the revised pay scale would be adjusted.
Appeal allowed.