SS Nijjar, J - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 2111986.
On 421986, the petitioner is stated to have fallen ill due to high fever/typhoid fever.
He was hospitalised from 421986 to 651986.
During his various medical check-ups, it was discovered that the petitioner was suffering from "Schizophrenic Psychosis (295)".
Thereafter, he was treated at various hospitals in public interest, but he could not be cured.
On 241986, a Graded Specialist (Psychiatry), Military Hospital, Jabalpur gave his opinion as follows :-  "......a case of schizophrenic psychosis on this 19 years old recruit, who had not even started his training.
He was found abnormal by the unit authorities and hence he was admitted in Hospital.
Psychiatric evaluation revealed a psychotic individual with grossly disordered thought incongruous emotional responses and ambivalent and unpredictable psychomotor activities indicating a clear case of schizophrenia.
He was treated with careful nursing ECT (5) and antipsychotic drugs.
His response to the treatment was partial.
Though acute symptoms disappeared and he started looking after his biological needs, a large degree of social incapacity and personality deterioration exists.
In view of the psychotic nature of the illness in this recruit, the Graded Specialist (Psychiatry), Military Hospital, Jabalpur recommended him to be invalided out of service in medical category "EEE" (Psy.)."
2.
On the basis of the medical opinion, the petitioner was brought before duly constituted invaliding medical board on 1741986.
The Board assessed his disability at 40% for two years.
It was also noticed that the illness suffered from the petitioner was not connected with the service, being constitutional in nature.
Thereafter, he was invalided out of service on 551986.
A sum of Rs. 188610 was paid to him towards final settlement of his account and Rs. 14000/- towards Disability Cover, for 40% disability under Army Group Insurance Scheme.
3.
Mr. Vimal Kumar relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of AJS Chaudhary v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) RSJ 778, in support of his submission that the illness suffered by the petitioner has to be presumed to be attributable to Army service as at the time of enrolment, no note was made by the Medical Board with regard to the ailment.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
The aforesaid judgment relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioner would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
As noticed earlier, the petitioner had not even commenced training when the ailment was discovered.
The Medical Board has also held that the ailment from which the petitioner suffered was constitutional in nature.
It has also been held that it is neither attributable to nor aggravated by the military service.
In AJS Chaudhary's cas (supra), the petitioner therein had been selected for admission to National Defence Academy in the year 1971.
Thereafter he joined Indian Military Academy for pre- commission training.
He was granted Commission in the rank of Second Lieutenant in December 1975.
During his tenure, he remained posted at high attitude/field stations in Jammu and Kashmir and Sikkim for two consecutive terms between 1976 and 1981.
It was only in 1982 he was diagnosed as suffering from Schizophrenia-ICC 25.
He was, therefore, declared unfit for military service after being placed in Medical Category "CEE".
In that case, the Medical Board had categorically stated that the disability did not exist before the petitioner's entering in service.
There is no such expression of opinion by the Medical Board in the present case.
This apart, the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and another v. Baljit Singh, 1997(1) SLR (SC) 98 : 1997(1) SCT 386 (SC) has held that even in cases where it is accepted that the disease has arisen during service, it must be established that conditions of military service determined or contributed the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service.
This onus has not been discharged by the present petitioner.
In view of the above, the present writ petition is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.