Hemant Gupta, J - Petitioner is aggrieved against the order dated 1682000 vide which he has been asked to apply for leave of the kind due from 12111998 to 12.11.1999 during which period he remained under suspension and the order dated 252001 passed by the State Government in appeal against the said order.
2.
Petitioner was working as Superintendent Grade II, Industrial Training Institute, Nangal.
He was placed under suspension vide order dated 12111998.
He attained the age of superannuation on 2822000.
A charge sheet for the infliction of major penalty was issued on 641999.
On 472000, the competent punishing authority passed an order considering report of the inquiry officer and reply of the petitioner that the petitioner has disobeyed orders under the orders of Principal and did not inform higher authorities.
The petitioner was given the benefit of doubt.
Petitioner accepted his mistake.
Since the petitioner has retired and taking into consideration the past service, the competent authority taking a lenient view had given punishment of recorded warning.
The operative part of the orders reads as under :-  "The undersigned has given a serious consideration to the report of the Enquiry Officer, the reply of the employee and all the facts of the case.
The undersigned has come to the conclusion that Raj Kumar, Superintendent, now retired, obeyed the orders under the influence of the Principal and did not inform about this to the higher authorities, as a result of which the employee is given the benefit of doubt.
Besides the employee has accepted his mistake.
This employee has retired and taking into consideration the past service of the retired employee, I, Nirmljit Singh Kalsi, Director Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, taking a lenient view, Shri Raj Kumar, Officer Superintendent retired is hereby given the punishment of recorded warning."
3.
The petitioner submitted a representation to treat the period of suspension as on duty.
However, petitioner was informed on 1682000 to apply for the leave of the kind due if the petitioner desires to have treated his suspension period as on duty.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the said order which was declined by the State Government on 252001.
Still aggrieved, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
4.
Petitioner has initially relied upon instructions dated March 26, 1990 which provide that in case minor punishment has been awarded, then his suspension would be unjust and the order will be passed granting him full pay and allowances.
However, such instructions were withdrawn on 14111990 and it was indicated that since there is already a provision for regularising the period under suspension under Rule 73 of Civil Service Rules, Therefore, no instructions can over-rule the provisions.
Thus, the instructions dated March 26, 1990 were withdrawn.
5.
It will be beneficial to reproduce Rule 73-B of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Chapter VII which reads as under :-  "(1) When a Government employee who has been suspended is reinstated or would have been so reinstated but for his retirement on superannuation while under suspension the authority competent to order re-instatement shall consider and make a specific order - (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government employee for the period of suspension ending with re-instatement or the date of his retirement on superannuation, as the case may be; and  (b) whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty.
(2) XXX XXX XXX XXX (3) Where the authority competent to order re-instatement is of opinion that the suspension was wholly unjustified, the Government employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (8), be paid the full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been suspended : Provided that were such authority is of opinion that the termination of the proceedings instituted against the Government employee, had been delayed due to reasons directly attributable to the Government employee, it may, after giving him an opportunity to make his representation and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for reasons to be recorded in writing that the Government employee shall be paid for the period of such delay only such amount (not being the whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine.
(4) In a case falling under sub-rule (3), the period of suspension shall be treated as a period spent on duty for all purposes.
(5) in cases other than those falling under sub-rules (2) and (3), the Government employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rules (8) and (9), be paid such amount (not being the whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been suspended, as the competent authority may determine, after giving notice to the Government employee of the quantum proposed and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him in that connection within such period as may be specified in the notice.
(6) XXX XXX XXX XXX (7) In a case falling under sub-rule (5), the period of suspension shall not be treated as a period spent on duty unless the competent authority specifically directs that it shall be so treated for any specified purposes : Provided that if the Government employee so desires such authority may order that the period of suspension shall be converted into leave of any kind due and admissible to the Government employee."
6.
A perusal of sub-rule (3) of rule 73-B says that the Government employee is entitled to full pay and allowances only if the suspension was wholly unjustified.
The question which now arises is whether the employee is entitled to full pay and allowances in view of the fact that he has not been exonerated in the inquiry proceedings but inflicted punishment of recorded warning.
7.
The counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Surjit Singh Aulakh v. Punjab and Haryana High Court, 1992(1) SCT 587 to contend that the punishment of warning is not a punishment and thus suspension of the petitioner would be deemed to be wholly unjustified.
However, the said argument is not acceptable.
In the present case, petitioner has been inflicted with punishment of recorded warning.
It is not merely a warning but a warning which is part of the record.
It is a censure.
Even the reasoning given by the punishing authority is that lenient view is taken only on account of the retirement of the petitioner.
He has been found guilty of the charge.
Thus, we are unable to hold that the suspension of the petitioner was wholly unjustified.
If the suspension was not wholly unjustified, the petitioner is not entitled to full pay and allowances.
8.
Thus, it is open to the competent authority in exercise of the power under sub-clause (v) to pay such amount of pay and allowances as he would have been entitled to in accordance with law.
Therefore, the judgment referred to by the counsel for the petitioner is clearly distinguishable.
That was a case where administrative warning was administered to the petitioner.
On the basis of such administrative warning, premature increment was declined to the petitioner.
But in the present case, in major penalty proceedings, recorded warning has been given as punishment.
9.
In view of the above, we do not find any illegality in the orders passed by the authorities.
Consequently, we dismiss the writ petition with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed