NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner is the widow of Havildar Lakhbir Chand who lost his life during the `Operation Vijay' in Jammu and Kashmir while fighting the enemy.
The deceased was NCO in the Regiment of Artillery in the Indian Army.
He was posted in 289 SATA BATTERY which was deployed in the operational areas in Akhnoor sector of Jammu and Kashmir and the unit was involved in the operational sector and was fully committed to the operational duties/activities.
The deceased, was performing his operational duties in the active areas on 24.8.1999 and patrolling on foot from Rdr to the listening post Kachrial when the enemy resorted to heavy and intense mortar shelling/bombardment from across the border.
At 0830 hours when he reached the listening post he complained of severe chest pain, from there, he was immediately evacuated in a vehicle to Jourian and from there he was taken in an ambulance to the military hospital, Akhnoor accompanied by a Medical Officer.
On the way he died at 0945 hours due to acute Myocardiac infraction caused by the abovementioned battle circumstances.
His death was mourned in the unit and the battle casualty was noticed to the Army authorities.
the Army publishes a battle casualty report in the prescribed form and relevant extract of the report which was published on 26.8.1999 reads as under :  "........No. 14350 199 X Hav (OFC) Lakhbir Chand was on line patrolling on foot from Rdr to the listening post Kachrial on 24 August, 1999.
During the period intense en mortar bombardment continued.
At 0830 hrs when he reached listening post complained of severe chest pain.
Immediately he was evacuated in a vehicle to AIS Jourian route to 170 MH Akhnoor.
At 0930 hrs 24 August 1999 the indl was evac to 170 MH Akhnoor in an Amb accompanied by the med officer.
While in route the indl died due to ACUTE MYOCARDIAC INFRACTION caused by above mentioned battle circumstances at 0945 hrs ......." 2.
Petitioner, who was the wife of the deceased was informed about his death on 24.8.1999 by a telegram and also through a special courier sent by the Unit.
The dead body of the deceased was sent by the Army authorities to his native village in Hoshiarpur district where he was cremated with full military honours.
A wreath was placed on his body on behalf of the Core Commander.
3.
The State of Punjab and announced certain benefits for the War Heroes and published in the official gazette on 26.6.1999 the rules called the Rules for the administration of Punjab War Heroes Families Relief Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
These Rules provide for the setting up of a fund out of whcih ex-gratia grants are given to the next of kins of defence/para military personnel from Punjab irrespective of the rank held by War Heroes who loose their lives or suffer disabilities of different magnitude in the specified areas of operational responsibility within the country.
The purposes for which the funds are to be utilised have been specified in the Rules and sources of the fund have also been laid down.
Petitioner applied for the grant of ex-gratia benefits since she claimed that her husband was a War Hero who lost his life in the specified area of operational responsibility in Akhnoor sector in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
This claim has been rejected by the State Government on the ground that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefits under the Rules as the death of her husband occurred due to acute `myocardiac infraction'.
It is against this refusal by the State Government to grant her relief that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  4.
In response to the notice of motion, the District Sainik Welfare Officer, Hoshiarpur has filed the reply on behalf of the respondents.
It is stated therein that since the death of Lakhbir Chand deceased was not caused by enemy action the petitioner is not entitled to the benefits under the Rules.
5.
We have heard counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The word `death' has been defined in clause (d) of Rule 2 of the Rules and reads as under :  "(d) Death : Death occurring on or after Ist January, 1999 in the specified area of operational responsibilities due to enemy action.
It also includes death in harness in the performance of duties due to accident, act of violence by terrorist or anti-social elements, border skirmishes, action against militants etc." A reading of the aforesaid definition makes it clear that death occurring on or after 1.1.1999 in the specified area of operational responsibilities due to enemy action is covered by the definition and the widow of such a War Hero would be entitled to the benefits.
The definition also includes death of an Army personnel who dies in harness in the performance of duties due to accident, act of violence by terrorists or anti-social elements, border skirmishes, action against militants etc.
It is, thus, clear that where an Army personnel dies in harness in the performance of duties due to accident, his widow would be entitled to the benefits under the Rules.
The word `accident' has not been defined in the Rules.
It has to be given its ordinary meaning.
According to the Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary the accident means :  "(1) a happening; an event that takes place without one's foresight or expectation; an event which proceeds from an unknown cause; or is an unusual effect of a known cause; and therefore not expected; chance; casualty; contingency.
(2) an unfortunate occurrence or mishap; especially one resulting in an injury."
The word `accident' also occurs in Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 but here too it has not been defined and it has come to acquire a settled meaning and denotes some unexpected event happening without design even though there may be negligence on the part of the person meeting with an accident.
It would, therefore, include not only such obvious occurrence as collisions, tripping over floor obstacles, fall of roof, but also less obvious ones causing injury such as strain which causes rupture, exposure to a draught causing chill, exertion causing apoplexy and shock causing neurasthenia.
It would also include a heart attack which is an unexpected event happening without design.
6.
In Bai Shakri v. New Manekchowk Mills Co, Ltd, XXI FJR 19 Justice Shelat of the Gujarat High Court while dealing with a case under Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 held that heart attack would be an accident within the meaning of Section 3 of that Act though in that case compensation was not paid to the defendants of the deceased as on the facts of that case the learned Judge held that the accident had not arisen out of and in the course of the employment.
Again, in Laxmibai Atmaram v. The Chairman and Trustees, Bombay Port Trust, 1953(7) F.J.R.
169 the High Court of Bombay held that a workman who died of heart attack while on duty must be held to have met with an accident within the meaning of Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act and his dependents were held entitled to compensation.
In the instant case, the deceased also died of actual Myocardiac Infraction which means failure of the heart while he was performing duty in the specified area of operational responsibilities and defending the borders of the country.
Since his death was unexpected and without design it was undoubtedly an accident and since he died in harness his was a death which is squarely covered by the definition given in clause (d) of Rule 2 of the Rules.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that the petitioner is entitled to the benefits under the Rules and that the action of the State Government in not treating her eligible cannot be sustained.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and a mandamus issued directing the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner and grant the benefits due to her under the Rules.
She is entitled to have her costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition allowed.