RL Anand, J - Dhian Singh son of Sewa Singh, has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has claimed disability pension from the respondents-authority by stating that he joined the Army as Sepoy on 491982.
He suffered from Neurosis Depressive Reaction.
According to the petitioner, he was medically examined by the Medical Board.
He was placed in medical category "B" permanent.
According to the petitioner, he suffered the above disease after joining the army and it is attributable to the military service and, therefore, he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
According to the petitioner he was discharged from the limitary service on 31101991.
2.
The writ petition of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents on the ground that the petitioner got discharge from the service on extreme compassionate ground at his own request because of his medical problem and he was relieved on his request with effect from 1111991 and as per Army Headquarters Letter No. A/09381/AG/PS 4(d) dated 10/19th June, 1970, individuals who seek discharge at their own request are neither entitled to the disability pension nor the disability element of pension, if they are found at the time of discharge to be suffering from a disability attributable to, or aggravated by service.
3.
A rejoinder was also filed by the petitioner in which he has alleged that he was a case of mental ailment and he was not having any sense of making any request of discharge.
He never made any request of discharge from military service and the document relied upon by the respondents is a concocted document by the respondents-authority.
4.
I have heard Shri H.S.
Sirohi, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Kamal Sehgal, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.
5.
The short point for determination is whether the petitioner has been discharged from the military service on account of his disability, by the respondent-authority or that the petitioner got the discharge at his own request ?
6.
It is true that the petitioner was produced before the Medical Board which assessed his medical disability and the petitioner was declared a case of Neurosis Depressive Reaction.
On account of this problem, the petitioner was placed in medical category "B" permanent.
The point for determination is how the petitioner was discharged from service ?
7.
During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the respondents has shown to me a letter dated 161991, written by the petitioner to his Commanding Officer, which runs as follows :-  "Sir,  1.
With due respect I beg to state the following few lines for your kind consideration and favourable action please.
2.
I, No. 4462859 Sep Dhian Singh was enrolled in the army on 491982 and completed 8 years and 8 months.
I am suffering from Neurosis since July 1988 and only son of my parents.
There is no male member to look after my property and aged ailing parents.
3.
Due to the above problems, I always remain mentally disturbed and unable to perform my duties up to the entire satisfaction of my superiors and I have nothing to look forward in my military service.
4.
I, therefore, request your honour to kindly look into the above matter and sanction my discharge from service on extreme compassionate grounds.
5.
I will be highly thankful to you for this act of kindness.
Thanking you, Yours faithfully  Sd/- Dhian Singh  (4462859 Sep Dhian Singh)" 8.
On this letter, the remarks of Lt. Col. AS Sandhu are relevant, which run as follows :-  "I am convinced about the genuine request of Sep Dhian Singh.
I strongly recommend his case for discharge from the service on extreme compassionate grounds".
Again there are remarks of Shri Madan Das, Brigadier OIC Records dated 2661991 which are as under:-  "Discharge from service on compassionate grounds in respect of No. 4462859 Sep Dhian Singh of 11 Sikh Lt is approved."
Thus, the reading of the above would show that in this case the petitioner was discharged from the military service on his own request and he was not discharged on account of medical disability, though the petitioner was a patient of Neurosis Depressive Reaction.
When a military personnel gets the discharge from military service on his own request, he is not entitled to any benefit such as disability pension.
9.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of Delhi High Court reported as 1997(4) Service Cases Today 599, Ex. Subedar Baljor Singh v. Union of India and submitted that in the cited case also the petitioner was discharged from the military service at his own request still the Hon'ble D.B.
of Delhi High Court allowed the writ petition and held that the petitioner of the cited case was entitled to disability pension.
I have gone through the facts of the cited judgment.
These are distinguishable.
In the cited case, the Sepoy was placed in low medical category who was accorded retention in service in public interest.
However, he faced difficulty in exercise of his duties due to his amputated leg.
In such a situation, it was observed by the Hon'ble D.B.
that it would not be termed as voluntary discharge but as discharge on medical grounds.
In the present case, the petitioner has sought the voluntary discharge from the service because of the fact that he was suffering from Neurosis since July 1988 and moreover, he wanted to look after his property and his aged parents.
With this background, the discharge was recommended and finally the petitioner was discharged from the military service vide order dated 2661991.
10.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is not entitled to any disability pension.
There is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.