RL Anand, J - Shri Shiv Dass Tyagi, District and Sessions Judge (Retd.)
has filed the present writ petition against the State of Haryana under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and has sought declaration that he is entitled to special addition to qualifying service for the purpose of superannuation benefit as contemplated by Rule 42 of the Civil Services Rules.
He has further made a prayer that directions be issued to the respondent to refix and revise his superannuation pension and the arrears to be paid along with interest.
2.
In brief, the case set up by the petitioner is that he joined PCS (Judicial Branch) on the basis of PCS Examination held in 1954 and was appointed as a Sub Judge on 2621956.
At the time of joining service he was 25 years 11 months and 18 days old i.e. 11 months 18 days more than 25 years.
On the re-organisation of the State of Punjab, he was allocated the State of Haryana.
Thereafter, he was promoted from time to time and on being promoted as Additional District & Sessions Judge on 29121971, he became a member of the Superior Judicial Service and started to be governed by the provisions of Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963.
He had more than 15 years qualifying service when he became the member of the Superior Judicial Service, Haryana.
He retired as election grade District & Sessions Judge and total qualifying service for the purpose of pension was taken from 2621956 to 31.3.1988 i.e. 32 years 1 month and 4 days.
According to the petitioner, he is eligible to add to his service qualifying for pension the actual period by which the age at the time of appointment exceeded 25 years since the service on the post to which he was appointed was one for which specialist qualification like graduation in Law was essential.
Now the petitioner says that he is entitled to add to his service qualifying for pension the actual period by which his age at the time of appointment exceeded 25 years.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the period of 11 months 18 days be added in his qualifying service and in this manner his qualifying service becomes 33 years 22 days and, therefore, the benefit of Rule 4.2 be given to him for the purpose of calculating his pension.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent.
The respondent stated that the petitioner, in fact, sought the voluntary retirement from service w.e.f.
681987 which was allowed vide order dated 681987.
The benefit towards superannuation pension under Rule 42-A of the CSR Volume-II is available only when a person retires from the service on superannuation only and not for any other class of pension.
The petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to the benefits under this rule because he neither retired at the age of superannuation nor he was granted superannuation pension.
The writ petition is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
Moreover, the writ petition is bad for non-joinder of parties and Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court has not been made a party in the present writ petition.
4.
I have heard Mr. OP Goyal, Senior Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Vijay Dahiya, AAG, Haryana on behalf of the State of Haryana and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The controversy in this writ petition is very short as to whether the petitioner is entitled to add the period of 11 months and 18 days to his service qualifying for superannuation pension.
Rule 4.2 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II has already been deleted.
Rule 4.2-A lays down that "An Officer appointed to a service or post may add to his service qualifying for superannuation pension (but not for any other class of pension) the actual period not exceeding one-fourth of the length of his service or the actual period by which his age at the time of recruitment exceeds twenty-five years or a period of five years, whichever is least, if the service or post is one, - (a) for which post-graduate research or specialist qualification, or experience in scientific, technological or professional fields is essential, and (b) to which candidates of more than twenty-five years of age are normally recruited : Provided that this concession shall not be admissible to any such officer unless his actual qualifying service at the time he quits Government service is not less than ten years.
Provided further that any such Officer who is recruited at the age of thirty-five years or more may, within a period of three months, from the date of his appointment, elect to forego his rights to pensions whereupon he shall be eligible to subscribe to a Contributory provident Fund............."  6.
Thus, the reading of the above would show that the petitioner could only claim the benefit if he serves actually up to the date of his superannuation.
But in the present case the petitioner has sought voluntary retirement w.e.f.
681987 which was allowed to him vide order dated 481987.
The petitioner was never retired at the age of superannuation nor he was granted superannuation pension.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot take the benefit of Rule 4.2-A, which is applicable in the present case.
7.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment dated 14121992 passed in C.W.P.
No. 11006 of 1992.
In my opinion, this judgment does not come to the rescue of the petitioner.
The point involved in that writ petition was different.
There was a discrimination with regard to the employees who were recruited after and before 26101960.
This artificial discrimination was struck down on the ground that the cut off date is arbitrary.
The order dated 14121992 was based upon the earlier order which was passed by the High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11756 of 1989, "Raj Kumar Gupta v. State of Haryana".
There is no similarly of facts and law of the said judgment with the present case.
As I stated above, the controversy is very short.
It is not a case of superannuation.
Rather, it is a case of voluntary retirement and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be granted the benefit.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ Petition which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.