David Christian, J - Appeal filed against the order passed by the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation (Deputy Commissioner of Labour-I), Madras in WC No. 84 of 1987, dated 1661988.
2.
The first opposite party, namely the Superintending Engineer, Thiruvanamalai Electricity System, North Arcot District, is the appellant.
3.
One B. Kannaiyan has filed the application for compensation alleging that late Arasakumar is the son of the applicant, who was employed under a contractor of first opposite party, namely the Superintending Engineer, Thiruvanamalai Electricity System, Thiruvanamalai, that on 1491983 while the workman was on duty and was doing the work of erection of poles he got electocuted and died as a result of the injuries sustained during the accident which arose out of and in the course of employment of the workman, that he died on that day itself, that the applicant is therefore entitled to get compensation as per the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, that the late workman was being paid a sum of Rs. 20 per day, that he was 20 years old, that he was helping the applicant to maintain the family, that the applicant is therefore a dependent and that therefore he is entitled to compensation of Rs. 50,000.
3.
The claim has been laid against (1) Superintending Engineer, Thiruvanamalai Electricity System, North Arcot District; and (2) Vijayakumar, contractor of the first opposite party; and (3) Regional Chief Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Vellore.
4.
The first opposite party, namely the Superintending Engineer, filed a counter contending that the applicant is not a dependent within the meaning of the Act, that the applicant is working as a foreman in the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board itself, that he is getting a salary of Rs. 1,653 per month, that it is false to state that late Arasakumar was employed under the first opposite party, that the first opposite party was not aware as to whether Arasakumar was employed by its contractor, that anyhow there was an agreement between the contractor and the opposite party under which the compensation payable to a workman is to be paid only by the contractor and not by the Board, that Vijayakumar, contractor, was employed to carry out certain line works in Kilpannatur Sub Division of the Electricity Board, that the deceased has not taken precautionary measures which seems to have been resulted in his death, that anyhow the contractor as per the agreement is liable to pay compensation payable under the Workmen's Compensation Act, that if the first opposite party is liable to pay compensation to the applicant, it is entitled to realise the same from the contractor and that the claim against this opposite party may be dismissed.
5.
The second opposite party filed a counter stating that late workman Arasakumar was employed by him for executing the contract obtained from the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, that the work was carried out for and behalf of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, that the Electricity Board alone is liable to pay the compensation, and that the claim may be dismissed against him.
6.
The third opposite party was impleaded because the first opposite party also pleaded that he has no power to grant the compensation exceeding a sum of Rs. 25,000.
7.
The Commissioner for workmen's compensation after considering the submissions made on behalf of both sides, finally passed an order awarding a sum of Rs. 19,200 as compensation payable by the first opposite party, namely the Superintending Engineer, Thiruvanamalai Electricity System, Thiruvanamalai, North Arcot District.
8.
Aggrieved at the said order passed by the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation the first opposite party, namely the Superintending Engineer.
Thiruvanamalai, North Arcot District, has come with this appeal.
9.
The point for consideration is :  Whether the order passed by the commissioner for workmen's compensation is liable to be set aside for all or any of the reasons submitted by the appellant ?
10.
The point :-  It is not in dispute that one K Arasakumar, son of the first claimant Kannaiyan was employed as a helper by the contractor of the first respondent, who was entrusted with the work of some line work in connection with erection of RCC poles for consumers of the Electricity board in Kilpannatur Sub Division of the first opposite party.
It is also further not disputed that in the accident that arose while workman was in the course of the employment he got electrocuted and died on the same day at the government Hospital.
The main point on which the order is resisted is that the applicant is not a `dependent' within the meaning of the Workmen's Compensation Act and therefore not entitled to any compensation.
Section 2(1)(d) reads as under :-  "2.
Definitions - (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (d) "dependent" means any of the following relatives of a deceased workman namely, (i) a widow, a minor legitimate son, an unmarried legitimate daughter, or a widowed mother; and (ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the workman at the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age of 18 years and who is infirm; (iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the workman at the time of his death - (a) widower, (b) a parent other than a widowed mother."
A bare reading of clause (1) of sub-section (1)(d) of section 2 reveals that a widow, a minor legitimate son, an unmarried legitimate daughter, or a widowed mother are entitled to compensation under the Act on account of the death of a workman who dies while on duty in the course of employment irrespective of the fact, whether they are dependent on the workman or not.
Sub-clause (a) to clause (iii) to sub-section (i)(d) provides that a widower would be entitled to compensation if he was wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the workman at the time of his death and sub-clause (b) thereto, provides that a parent other than a widowed mother is entitled to compensation on account of death of his or her son if at the time of death of the workman, he or she was wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of a deceased son.
11.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent relies upon a ruling reported in Dhan Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, 1993(1) ACC 3 : 1993(2) SCT 451 (P&H), a decision of Punjab and Haryana High Court, wherein the claim of the father in respect of death of his son arising out of and in the course of the employment was allowed.
But that was a case where the parents and others were found to be dependents on the deceased workman when he died in the course of the accident.
12.
In Charubala Saha v. Eastern Railway Administration, AIR 1988 Cal 327, the Calcutta High Court held that the "dependents" under section 2(d) means dependents at the time of death of the deceased workman.
Therefore, in the application for compensation arising out of the death of the deceased in a railway accident, it must be shown that the applicant claiming compensation was dependent upon the deceased at the time of his death.
Therefore, where in the application for compensation filed by the father of the deceased on behalf of himself, his wife and unmarried daughter it was found that the applicants far from being "sole dependents" were not dependent at all nor even partly on the earnings of the deceased, the claim case was rightly dismissed by the claims commissioner.
13.
In GN Bhandari v. The Railway Administration, New Delhi, AIR 1983 All 150, it was held, where the father claimed compensation on death of his son in a train accident, the claim would not be maintainable when there was no material on record to show that the claimant was dependent on the earnings of the deceased son.
The father would not be entitled to get compensation even under section 20 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, apart from the fact that the section was not attracted.
14.
In the present case in our hand, the claimant is a father who is admittedly employed as a foreman earning a sum of Rs. 1,653 and he is not definitely dependent upon the earnings of the deceased son.
In fact deceased was only a worker under a contractor of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board for only on daily wages and that too a small sum of Rs. 10 per day.
The father cannot also plead on behalf of his wife, namely the mother of the workman or unmarried sister or brothers of him who are dependent workman.
The present claim was filed for himself and he now cannot turn round and say that he was not solely depending upon the earnings of the late workman, that his wife and unmarried daughter and son were partly depending upon the earnings of the late workman.
The family, namely the wife and children of the present claimants are fully depending upon the earnings of the father and it cannot be stated that they were dependents of the deceased workman.
Therefore, without considering all these facts the Commissioner for workmen's compensation decided to award compensation and directed the first opposite party, namely the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board to pay the compensation to the applicant.
Therefore, the order cannot be sustained in view of the fact that the compensation on account of death of late workman is not as a matter of right nor a legal heir is entitled to the same but the persons who are entitled for compensation are only those persons who have been enumerated under section 2(d) of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.
Only a widowed mother, minor son and unmarried daughter alone are entitled as a matter of right to claim compensation without proving their dependency on the late workman.
The other relations, namely a parent other than the widowed mother, brothers and sisters will have to prove their dependency before claiming compensation.
Therefore, the present claimant, who is the father of late workman gainfully employed and who is getting monthly income of Rs. 1,653 is not at all a dependent on the late workman and therefore not entitled to compensation.
15.
The Electricity Board also raised a contention that the deceased workman is not directly employed by them but was employed under a contractor and therefore, the second respondent contractor has to pay the compensation.
For this purpose they also rely upon an agreement entered into between the Electricity Board and the second opposite party to the effect that in case of accident and death of any workman under him, the contractor will be liable to pay the compensation and not the board and even if the board is made to pay compensation it is entitled to the reimbursement of the said amount from the contractor.
So far as the workmen's compensation is concerned, even an employee under a contractor is entitled to compensation from the principal employer and the contract entered into between the contractor and principal contractor cannot have an overriding effect over and above the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
Therefore, on the ground that there is a contract between the principal employer Board and the second opposite party, the claim of the applicant cannot be resisted.
Therefore, on this ground, the principal employer cannot avoid his liability to pay the compensation.
However, in view of my findings the present claimant being the father not being a dependent of the late workman is not entitled for compensation.
On this point the appeal has to be allowed.
16.
In the result, the appeal filed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board is allowed and the claim petition is dismissed, however, without costs.
Consequently C.M.P.
No. 540 of 1989 is closed.
Appeal allowed.