SB Sinha, J - With the consent of the parties, let the appeal be treated as on day's list.
2.
This appeal is directed against the order dated 14th September, 1998 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Metiabruz High School obtained prior permission for recruitment of Commerce Teacher in Urdu Section for ST candidates vide Memo No. 3124/M dated Calcutta the 1st November, 1994.
Pursuant to the permission, the School authority issued an Open Advertisement in the Statesman dated 2nd August, 1995 for the aforesaid post.
However, no response was received from any ST candidates in Urdu for the said post and, therefore, the School authority applied to the District Inspector of Schools (SE) on 12th September, 1995 for abolition of ST post and to issue a certificate for de-reservation so that a general category candidate may be appointed to that post.
Further case of the School authority is that on several occasions the District Inspector of Schools was approached during 12th September, 1995 to April, 1997 for getting the post de-reserved as no suitable ST candidate was available for the post and the students of Urdu knowing were suffering.
Thereafter, an advertisement was issued on 1st May, 1997 by the School authority and in pursuance thereof, the petitioner/appellant applied for the post and after interview he stood first in the interview test.
His name was sent for approval to the District Inspector of Schools (SE), but the same was not approved.
Consequently, a writ petition, being No. 14013(W) of 1998, was filed before the High Court.
That writ petition was dismissed by the learned Single Judge.
3.
Being aggrieved, the petitioner has filed this Letters Patent Appeal.
Learned Counsel for the appellant submits that the selection process started on 1st November, 1994 when the School obtained prior permission for recruitment of the teacher in terms of the directions dated 2nd April, 1993 issued by the Director of School Education in exercise of his power under Clauses (i) and (ii) of Sub-rule (1) and Clause (i) of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 28 of Rules for Management of (Aided and Unaided) Schools, 1969 (commonly known as Recruitment Rules) which permitted the post to be filled up by a general category candidate if the candidate of the reserved category was not available.
Learned Counsel further submits that the District Inspector of Schools was approached for de-reservation of the post, but no action was taken by him and, therefore, the School authority should not be made to suffer on account of the inaction on his part.
4.
However, we are not impressed with this argument.
Rule 7(a) provides that in preparing the panel, the statutory provisions for reservation of SC/ST candidates shall be properly observed.
5.
The matter relating to reservation is governed by a statutory Act known as West Bengal Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Vacancies in Services and Posts) Act, 1976.
Section 4 of the said Act provides that all appointments to services and posts in an establishment which had to be filled up by direct recruitment shall be regulated in the manner specified therein.
6.
Section 6 which provides for de-reservation of the Act as it originally stood reads thus :-  "If the State Government is of opinion that the reservation for members of the Schedule Castes or Schedule Tribes shall not be applied to any particular service or post in view of the specialised qualification or experience necessary, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such service or post from the provisions of this Act."
7.
The said provision has since been amended by West Bengal Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Vacancies in Services and Posts) Amendment Act, 1994, which reads as following :-  "6.
(1) There shall be no de-reservation of any reserved vacancy by any appointing authority in any post in an establishment which is required to be filled up by direct recruitment.
In the absence of qualified Scheduled Caste or Schedule Tribe candidate, as the case may be, to fill up such vacancy, such vacancy shall remain unfilled.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if in the public interest, it is necessary to fill up any vacancy as aforesaid remaining unfilled on account of non-availability of a qualified Scheduled Caste or Schedule Tribes candidate, as the case may be, the appointing authority shall refer the vacancy to the State Government for de-reservation.
Upon such reference, the State Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, by order, de-reserve the vacancy, subject to the condition that the reservation against the vacancy so de-reserved shall be carried forward against the subsequent unreserved vacancy."
8.
Our attention has been drawn to the fact that the Government of West Bengal in terms of a circular letter dated 4th April, 1987 directed :-  "In case of non-availability of any qualified Scheduled Tribe candidate against a vacancy reserved for the particular community, the vacancy shall be treated as unreserved and filled up as such.
Similarly, in the case of non- availability of a qualified Scheduled Caste candidate against a vacancy shall be treated as unreserved and filled up as such.
In respect of both the situations as aforesaid, the reservation shall, however, be carried forward towards the subsequent vacancy that may occur during the "next two years", one after another, for the particular community i.e. for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as the case may be till any one of such vacancies can be filled up by a qualified candidate of that particular community.
If no qualified candidate of the particular community for whom the reservation is being carried forward becomes available to fill up the carried forward vacancy within the said period (i.e. "next years"), the reservation shall be treated as lapsed in that particular case.
Further, if no vacancy occurs at all during the "next two years" period of carry forwarded, then also the reservation in that particular case shall be treated as lapsed."
9.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant as also the Managing Committee have raised a contention that in terms of the aforementioned circular letter dated 4th April, 1987 the reserved post could be carried forward for the next two years, but assuming that the same could be done, no order in that regard has been passed by any competent authority.
10.
Furthermore, the said Act was amended by West Bengal Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Vacancies in Services and Posts) Amendment Act, 1994, which admittedly has come into force with effect from 16th January, 1995.
11.
Sub-section (1) of Section 6 as noticed hereinbefore places an absolute embargo on the de-reservation by providing that there shall be no dereservation of any reserved vacancy by any appointing authority in any post which is required to be filled up by direct requirement.
In the absence of qualified scheduled caste or scheduled tribe candidate, vacancy shall remain unfulfilled.
Sub-section (2) of Section 6 of the said Act, although permits dereservation, specifically provides that de-reservation can be done only by the State Government and that too, if it is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do subject to the condition that the reservation against the vacancy so reserved shall be carried forward against the subsequent unreserved vacancy.
The prohibition contained in the said Act is absolute and imperative in nature.
No authority other than the State Government far less the District Inspector of Schools has any authority or jurisdiction to pass any order of de-reservation.
The learned trial Judge has held that the Managing Committee of the school had not made any prayer for de-reservation of the post.
However, the learned Counsel now contends that such an application had been filed.
But it is the admitted case of the parties that no order of de- reservation has been passed by the State Government in this matter.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submits that this provision was incorporated by the amendment effected vide West Bengal Act LXII, 1994 which became effective with effect from 16th January, 1995 and since the selection process started on 1st November, 1994, the unamended provision would be applicable.
In our view, this argument is wholly without any merit for the reason that on 1st November, 1994 the selection process started with respect to the selection of a scheduled tribe candidate and not of the general category.
Even, according to the petitioner, the advertisement for selection of a general category candidate was issued for the first time on Ist May, 1997.
Therefore, we hold that the amended provision of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 6 of the Act would be applicable to the facts of the present case and, thus, as no order of de-reservation was made by the State Government, the order passed by the District Inspector of Schools does not suffer from any illegality or infirmity.
It is, therefore, not a case, as has been argued by the learned Counsel for the appellant and also the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Managing Committee, that recruitment process having been started, the old Rule shall apply.
The said argument is wholly misconceived.
Apart from the fact that in the instant case the recruitment process in respect of the general category candidate started from the date of issuance of advertisement which is much after coming into force of 1994 Amendment Act, no order for de-reservation having been passed, the entire exercise on the part of the Managing Committee was illegal and without jurisdiction.
13.
As such we do not find any infirmity in the order passed by the learned Single Judge.
Consequently, we dismiss the appeal and the application but, in the circumstances, without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.