GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing the order dated 18.6.1998 passed by the respondent No. 2 whereby he rejected the petitioner's representation for employment on one pay scale lower than the pay scale in which his father was drawing salary.
2.
Brief facts necessary for deciding this case are that the petitioner's father, Shri Prithi Singh, died on 28.4.1996 while holding the post of Sub Inspector, Cooperative Societies.
At the time, he was drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
The petitioner applied for compassionate appointment as per the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4595 of 1998 for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the post of Clerk which carried one pay scale lower of the pay scale of the post held by his father.
That petition was disposed of by the High Court on 31.3.1998 with the direction that the petitioner's representation be decided within three months.
In compliance of the directions given by the High Court, the respondent No. 2 passed the impugned order rejecting the petitioner's claim on the ground that the pay scale of the post of the deceased is Rs. 950-1500 and, therefore, the petitioner has rightly been appointed on the post of Peon in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940.
3.
We have heard Shri Jaswant Singh and perused the record.
4.
The only reason assigned by the respondent No. 2 for not accepting the petitioner's claim to be appointed on a post in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 is that at the time of demise of late Shri Prithi Singh, the pay scale of the post of Sub Inspector, Cooperative Societies, was Rs. 950-1500 and the fact that late Shri Prithi Singh was actually drawing pay in the higher scale of Rs. 1400-2600 by virtue of grant of higher standard pay on completion of 10 years cannot be made basis of accepting the petitioner's plea for appointment on a post in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500.
5.
In our opinion, the respondent No. 2 is not right in rejecting the petitioner's claim.
The instructions issued by the government vide circular letter dated 851995 envisaged compassionate appointment atleast one step lower than that of the deceased employee.
The meaning of the expression "one step lower" was clarified in the circular letter dated 3181995 in the following words :-  "One step lower is interpreted as one pay scale below that of the deceased employee.
It is further clarified that appointment on compassionate grounds under ex gratia scheme can be offered only on a post in the pay scale lower than that of the deceased employee."
6.
On a bare reading of the plain language of the two circulars, it becomes clear that the dependent of the deceased employee is entitled to be considered for appointment on a post which carries one pay scale lower than that of the deceased employee.
By virtue of clarification given by the government vide circular letter dated 3181995, the pay scale on which the dependent can be appointed has been made referable to the pay scale of the deceased.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointment on a post carrying one pay scale lower than the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 which late Shri Prithi Singh was receiving at the time of his demise and the respondent No. 2 is not right in declining the request of the petitioner.
The reason why Shri Prithi Singh was receiving salary in a higher pay scale is hardly relevant for the purpose of deciding the petitioner's entitlement to be appointed on a post carrying one pay scale lower than the pay scale of this father.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P2 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner for appointment carrying pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 and pass appropriate order within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.