JN Sarma, J - The petitioner herein passed BE in Mining Engineering.
On 23.1.1971, he joined as Mining Engineer in the Directorate of Geology and Mining.
On 23121991 he was promoted to Joint Director and presently serving as such.
On 17.7.1968 the respondent No. 3 joined as Assistant Driller in the Directorate of Geology and Mining.
He passed BE in Mechanical Engineering.
On 19111972 he was promoted as Drilling Engineer.
On 2091978 he was promoted as Senior Drilling Engineer and on 1461991 he was promoted as Chief Drilling Engineer.
In the year 1988 there was Gazette publication in the name and style of Assam Geology and Mining (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Order, 1988.
It was stated that pending finalisation of Assam Geology and Mining Service Rules to be framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, Government of Assam is pleased to make the order regulating the recruitment and other conditions of service of the persons appointed to the post under Geology and Mining Directorate.
Order 5 of that order provides for the recruitment of Director and it is provided that the post of Director shall be filled up by promotion from the cadre of Joint Director/Chief Geologist.
Academic qualification prescribed for the post of Director should be post graduate degree in Geological Science/Applied Geology/Geo-Physics or degree in Mining Engineering from a University or an institution recognised by the Govt.
It was further provided that in order to become eligible for promotion, the incumbent must have at least 20 years of service experience with minimum 3 years service as Joint Director, Chief Geologist on the first day of the year in which the selection is made.
According to this Order the respondent No. 3 who is a Mechanical Engineer does not possess the qualification.
There was a further gazette publication of Assam Geology and Mining (Recruitment and Condition of Service) (Amendment) Order, 1990 and for the first time the post of Chief Drilling Engineer was created.
On 2821998 one KC Bordoloi, Director, Geology and Mining retired and the petitioner being duly qualified was expecting promotion to the post of Director in view of his qualification and seniority.
But on 2621998 respondent No. 3 was allowed to hold the current charge of the post of Director with effect from 2821998 vice Sri KC Bordoloi retired.
That is Annexure 3 to the writ application which is quoted below :-  "Government of AssamPower (Elect.)
Mines and MineralsDepartment * * * ************* Order by the Governor of Assam NotificationDated Dispur, the 26th Feb 1998.
No. PEM.
7/98/Pt : Shri Basudev Bhattacharjee, Chief Drilling Engineer of the Directorate of Geology and Mining, Asssam is allowed to hold current charge of the post of the Director of Geology and Mining, Assam, with effect from 2821998 (AN) vice Shri KC Bordoloi, Director of Geology and Mining Assam being retired.
Sd/- (Z.M.
Hoquq), Dy.
Secretary to the Govt. of Assam, Power (Elect.)
Mines and Minerals Department."
Vide Annexure 4 a representation was filed before the Chief Secretary stating that the respondent No. 3 is not qualified to hold the post of Director.
Even the respondent No. 3 was senior to KC Bordoloi, the earlier Director who was not allowed to hold the post due to lack of qualification.
There is also an Office Memorandum which states that persons of State Government shall be allowed to hold dual charge without approval of the Personnel (B) Department and the Finance Department.
That is Annexure 7 to the writ petition.
That is quoted below :  "Government of Assam Department of Personnel : Personnel `B' Dispur, Guwahati 6.
............... No. ABP.383/81/71Dated Dispur, the 3rd October 1991.
Office Memorandum Consequent upon the amendment of ER 49 of the AFRs and S.Rs.
vide correction slip No. 240 dated 581991 issued under Finance Estt.
(A) Department's Notifications should ensure not to allow the full charge of the duties of a higher post or posts in addition to one's own duties beyond a period of three months as per provisions of FR 49(a)(b) as amended, and to take urgent steps where necessary to fill up the post(s) on regular basis in accordance with the provisions of Service Rules prescribed for the purpose.
This is in continuation of this Department's O.M.
No. ABP 383/81/23 dated 691989.
Sd/- J Chakraborty, Secretary to the Govt. of Assam, Personnel (B) Department."
There was no approval from the Personnel and Finance Department in this particular cases.
Earlier to it, on 6th September 1989 there was another Office Memorandum regarding arrangement of dual charge and that is quoted below :  "Government of Assam Department of Personnel; Personnel (B) Dispur, Guwahati.
O.M.
No. ABP.383/81/23, Dated Dispur, the 6th September, 1989 Office Memorandum Sub : Arrangement of Dual charge.
In continuation of this Deptt.
's O.M.
No. ABP.
383/81/10 dated 1891984 it has been reiterated that concurrence of Personnel Deptt.
is required to be obtained by other Deptt.
in the matter or processing of proposals for grant of additional remuneration under T.R.
49 when it is proposed to allow dual charge arrangement.
But, it has been observed that without prior approval of Personnel Dept., some Administrative Depts.
have been continuing to make dual charge arrangement and allow to continue for undue long period without filling up the post on regular basis which is highly irregular.
It is, therefore, stressed that views of Personnel and Finance should invariably be taken by all concerned before such an arrangement is finalised and notification issued in this regard.
No proposal for ex post facto approval will be entertained in the Personnel Department.
The Administrative Deptt.
should ensure to take urgent steps to fill up the post(s) on regular basis instead of allowing continuance of the dual charge arrangement indefinitely.
Sd/- Joint Secretary to the Govt. of Assam."
In this particular case in violation of the recruitment rules or recruitment order as quoted above and in violation of Annexures 6 and 7 quoted above, the respondent No. 3 has been allowed to hold that the charge and even after filing of the case, a letter was issued by the Under Secretary to the Government of Assam, Personnel (B) Department, Dispur which reads as follows :  "Government of Assam Department of Personnel; Personnel (B) Dispur : Guwahati.
No. ABP.
57/98/45 Dated Dispur, the 15th May, 1998.
From : Shri GN Saikia, Under Secretary to the Govt. of Assam, Personnel (B) Deptt.
To : The Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of Assam, Power (Elect.)
Mines and Minerals Department, Dispur.
Subject : Civil Rule No. 1518/98 Joyti Prasad Borah v. State of Assam and others.
Ref.
: Memo No. 2981 dated 211998 from the Junior Government Advocate, Assam.
Sir, I am directed to invite a reference to the letter cited above regarding Civil Rule No. 1518/98.
Shri JP Borah v. State of Assam and others and to say that apparently the order to hold current charge of the post of Director, Geology and Mining by Shri Basudev Bhattachargee, Chief Drilling Engineer was passed without following the provisions of the Service Rules.
Since in the judgment dated 3031998 of the Hon'ble High Court, it has been stated that pendency of the Rule shall not be bar for the authority to fill up the post in accordance with law, you may take corrective steps immediately as per the provisions of the existing Service Rules and inform the Hon'ble High Court accordingly.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Under Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,  Personnel (B) Department."
It is on this ground this writ petition has been filed with a prayer that the Notification dated 2621998 issued by the Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of Assam Power, Mines and Minerals Department, allowing the respondent No. 3 to hold dual charge should be quashed and with further prayer that the post may be filled up on regular basis as provided in the rules, executive instructions governing the service.
2.
An affidavit in opposition has been filed on behalf of the respondent No. 3.
In the affidavit in opposition it is stated that there was earlier a case before the Assam Administrative Tribunal at Guwahati being case No. 39ATA/97 filed by the respondent No. 3 and that appeal was with regard to the academic qualification for eligibility for promotion to the post of Director and Addl.
Director in the Directorate of Geology and Mining of the State Government.
In that judgment in paragraphs 11, 12, and 13 it was directed as follows :  "It is, therefore, necessary now to rectify the inadvertent omissions in the Assam Geology and Mining (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) (Amendment) Order, 1990 in the matter of (i) exclusion of the academic qualification of graduation in Mechanical Engineering for the post of Joint Director and/or equivalent posts for promotion to the post of Additional Director, and (ii) the exclusion of the academic qualification of Mechanical Engineering in the post of Additional Director for promotion to the post of Director.
For reasons, stated above, we find that the conditions of the Government of assam and the learned Counsel for the State Government stated in para 9 of this Judgment are not valid and are not accepted by us.
The contentions of the learned Counsel for the appellant (Shri Bhattacharjee) stated in paragraph 89 of this judgment are valid and are accepted by us.
The Government of Assam are directed to rectify the inadvertent omission immediately (i) by adding the academic qualification of graduation in Mechanical Engineering to the existing qualifications for the post of Joint Directors and/or equivalent posts for promotion to the post of Additional Director, and (ii) by adding the academic qualification of graduation in Mechanical Engineering to the existing qualifications for the post of Additional Director for promotion to the post of Director by making suitable amendments.
The posts of Director or the Additional Director shall not be filled up without making the amendments."
As against the order of the Tribunal a Civil Rule being Civil Rule No. 1106/98 has been filed wherein a prayer was made that the directions quoted above given by the Assam Administrative Tribunal should be quashed.
3.
I have heard Mr. BD Das, learned Advocate for the petitioner, Mr. GK Bhattacharjee, learned Advocate for the respondent No. 3 and the learned GA Assam for the other respondents.
4.
It is well settled that in the absence of statutory rules made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India the appointment and other conditions of service can be regulated by administrative order or executive instruction and the execution instruction shall hold the field till the matter is finalised.
Sri Das further makes the submission that the Assam Administrative Tribunal has no jurisdiction to give any direction to the authority to change the qualification.
The Assam Administrative Tribunal Act, 1977 was enacted and it came into force from 3rd January, 1977.
It received assent of the President on 2nd May, 1977.
The statement and object of reason was to provide for an alternative forum for the adjudication of disputes in respect of certain conditions of service i.e. classes in the service of the State Government.
The conditions of service has been defined in Section 2(e) and they are as follows :-  "(e) `Conditions of service' includes all materials relating to the -  (i) appointment, seniority, confirmation and termination of service of a civil servant; (ii) Censure, withholding of recruitment of promotion, recovery of pay of any loss to the Government, reduction to a lower service, grade or post, or to a lower time scale, or to a lower stage in a time scale, denial or variation of pension or denial of the maximum pension."
So, the question of qualification will not come within the definition as quoted above.
Section 4 gives the jurisdiction to the Tribunal to entertain, dispose of appeal preferred by Civil servants against any order pased by a competent authority in respect of any condition of service.
5.
The word `anything' certainly will mean all, but as the conditions of service have been defined as quoted above, it will not include it or bring in its sweep.
Other things save and except those which are included other things will not be within the jurisdiction of Tribunal.
Further conditions of the Government servant appointed to the post are regulated by terms of contract of the employment and express or implied and subject thereof by rules applicable to the members of the particular service.
It is also open to the Government to regulate all the matters relating to the conditions of service by imposing administrative instructions or so long the statutory rules have not been made.
If the rules are silent in the matter, the Government can fill up the gap with instructions.
A bare look to the rules will show that there was no order by the competent authority and as such, it is not understood how the Administrative Tribunal can entertain this appeal, because the jurisdiction to entertain the appeal will come only when any order is passed by the competent authority in respect of any condition of service.
6.
That being the position, both the Civil Rules are allowed.
The order of Assam Administrative Tribunal dated 2121998 (Annexure 1) to the Civil Rule No. 1106/98 shall stand quashed and in Civil Rule No. 1518/98 the order dated 2621998 (Annexure 2) to the Civil Rule by which the respondent No. 3 was allowed to hold the current charge of Director of the Geology and Mining shall stand quashed and the post shall be filled up by the authority by following the due process of law by adhering to the executive instructions holding the field.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.