THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner has approached this Court for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to award the Degree of Bachelor in Ayurvedacharya in pursuance of the declaration of his result on completion of the course.
2.
The petitioner applied for admission to BAMS in Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra in 1985.
He was allowed admission by the University in the Session 1985-86.
He passed 1st year BAMS Examination held in April 1987 and the 2nd year and 3rd year Examinations held in April 1990.
He cleared 4th year Examination held in December, 1990 and he also passed the Final Year Examination held in June, 1991.
His final result was declared on 28101991.
Thereafter he also did his internship during 1991-92.
On 1861992 a Show Cause Notice was issued to the petitioner to explain and satisfy the authorities that he is a domicile of Haryana.
In response to the said notice, the petitioner had replied that at the time of admission, he submitted a domicile certificate, but as the same was not traceable in the records of the Kurukshetra University, he submitted a fresh domicile certificate dated 871992.
Thereafter on 751993 the petitioner was issued a memo calling upon him to explain about the authenticity of the domicile certificate dated 871992 produced by him.
He submitted a detailed reply.
According to the petitioner, he resided with his parents at Village Godika, Distt.
Sirsa and in the year 1985, he submitted an application to the Assistant Collector 1st Grade, Dabwali (SDO Civil) who after verification, issued domicile certificate and he was allowed admission by the College as well as the University and he completed his academic course.
On the basis of some anonymous complaint, the petitioner was asked to submit proof of his domicile in the State of Haryana.
Accordingly, in the year 1992, he submitted a fresh domicile certificate from the competent authority.
According to the petitioner, the delay in questioning his domicile in the State of Haryana after completion of his course is unjust.
Further, according to the petitioner, he was born on 951968, and his father was having a Bachelor Degree in Ayurvedic Medicines who started his practice in Villages Pipli and Godika, District Sirsa and the petitioner was born in Village Godika in the year 1968 when his father was practising there and the petitioner was admitted in Government High School, Pipli and he did his primary education at Pipli and for higher studies, he shifted to Mansa.
He did his Matric and Higher Secondary from Government High School, Mansa, but his father continued to stay in village Godika where he started practice and after completion of his Higher Secondary Examination, the petitioner applied for admission in BAMS in Kurukshetra University and after completion of all the formalities and getting himself qualified, he was admitted into BAMS Course of Kurukshetra University in 1985.
Though the petitioner completed his Course, the authorities issued him a notice to explain and satisfy that he was a domicile of Haryana for which the petitioner submitted his explanation by submitting a fresh domicile certificate dated 871992.
The report of the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa that the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner is a forged one was without jurisdiction and, therefore, the cancellation of the result of the petitioner by the Principal of the SK Government Ayurvedic College, is illegal and liable to be set aside.
3.
A written statement was filed by the 2nd respondent i.e. Kurukshetra University in which it is admitted that the petitioner was granted admission to BAMS Course in the Session 1985-86.
It is further averred that in the year 1989 a complaint was received to the effect that the petitioner was not a resident of Haryana State and he submitted a domicile certificate based on wrong facts and thereupon the Principal, Shri Krishna Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra requested the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa, to verify the said domicile certificate and the Deputy Commissioner reported that the petitioner was not a resident of Village Godika and the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner was not issued by the SDO (Civil) Dabwali.
Therefore, a Show Cause Notice was issued to the petitioner by the College.
Thereafter the petitioner submitted a domicile certificate dated 871992.
When the petitioner was earlier directed to attend the office of SK Government Ayurvedic College, he submitted another domicile certificate dated 1251992 issued by the SDO (Civil), Dabwali and the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa in his letter dated 7.12.1992 informed the Principal of SK Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra that the domicile certificate submitted by the petitioner dated 1251992 was forged one and the petitioner was not a resident of Village Godika.
Therefore, according to the respondents, after giving an opportunity to the petitioner, an order was passed on 19.11.1993 by the Principal of Shri Krishna Government, Ayurvedic College-respondent No. 3, cancelling the admission of the petitioner and requested the Kurukshetra University, respondent No. 2, to cancel the result and Degree according to the Rules of the University.
According to the 2nd respondent, for obtaining admission to an educational Institution the candidate must be a domicile of the State of Haryana and according to clause 22 of the Ordinance of General Rules for Examinations, the Controller of Examinations have authority to cancel the candidature of a candidate for any University Examination on the ground of eligibility.
Therefore, according to the respondent, the admission of the petitioner into the Course is totally cancelled as he obtained the admission by producing a false domicile certificate.
4.
Similar contentions have also been taken by the 3rd respondent who filed a separate written statement.
5.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner is a domicile of the State of Haryana and that the enquiry by the Deputy Commissioner was conducted behind his back without issuing notice to him.
Therefore no reliance can be placed on the report of the Deputy Commissioner and the petitioner was not given any opportunity to substantiate his claim that he is a domicile of Haryana, he was born in the State of Haryana and that he had primary education at Pipli in the State of Haryana and his parents have been living in the State of Haryana and simply because the petitioner did his Higher Secondary at Mansa in the State of Punjab, does not disentitle him to seek admission in the State of Haryana as he cannot be said to be a domicile of Punjab when he was born in the State of Haryana and staying in the State of Haryana.
The Counsel further submitted that there is no proof that the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner is false.
The original certificate submitted by the petitioner was not verified and it was not found to be a forged one.
The S.D.O.
(Civil), Dabwali who issued the domicile certificate in the year 1992 was not examined by any of the authorities and it is not known on what basis the Deputy Commissioner came to the conclusion that the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner in the year 1992 is a forged one.
The learned Counsel also submitted that the petitioner completed his Course and also did his internship and, therefore, it was not proper to cancel his admission after lapse of 8 years and withhold the result of the award of the Degree to the petitioner.
6.
There is no dispute about the fact that the petitioner was admitted into BAMS Course on the basis of the domicile certificate produced by him in year 1985.
At that time the certificate was issued by the then Assistant Collector 1st Grade (SDO Civil), Dabwali.
There is nothing on record to show that any enquiry was conducted in regard to the genuineness or otherwise of the certificate produced by the petitioner in the year 1985 at the time of his admission in BAMS Course.
After the petitioner completed his course, he was asked to submit explanation and satisfy the authorities that he is a domicile of Haryana State.
Thereafter the petitioner submitted another domicile certificate on 871992.
According to the authorities the domicile certificate issued in the year 1992 was not a genuine one.
This conclusion was arrived at not on the basis of any enquiry held after giving notice to the petitioner.
S.D.O.
(Civil) Dabwali has given two certificates one dated 1251992 which was verified by Naib Tehsildar (Circle Revenue Officer), Dabwali and the other dated 871992 which was verified by Tehsildar (Circle Revenue Officer), Dabwali.
In the letter sent by the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa to the Principal, Shri Krishna Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra, the Deputy Commissioner stated that an enquiry was conducted By S.D.O.
(Civil), Dabwali from which it was found that the petitioner is not a permanent resident of Godika, Tehsil Dabwali and the permanent residence certificate issued on 1251992 is wrong.
But it does not appear that S.D.O.
(C), Dabwali conducted any enquiry after issuing notice to the petitioner.
It is also not borne out from the record that the SDO (Civil), Dabwali who has issued the certificates dated 1251992 and 871992 was ever examined during the course of enquiry.
According to these two certificates issued in the year 1992, the verification was made by Naib Tehsildar (Circle Revenue Officer), Dabwali and by the Tehsildar (Circle Revenue Officer), Dabwali.
There is no material on record to show that the statements of Naib Tehsildar and Tehsildar who were said to have verified whether the petitioner was a domicile of Haryana State were examined during the course of enquiry.
Nothing was said by the Deputy Commissioner in regard to the certificate which was submitted by the petitioner in the year 1985 at the time of his admission.
No record was produced before this Court to show that certificate issued by the then S.D.O.
(Civil) in the year 1985 was not genuine.
Therefore, it has to be concluded that there was no material to show that the certificate issued in the year 1985 was not genuine.
As any enquiry held at the back of the petitioner violates the principles of natural justice that no person can be condemned without affording any opportunity, the said enquiry reports cannot be relied upon.
7.
In view of my foregoing discussion, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to get the Bachelor Degree of Ayurvedacharya as he has successfully completed the course and also undergone the internship and the impugned letter/notice dated 751993 is hereby quashed.
8.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed and the impugned notice dated 751993 is hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to award the Bachelor Degree of Ayurvedacharya to the petitioner as he has successfully completed the course as well as internship.
However, there will be no order as to costs.