ML Singhal, J - Vide order dated 241986, Shri B.L.
Singhal, Senior Subordinate Judge, Karnal passed the following punishments upon Dhiru Ram who was working as Civil Nazir in the Court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Karnal :  (i) Reversion from Civil Nazir to the post of Naib Nazir.
(ii) Reduction in his pay scale from Rs. 660/- to 400/- for a period of two years.
(iii) Stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
2.
Dhiru Ram challenged the said order of punishments on the administrative side in the High Court.
High Court vide order dated 22.9.1998 dismissed his appeal.
Dhiru Ram challenged the order of the High Court dated 22.9.1988 into which the order of Senior Subordinate Judge, Karnal dated 241986 stood merged by means of civil suit No. 571 of 1991 filed by him in the Civil Court at Karnal.
It was alleged in the plaint that the said order of punishments was illegal, void ab-initio, mala fide, arbitrary, against the provisions contained in the High Court Rules and Orders regarding punishment and also against the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
It was alleged in the plaint that the punishing authority was biased and prejudiced against him.
Punishing authority conducted preliminary enquiry, framed charge sheet, conducted regular departmental enquiry, served show cause notice proposing punishment and inflicted punishment himself which is against the rules of natural justice.
Senior Subordinate Judge could not be prosecutor as well as judge.
He had pre-judged the correctness of the charges against him and the enquiry was a mere farce.
For single mis-conduct, three fold punishments were imposed upon him which were major punishments.
No reasonable opportunity was given to him before the imposition of punishments.
The findings of the punishing authority were based on presumptions, conjectures and surmises.
He had not committed any misconduct and the department had not suffered any wrongful loss by his alleged misconduct nor he had been put to any wrongful gain.
National Savings Certificates were not purchased by him due to non-supply of requisite information by the officials concerned.
He could not be held responsible for the shortage of cash in hand at the time of checking by the competent authority because the latter had not checked the cash book and the chest.
3.
State of Haryana contested the suit, urging that the suit is barred by time.
Regular enquiry was held in accordance with law.
He as given due opportunity.
He retained money in his possession from 2791984 to 18.9.1985 without any order.
He thus committed misconduct.
4.
Vide order dated 1691996, Civil Judge (Jr. Division), dismissed the plaintiff's suit.
Plaintiff went in appeal, which was allowed by Additional District Judge, Karnal vide order dated 20.4.1988.
5.
State of Haryana has come up in this appeal to this Court.
6.
During the pendency of the appeal, Dhiru Ram died.
As such, his widow Kishni Devi and children Janardhan etc. were brought on record as his LRs/heirs.
7.
I have heard the learned District Attorney for the State of Haryana, learned counsel for the respondents and have gone through the record.
8.
It is submitted by the learned District Attorney for the State of Haryana- appellant that the imposition of the aforesaid punishments was quite legal in as much as these punishments could simultaneously be imposed upon Dhiru Ram in view of the High Court Rules and Orders on the subject.
Allegation against Dhiru Ram was that he had drawn certain amount as arrears of dearness allowance pertaining to the employees.
He was required by invest the amount pertaining to each of the employees in the purchase of national savings certificates.
He did not purchase national saving certificates and thus kept the amount with him.
It was thus a single misconduct if it was any.
For a single misconduct, he could not have been punished three folds.
He was punished with the reversion from the post of Civil Nazir to the post of Naib Nazir.
He was punished with the stoppage to two increments with cumulative effect.
He as also brought down to a lower slab in the time scale.
Assuming that all these punishments could have been imposed upon him in view of the High Court Rules and Orders, for a single misconduct, it would be atrocious on the part of Senior Subordinate Judge as well as on the part of the High Court to have imposed upon him so severe punishments for a petty misconduct like this.
He was required to invest the amount of arrears of dearness allowance pertaining to the employees in the purchase of national savings certificate for them.
He could not invest the amount in the purchase of national savings certificates because of non-supply of requisite information by the officials concerned.
The amount could be disbursed to them and they themselves could purchase the national savings certificates.
On the departmental side also, the punishment imposed should be in close proximity to the misconduct committed, just as in a criminal case punishment varies with the nature of the offence committed.
9.
In this case, Senior Subordinate Judge himself conducted enquiry and himself punished Dhiru Ram.
Principles of natural justice demanded that he should have got enquiry conducted through some one else, so that Dhiru Ram could have this feeling that there had been application of independent mind to the charge against him.
Senior Subordinate Judge conducted preliminary enquiry himself.
If he had conducted preliminary enquiry himself and had found him guilty, he should not have straightaway held regular enquiry.
He should have entrusted the holding of regular enquiry to some body else.
There was no charge of embezzlement of Government money by him.
At best he was negligent in performing his duty.
10.
Plaintiff's suit was within time.
Plaintiff got cause of action on 22.9.1988 i.e. when his appeal against the punishment was dismissed by the High Court.
After serving two months notice, as envisaged by the provisions of Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, he could file suit till 22111991.
He filed this suit on 2691991.
Notice period has to be excluded in cases where service of notice is mandatory.
In this appeal, no question of law arises what to talk of substantial question of law.
Learned Additional District Judge correctly adjudicated the factual as well as the legal aspect of the case.
Appeal allowed.