Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Management of Shri Mahavir Jain Girls High Schools, Jind, is the petitioner.
It is aggrieved by the order dated August 13, 1981, passed by the Director of School Education, Haryana, by which the appeal against the order dated May 4, 1981, of the District Education Officer, Jind, was dismissed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner which claims to be an institution established and being run by a minority community in Haryana appointed respondents 4 to 9 as teachers in the school during the period from July 12, 1979 to January 1, 1981.
These appointments had been made in probation.
On April 27, 1981, the President of the School issued an order that the services of seven teachers including respondents 4 to 9 who were working on probation ``may be terminated with effect from 30.4.1981, Afternoon''.
In pursuance of this communication, the Headmistress of the School issued an order terminating the services of the teachers with effect from April 30, 1981.
On May 4, 1981, the District Education Officer informed the management that the orders regarding the ``dispensing with the services of 7 teachers are hereby stayed till the inquiry is completed by the Department.''
The petitioner challenged this order through an appeal before the Director of School Education, Haryana.
The petitioner as well as the teachers were called upon to appear for personal hearing on July 27, 1981.
The petitioner alleges that it had deputed Mr. Santosh Kumar, who was working as a Lecturer in the Education Department of the State of Haryana and also a member of the School Managing Committee to appear on its behalf.
The second respondent refused to hear him on the ground that he was a Government employee.
No opportunity was given to the Management to adduce any evidence and its appeal was rejected.
The Director observed that ``after going through the relevant record I have come to the conclusion that the services of the seven employees have not been terminated due to their unsatisfactory record because there is nothing on the record which could prove the contention of the appellant.
On the other hand I can safely presume that the services of these teachers have been terminated as a measure of punishment--------.''
While dismissing the appeal, he also directed the Management to comply with the provisions of Section 3 of the Haryana (Aided Schools) Security of Service Act, 1971, and the rules framed thereunder.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition in the year 1981.
3.
Counsel have been heard.
Admittedly, respondents 4 to 9 were on probation.
It is also not disputed that under the rules the Management has the power to dispense with the services of a teacher if his work has not been found to be satisfactory.
It is only when the Management proposes to dismiss an employee on account of certain charges that an inquiry as contemplated under Section 3 has to be held.
In the present case, the second respondent has not referred to any material on the record on the basis of which he presumed that the services had been terminated ``as a measure of punishment.''
Still further, a perusal of the order clearly shows that when Santosh Kumar, the person who had been deputed by the Management to appear on its behalf, was asked to stay out, the entire Management had left the room.
The action of the petitioner in leaving the room of the Director may not have been very correct, yet in this situation there was none who could have produced the record or shown that the performance of the teachers was not satisfactory.
4.
Mr Surya Kant has contended that the petitioner has material in its possession to prove that there were complaints against the teachers and that their performance was to satisfactory.
In the circumstances of this case, it does not appear to be proper that this Court should examine the evidence.
Suffice it to say that the order passed by the Director suffers from two infirmities.
Firstly, there is no basis for the finding that the order of termination had been passed as a measure of punishment.
Secondly, the conclusion that the service of the seven employee had not been terminated due to unsatisfactory record has been arrived at without giving the petitioner an opportunity.
As a result, the order cannot be sustained.
5.
Mr. Surya Kant submits that even the District Education Officer had erred in passing the stay order.
Learned counsel points out that Kumari Raj Tyagi had filed an appeal.
She was not even one of the teachers whose services were terminated.
Consequently, she had no locus standi to file the appeal.
This is a matter which would be considered by the Director.
The petitioner may raise this plea before him.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant has also submitted that during the pendency of the writ petition most of the teachers viz. respondents 6, 7 and 8 have already got employment with the Education Department.
They are still working.
Respondents 4, 5 and 9 have got married and are living with their husbands away from Jind.
Even this is a matter which shall be considered by the second respondent while hearing the appeal.
7.
In view of the above, the order passed by the Director, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition, is set aside.
The matter is remitted to him for fresh decision.
He shall re-decide the case in accordance with law.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of respondents 4 to 9, he will give a notice to the said teachers to appear before him.
Till the matter is decided, the operation of the order passed by the District Education Officer shall remain stayed.
8.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.