VS Aggarwal, J - For certain posts named as SS Master, the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, invited applications from the eligible candidates.
The educational qualifications prescribed were as under :-  "1.
SS Master (269) : (i) BA Education from Govt. College of Education, Kurukshetra, with any two of the following subjects in addition to English; (1) History (2) Pol.
Science (3) Economics (4) Geography (5) Sociology  or  BA with English and any two of the above mentioned subjects with B.T./B.Ed.
from recognised University.
Or MA in one of the subjects mentioned above with B.T./B.Ed.
from a recognised University."
3.
The advertisement appeared on 2971991.
The petitioner applied for the said post.
He was called for an interview and was selected.
He was given appointment vide order dated 1311992.
In compliance with that order the petitioner joined his duties in Govt. High School, Dadu (Sirsa).
4.
After expiry of more than 3 years of his service in February, 1995, a show-cause notice was served to the petitioner by the respondent as to why his appointment be not cancelled because he did not fulfil the qualifications for the post of SS Master.
The reason given was that petitioner did not pass BA with English as one of the subjects and that he has wrongly been selected as SS Master.
The petitioner submitted his detailed reply stating that the show-cause notice has wrongly been issued.
However, his services were terminated and petitioner was relieved of his duties w.e.f.
1331995.
5.
The petitioner seeks quashing of the show-cause notice and termination order dated 821995 and 10.3.1995 respectively and a direction that respondent should treat the petitioner in his continued employment as such.
6.
In the reply filed, the petition has been contested insisting that the petitioner did not have English as a subject and therefore, he was not qualified to be appointed for the post.
This fact came to the notice of the respondent when CWP No. 4678 of 1994 was filed in the High Court.
When it came in the notice of the respondent, a show-cause notice was given and after considering the reply, petitioner was relieved of his duties.
7.
Attention of the Court was drawn to CWP No. 4678 of 1994 titled as Nand Lal Parik v. The Director of Secondary Education, Haryana.
Relying on the facts of said writ petition and decision, it was urged by the learned State counsel that present writ petition is not maintainable.
8.
It appears that one Nand Lal Parik had filed a writ petition and therein it was brought to the notice of the respondents that the present petitioner did not fulfil the educational qualifications and thus was wrongly appointed.
The said writ petition of Nand Lal Parik was disposed of pointing that the services of the present petitioner have been terminated and therefore writ petition of Nand Lal Parik has become infructuous.
It is obvious from the aforesaid that no question of law was decided.
The petitioner was not a party to that writ petition of Nand Lal Parik.
His rights had not been determined.
Therefore, the decision in the case of Nand Lal Parik in CWP No. 4678 of 1994 will not help the respondent in order to argue that rights of the petitioner have also been shelved.
9.
In that event, on behalf of the State, it was urged that for the post mentioned, it was necessary that a person must have English as a subject in his BA examination.
The petitioner has asserted that he is MA in Geography and has also passed B.Ed.
examination.
This fact has not been controverted before us.
10.
A perusal of the qualifications prescribed clearly shows that it was categorised into three sets of qualifications.
According to the first set of qualifications, a candidate passing BA Education from Govt. College of Education, Kurukshetra with any of the two subjects i.e. History, Pol.
Science, Economics, Geography and Sociology was eligible.
According to the second set of qualifications, a candidate passing BA with English and any of the two subjects amongst History, Pol.
Science, Economics, Geography and Sociology with B.T./B.Ed.
from recognised University was eligible.
The third set of qualifications is independent of the first two.
According to it, if a candidate passes MA in any of the subjects namely History, Pol.
Science, Economics, Geography and Sociology with B.T./B.Ed.
from a recognised University is also eligible.
To state that a person who has passed MA In the subjects referred to above and also holds of degree of B.T./B.Ed.
must have passed English as a subject in B.A would be incorrect.
If that was so, there was no necessity of having the third set of qualifications.
It has nothing to do with the first two sets of qualifications.
Once the petitioner has passed MA in Geography and B.Ed.
from MD University, Rohtak, he must be held to be eligible to the said post.
The show-cause notice and subsequent order terminating the services of the petitioner on the ground that he was not having the prescribed educational qualifications, therefore, are illegal.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow the writ petition and quash the show-cause notice and termination order.
It is directed that the petitioner may be taken back as SS Master from the date he rejoins his duties.