Mohinder Pal, J - The petitioner is working as Circle Superintendent in Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited (`D.H.B.V.N') at Gurgaon.
Earlier to the allocation of services of the petitioner to D.H.B.V.N, he was working in the erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board (`H.S.E.B').
The employees of H.S.E.B were allocated to four entitles ie HPGCL, H.V.P.N.L, D.H.B.V.N and UHBVN on `as is where is' basis.
The employees who were working in the jurisdiction of D.H.B.V.N were allocated to D.H.B.V.N and those who were in the Projects Wing were allocated to Haryana Power Generation Corporation Limited (H.P.G.C.L).
Thereafter, an option was given to all the employees for change of their respective allocations.
The petitioner did not exercise any option for change of his allocation from D.H.B.V.N to HPGCL  2.
The petitioner served legal notice dated November 16, 2005 (Annexure P-6) upon the respondents to consider his case for promotion to the post of Administrative Officer at Thermal Projects, H.P.G.C.L, Panipat/Faridabad, he being the seniormost Circle Superintendent in the D.H.B.V.N.
When his legal notice was not being decided by the respondents, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2909 of 2007, which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on February 26, 2007, by issuing a direction to the competent authority of the respondents to decide the legal notice filed by the petitioner within a period of six months from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order.
3.
Now, vide order dated August 13, 2007 (Annexure P-8), the claim made by the petitioner in the legal notice has been rejected by the competent authority.
Hence this writ petition.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and have gone through the records of the case.
5.
The claim of the petitioner is that three posts of Administrative Officers of common cadre are available in the H.P.G.C.L organization at Panipat and Faridabad and he being seniormost Circle Superintendent in the erstwhile H.S.E.B in the Field Cadre, should be promoted as Administrative Officer against one of the said posts.
As stated above, the employees of erstwhile H.S.E.B were allocated to four entitles ie HPGCL, H.V.P.N.L, D.H.B.V.N and UHBVN Those employees of H.S.E.B, who, at the time of allocation, were working in the jurisdiction of D.H.B.V.N were allocated to D.H.B.V.N and those who were in the Projects Wing of the H.S.E.B were allocated to HPGCL An opportunity was granted to the employees thereafter to opt for change of their allocation.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not exercise any option for change of his allocation from D.H.B.V.N to HPGCL The claim of the petitioner for promotion as Administrative Officer has been declined on the ground that he having been allocated to D.H.B.V.N is working there against the strength of D.H.B.V.N and has no claim whatsoever against any post or vacancy in the H.P.G.C.L, which is a separate legal entity.
We have perused the impugned order (Annexure P-8).
It is mentioned therein that the promotion channel of Circle Superintendent (Field Cadre), the post held by the petitioner, in the erstwhile H.S.E.B was to the post of Administrative Officer (Projects) and all the three posts of Administrative Officer (Projects) now stand allocated to H.P.G.C.L because all the Projects in the State were handled by the said organization.
There is no promotion channel in the D.H.B.V.N and other Power Utilities ie HVPNL and UHBVN from the post of Circle Superintendent (Field Cadre) to the post of Administrative Officer.
6.
The erstwhile H.S.E.B having been merged into four separate Nigams ie HVPNL, H.P.G.C.L, D.H.B.V.N and UHBVN and the petitioner after being allocated to D.H.B.V.N not opting for allocation to any other Nigam, cannot now claim any right against the posts which fall under the jurisdiction of other Nigams.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the authority relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner ie State of Haryana and others v. Shamsher Jang Bahadur and others, 1972 S.L.R.
441 has no applicability.
In that case, the respondent, who had been provisionally promoted as an Assistant in the Punjab Civil Secretariat at Chandigarh, was reverted from the post of Assistant to the post of Clerk on the ground that he failed to qualify the test prescribed for the post of Assistant under certain administrative instructions issued in this regard.
He filed civil suit challenging his reversion, which was decreed in his favour.
The State of Haryana filed appeal against the judgment and decree rendered by the Civil Court, which was dismissed by the lower appellate Court.
Regular Second appeal was also dismissed by this Court and this Court's order was upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court by holding that the Government is not competent to alter the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India by means of administrative instructions.
Such is not the position in this case.
The Government of Haryana (Power Department), vide its Notification SO No. 106/HA-10/98/S/23, 24 and 25 of 1998 dated August 14, 1998, had formulated transfer scheme for the employees who were working in the erstwhile H.S.E.B and as per this scheme the employees of H.S.E.B were allocated to four separate entitles, mentioned above.
This transfer scheme was not challenged by the petitioner.
He chose to remain in D.H.B.V.N as he did not opt for any of the other three Nigams.
If three posts of Administrative Officers occurred in the Project Wings of the State ie HPGCL, which according to the petitioner are not being filled and the Engineers are deputed to look after the charge of Administrative Officers, he cannot claim any right to the same, H.P.G.C.L being a separate legal entity.
For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any ground warranting interference in the impugned order in exercise of writ jurisdiction of this Court.
This petition is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.