N K Sodhi, J - Whether denial of opportunity to a delinquent official to take assistance of a retired government employee in the departmental proceedings and whether inordinate delay on the part of the punishing authority after the receipt of the inquiry report, would vitiate the departmental proceedings, are amongst others the meaningful questions of law which arise for decision in this bunch of four writ petitions No. 8108, 7242, 7789 and 8260 of 1991 which can conveniently be disposed of by one judgment as learned counsel for the parties are agreed that identical questions of law and facts are involved in all these cases.
Since arguments were advanced in Civil Writ Petition 8108 of 1991, facts are being taken from this petition.
2.
What is sought to be challenged in this petition is the show cause notice dated December 12, 1990 issued to the petitioner by the Superintending Engineer, Public Health (RWS) Circle, Patiala requiring him to show cause as to why one of the major penalties as specified in Rule 5 read with Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called "the Rules") be not imposed on him and also to show cause as to why the loss caused by him be not recovered from him.
Petitioner who is working as a Junior Engineer in the Public Works Department, Public Health Branch in the State of Punjab was charge-sheeted on December 8, 1978 by the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle, Patiala who was then the punishing authority under the Rules.
The petitioner was informed that it was proposed to take action against him under Rule 8 of the Rules on the ground set out in the statement of allegations appended to the charge-sheet.
The following charges were levelled against the petitioner :-  1.
Misuse of powers entrusted to the post of Sectional Officer.
2.
Loose control over the works and labour and in Accounts Matter.
3.
Performance of duty in delinquent manner.
4.
Mis-appropriation of Public Funds.
5.
Commitment of financial irregularities with mala fide attention.
6.
Works executed uneconomically.
7.
Untrustworthy.
He was required to state in writing within a period of twenty-one days from the receipt of the charge-sheet as to whether he admitted the truth of all or any of the charges and what explanation or defence, if any, he had to offer.
It appears that the petitioner denied all the charges and the explanation furnished by him was not found satisfactory as a result whereof the punishing authority appointed an inquiry officer under the Rules for holding an inquiry into the charges.
The first date fixed in the inquiry proceedings is stated to be August 23, 1979.
The petitioner as per his representation dated August 30, 1979 in response to the office order No. 163 dated 181979 from the Superintending Engineer (punishing authority) brought to the notice of the latter that the charge-sheet did not have with it the list of documents and the list only mentioned 'connected M-Roll' and 'connected M.B.s' etc.
This, according to the petitioner, was all vague and he demanded from the authorities a complete list of documents in terms of Rule 8(3) of the Rules.
Thereafter, by another representation dated February 29, 1980 (Annexure P3 with the writ petition), the petitioner reiterated his demand for the supply of list of documents and also brought to the notice of the punishing authority that the presenting officer had not attended the proceedings on some of the previous dates as a result of which inquiry could not proceed.
The petitioner also submitted to the punishing authority that he had engaged one Shri R L Gupta, a retired Superintendent from the Public Works Department (B&R Branch) for his assistance and that an intimation to this effect had already been given to the inquiry officer as per his letter dated August 23, 1979.
It was also represented by the petitioner that the inquiry officer vide his letter dated 11.1.1980 accepted the demand of the petitioner for taking the assistance of Shri Gupta but subject to certain conditions laid down in that letter which conditions, according to the petitioner, were not valid.
It was specifically brought to the notice of the punishing authority that the petitioner was entitled as of right to take assistance during the inquiry proceedings except from a legal practitioner.
On receipt of the aforesaid representation (Annexure P3 with the petition), the punishing authority sent a reply as per letter dated March 31, 1980 the relevant portion of which when translated in English reads as under :-  "Sub : Enquiry case of Shri Rajinder Kumar Sood, Sectional Officer (363).
Ref : Your representation dated 29280.
After consideration of your representation by the undersigned, the following parawise reply is given :-  1.
Details relating to documents have already been sent to you vide this office No. 6008 dated 5579 in which specific documents have been mentioned.
2.
Your suggestion in this regard cannot be accepted.
You can request the Enquiry Officer to permit you to examine the record.
3.
Enquiry Officer is being asked about this matter.
4.
Directions are being issued to the Enquiry Officer in this regard.
You can continue with the retired government employee already engaged by you.
Encl : Nil.
Sd/-  Superintending Engineer,  Public Health (RWS) Circle,  Patiala.
A copy of this letter was also endorsed to Shri R N Gupta, Executive Engineer, Public Health who was the then inquiry officer and the endorsement reads as under :-  "A copy of the above is forwarded to Shri R N Gupta Executive Engineer, Public Health (RWS) Division No. 2, Hoshiarpur (Enquiry Officer) with reference to the representation of the official dated 29280 for information and necessary action.
It has been reported by the official in para 3 that the Presenting Officer has remained absent many times on the dates fixed in the enquiry.
The reasons for the same may be explained.
In para No. 4 he be allowed the continuation of Shri R L Gupta, retired government employee already engaged by him because the instructions of government dated 281179 are not applicable in this case.
Sd/-  Superintending Engineer,  Public Health (RWS) Circle,  Patiala.
It will be seen that the punishing authority permitted the petitioner to continue taking assistance from Shri R L Gupta retired government employee whom he had earlier engaged for his assistance before the inquiry officer.
The letter quoted above does not impose any conditions in this regard.
Rather, the inquiry officer was directed as per the endorsement to allow the petitioner to continue taking assistance from Shri R L Gupta since instructions issued on 28111979 were not applicable.
Rule 8(8) of the Rules which permits a government employee to take assistance from any other employee other than a legal practitioner is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "8.
Procedure for imposing penalties :-  (1) to (7) xx xx xx xx  (8) The Government employee may take the assistance of any other Government employee to present the case on his behalf, but may not engage a legal practitioner for the purpose unless the Presenting Officer appointed by the punishing authority is a legal practitioner, or the punishing authority having regard to the circumstances of the case, so permits.
(9) to (23) xx xx xx xx."
It may be observed that the State Government had issued instructions regarding the manner in which the delinquent officials were to be allowed assistance from government employees in terms of the aforesaid Rules.
These instructions were amended on November 28, 1979 and as per the amendment, assistance could be had even from a retired government employee which benefit was not earlier available though there is no specific bar in this regard in the Rule quoted above.
It appears that even though the punishing authority had permitted the petitioner in March, 1980 to take assistance of Shri R L Gupta, the presenting officer before the inquiry officer continued raising objection that he could not assist the petitioner with the result that the inquiry officer did not proceed and the inquiry proceedings lingered on till September, 1981.
The petitioner kept representing to the punishing authority that he should be allowed to continue with the assistance of the retired government employee.
In response to one of his representation dated 28.8.1981 (Annexure P5 with the petition) the punishing authority as per his letter dated 2591981 (Annexure R3 with the written statement) informed him that he (petitioner) had been allowed to continue to take the assistance of a retired government official under the impression that the other conditions contained in the Punjab Government instructions stood fulfilled.
Prior to this, the inquiry officer as per his letter dated September 8, 1981 (Annexure P6 with the petition) had also informed the petitioner that he should not have engaged the retired government employee for defending him as that was not, according to him, permissible under the Rules.
By the same letter, the petitioner was informed that he should appear before the inquiry officer on 1191981 at 10.00 A.M. and he would be allowed the assistance of any Punjab Government employee for defending him.
Shri R L Gupta was a retired employee and since the inquiry officer was not inclined to permit him to assist the petitioner, the petitioner did not appear before the inquiry officer on 1191981, the date fixed in the proceedings.
A look at the inquiry proceedings held on the said date (Annexure P7 with the petition) would show that in reply to a question from the inquiry officer the presenting officer gave a detailed explanation with regard to the charges levelled against the petitioner and stated that all the charges stood proved.
In reply to another question as to whether the presenting officer wanted to say anything else in writing or verbally, the latter stated that the petitioner was wilfully absenting from the inquiry and, therefore, the inquiry officer was requested to take further action in the matter after looking into the record in regard to the charges.
The next date fixed in the inquiry was 30111981 on which date the petitioner appeared but the presenting officer was not present.
In response to a direction issued by the inquiry officer on 15.11.1981, the petitioner filed his written statement of defence along with all the objections and the inquiry proceedings concluded.
Immediately after conclusion of the proceedings the petitioner filed a representation on 16121981 addressed to the punishing authority pointing out the irregularities which according to him, had been committed by the inquiry officer and the reasons why he (petitioner) disassociated himself from the proceedings on 1191981.
3.
The inquiry officer then gave his detailed report dated 891982 holding that the charges levelled against the petitioner stood proved and sent the same to the Superintending Engineer, Public Health (RWS) Circle, Patiala who was then the punishing authority.
The punishing authority surprisingly enough instead of taking action on the report sent the same to the State Government.
It was after a lapse of more than 2 years that the Secretary to Government, Punjab, P.W.D.
(PH Branch) sent a show-cause notice dated 5111984 to the petitioner along with a copy of inquiry report requiring him to show cause as to why one of the major punishments as enumerated in the Rules be not imposed.
He was required to send his reply within 21 days from the date of issue of the notice.
This show-cause notice also stated that the report of the inquiry officer had been carefully examined by the Government and serious charges against the petitioner stood proved and that the office fully agreed with the findings of the inquiry officer.
The petitioner received this show-cause notice through the Sub Divisional Engineer, Anandpur Sahib on 3121984 and immediately sent his reply on 18121984.
The case of the petitioner is that after sending his reply, he met the Secretary to Government, Punjab personally and explained to him the irregularities allegedly committed by the inquiry officer and it is averred by him that the Secretary was satisfied with the explanation furnished by the petitioner though there is nothing on the record in this regard.
It seems that the matter remained pending with the State Government is also with the punishing authority but no action was taken on the show-cause notice.
It was then after a lapse of more than 6 years from the date of issue of the earlier show cause notice and after a gap of more than 8 years from the date of submission of inquiry report that a fresh show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on 12121990 (Annexure P12 with the petition) by the Superintending Engineer, Public Health (RWS) Circle, Patiala again requiring the petitioner to show cause why one of the major penalties be not imposed on him and why loss said to have been caused by him be not recovered.
It is this show cause notice that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
This show cause notice was received by the petitioner on 2231991 and he submitted his reply on 841991.
The motion bench while admitting the writ petition stayed the passing of the final order by the appropriate authority.
The petitioner is, therefore, continuing in service.
4.
Mr. Gopal Mahajan, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner while challenging the validity of the show-cause notice has raised the following contentions :-  (i) That the petitioner was not allowed by the inquiry officer the assistance of Shri R L Gupta, a retired government employee in the departmental proceedings which amounted denial of reasonable opportunity and violated not only the principles of natural justice but also Rule 8(8) of the Rules;  (ii) That the charges levelled against the petitioner were vague and that the inquiry officer did not record any evidence oral or documentary and this violated the mandatory provisions of clauses (3) (4) and (14) of Rule 8 of the Rules;  (iii) That inordinate delay by the punishing authority in issuing show cause notice after submission of inquiry report vitiated the proceedings and, therefore, no action can be taken at this belated stage;  (iv) That the inquiry report did not meet the requirements of Clause (23) of Rule 8 of the Rules;  (v) That the impugned show cause notice has not been issued by a competent authority i.e. the punishing authority who by now when the said notice was issued was admittedly the Chief Engineer and, therefore, the same was liable to be quashed; and  (vi) That the presenting officer who represented the department was senior to the inquiry officer and, therefore, there was a natural bias of the inquiry officer in favour of the department and against the petitioner.
As I am inclined to accept contentions (i) & (iii) let me first deal with them.
Contention (i)  5.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle, Patiala who was then the punishing authority had as per his letter dated 3131980 permitted the petitioner to continue to take the assistance of Shri R L Gupta whom he had earlier engaged to assist him in the departmental proceedings.
The permission granted vide this letter was absolute in terms and was not hinged with any pre-requisites as was later sought to be contended by the punishing authority.
From the endorsement made to the inquiry officer, it is clear that he was directed to continue to allow Shri R L Gupta to assist the petitioner because the instructions dated 28111979, according to the punishing authority, were not applicable in the instant case.
Rule 8(8) quoted above also permitted the petitioner to have the assistance of a government employee and it did not specifically bar the assistance of a retired employee though the Government amended its instructions on 28111979 to enable the delinquent officials to take assistance from retired employees as well.
Assuming that the instructions prior to 28111979 did not permit a retired government employee to assist the delinquent official but the punishing authority in the present case had permitted the petitioner to take assistance from Shri R L Gupta who was a retired employee.
There was no illegality or even material irregularity committed in allowing such an assistance and the punishing authority having allowed such assistance, it was not open to the inquiry officer to have disallowed such assistance on an objection being raised by the presenting officer.
The fact is that Shri R L Gupta was not allowed to assist the petitioner on September 11, 1981 the date on which the inquiry proceedings were held and a letter dated 891981 to this effect had already been written by the inquiry officer to the petitioner.
It is for this reason that the petitioner disassociated himself from the proceedings on September 11, 1981.
Later on, the punishing authority as per its letter dated September 25, 1981 tried to wriggle out from the earlier permission granted to the petitioner on March 30, 1980 on the ground that the same had been given on the assumption that the other conditions contained in the government instructions had been fulfilled.
A bare look at the earlier letter would indicate that the permission was absolute and not hedged by any conditions.
When the permission had been granted to the petitioner on 3131980 without any conditions to take the assistance of Shri R L Gupta, there was hardly any justification for the inquiry officer to address a letter dated August 20, 1981 to the petitioner (Annexure R5 with the written statement) imposing some conditions.
The relevant part of this letter reads as under :-  "You are hereby allowed to take assistance of any Pb.
Government official for defending your case on your behalf.
Your assistant thus deployed shall have to submit the affidavit on judicial paper before the start of enquiry proceedings clarifying the following conditions :-  (i) That he is a Government employee or not more than three years have passed since his retirement from Pb.
Government service.
(ii) He has not more than three enquiry cases in hand for defending on behalf of Punjab Govt. employees.
(iii) He is not a legal practitioner."
It is no one's case that Shri R L Gupta was a legal practitioner.
The inquiry officer then recorded the proceedings on 1191981 and on questions asked from the presenting officer, he got replies from the letter who stated that the charges against the petitioner stood proved.
The proceedings were then adjourned to November 30, 1981 on which date the petitioner filed his written statement of defence in response to the directions given to him by the inquiry officer on 15.11.1981.
Merely because the petitioner prepared the statement of defence in detail and even if one were to assume as was sought to be urged on behalf of the respondents that the statement must have been prepared after consulting Shri R L Gupta it cannot be said that the petitioner was provided a reasonable opportunity of getting the assistance of Shri R L Gupta during the course of inquiry proceedings.
The requirement of the Rule referred to above is that the delinquent official is entitled to take the assistance from another employee to present the case on his behalf before the inquiry officer and such assistance has necessarily to be provided in the course of departmental proceedings.
It is by now well settled that in a disciplinary inquiry the delinquent has a right not only to cross-examine witnesses examined by the presenting officer and lead his own evidence but also has a right where the department is represented by a presenting officer to be defended by another government employee including a retired employee of his choice.
6.
After going through the various representations filed by the petitioner and letters written by the punishing authority and the inquiry officer and keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the present case, I have no hesitation in holding that the petitioner was not allowed to take assistance from Shri R L Gupta, which violated not only the Rules of natural justice but also the mandatory provisions of Rule 8(8) of the Rules and, therefore, the inquiry proceedings, in my opinion, stand vitiated.
Contention (iii)  7.
Coming now to the delay caused by the punishing authority in issuing the impugned show cause notice after it had received the inquiry report, I am inclined to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the inordinate delay of more than 8 years in issuing the impugned show cause notice vitiates the same and no action could be taken on such a belated notice.
The charge-sheet in the instant case was issued on December 8, 1978 and the inquiry officer submitted his report to the then punishing authority- Superintending Engineer on 891982.
Thereafter, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner to show cause why one of the major penalties be not imposed on him.
This notice was issued on November 5, 1984 after a lapse of more than 2 years.
The petitioner filed his reply and allegedly met the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Public Works Department (Public Health Branch).
The averment is that the Secretary after giving a hearing to the petitioner was satisfied with his explanation but there is nothing to this effect on the record.
However, the fact remains that the punishing authority did not take any action thereafter and allowed another period of more than six years to pass.
It is common case of the parties that by this time, the punishing authority of the petitioner and other officials of his level had changed and it was the Chief Engineer who could punish them under the Rules.
However, the impugned show cause notice has been issued by the Superintending Engineer instead of the Chief Engineer.
No explanation much less satisfactory has been furnished for this inordinate delay in issuing the impugned show cause notice.
Learned Assistant Advocate General sought to contend that the Junior Engineers (who are petitioners in this bunch of petitions) had been charge-sheeted along with some Executive Engineers whose appointing authority was the State Government and, therefore, after the receipt of the inquiry reports, the entire case including that of the petitioners was sent to the State Government for appropriate action and the files were sent back to the Chief Engineer who was the punishing authority of the petitioners on October 10, 1990 for taking suitable action.
This, in my opinion, is hardly any reason for delaying the proposed action nor is this any explanation for the delay.
Even the earlier show cause notice was issued on November 5, 1984 after more than 2 years after the receipt of inquiry report.
The petitioner submitted his reply but no action was taken and another period of more than six years was allowed to pass.
Such a long delay leads me to the conclusion that the proceedings against the petitioner must have been dropped.
Final show cause notice to a delinquent official has in public interest and in fairness to the official to be issued within a reasonable time and as early as possible after the receipt of the inquiry report and not that he remains on tenterhooks and the democles' sword kept hanging on him for years together as in the present case.
If there is inordinate delay after the receipt of the report it can well be presumed that the competent authority had dropped the proceedings.
A somewhat similar situation arose in E S Athithyaraman v. The Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Administration) Department, Madras-34, 1971(2) S.L.R.
41.
In this case the petitioner was called upon to show cause against the proposed punishment by a letter dated October 19, 1961 and the petitioner sent his explanation.
Subsequently for a period of more than 3-1/2 years nothing was heard about the matter when on 25th August, 1965, he received a communication to the effect that an inquiry would be conducted against him on September 1, 1965.
Thereafter, he received a letter dated 4th November, 1967 proposing to impose a penalty of reduction in rank.
Learned Judge of the Madras High Court while concluding that the inquiry proceedings after a long delay must be deemed to have been dropped observed in para 6 of the judgment as under :-  "6.
As far as the second contention is concerned, admittedly there has been a delay of more than three and a half years in between 14th December, 1961, when the petitioner sent his explanation to the show cause notice against the proposed punishment and the notice dated 20th August, 1965, of the Assistant Commissioner of Ramanathapuram at Madurai, offering to conduct an inquiry.
There is no explanation whatever in the counter affidavit for this delay of more than three and a half years.
Even after the petitioner appeared for the enquiry on Ist September, 1965, for more than two years, nothing was heard about the matter, when suddenly on 4th November, 1967, the Commissioner sent a notice to the petitioner calling upon him to show cause against the proposed punishment.
Such a long delay in this matter, coupled with certain other circumstances clearly leads to the conclusion that the respondent must be deemed to have dropped the entire proceedings."
In P. Andrews v. District Educational Officer, Bangalore and another, 1968 Lab.
IC 756, the petitioner who was an assistant teacher was called upon on October 17, 1961 by the District Educational Officer to who cause against three charges.
He submitted his explanation on October 24, 1961 and nothing happened thereafter.
On March 26, 1964, the District Educational Officer issued another show cause notice asking him to show cause in respect of two charges which were the same which were incorporated in the earlier  charge-sheet.
It was at this stage that the petitioner approached the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution and the learned Judges constituting the Division Bench while allowing the writ petition observed as under :-  "If after the production of this explanation, the disciplinary proceeding was not continued, what should reasonably follow is that the disciplinary authority was satisfied with the explanation and dropped the charges.
The strength of that inference receives reinforcement from the fact that it was only after a period of 3-1/2 years that the charges were once again revived.
The great and inordinate delay in the revival of those charges and the antecedent discontinuance of the earlier disciplinary proceeding over a long tract of time, can have no other meaning that that the disciplinary authority was satisfied with the explanation offered by the petitioner on October 24, 1961 and that in consequence the proceedings against him were discontinued and abandoned......"  I am in respectful agreement with the views expressed in the aforesaid judgments.
Therefore, in the instant case as well the impugned show cause notice deserves to be quashed on the ground of inordinate delay inasmuch as it must be presumed that the proceedings were dropped when the petitioner had filed his explanation to the earlier show cause notice and nothing was heard thereafter for more than six years.
In view of my decision on the aforesaid two contentions (i) & (iii) it is not necessary to deal with the other submissions of the learned counsel for he petitioner.
For the reasons recorded above the writ petitions are allowed and the impugned show cause notices quashed.
The petitioners shall have their costs which are assessed at Rs. 500/- in each case.