GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioners, who possess the qualifications of Diploma in Physical Education (DPEd) and Degrees of Bachelor of Physical Education (BPEd) and Master of Physical Education (M.P.Ed) are eligible for appointment as Physical Training Instructor (PTI) under the Haryana State Education School Cadre (Group `C') Rules, 1998 (for short, `the 1998 Rules') and the decision of the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (for short, `the Commission') not to entertain their candidature is legally unsustainable are the questions which arise for determination in these petitions.
2.
The petitioners possess the qualifications of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed In response to advertisement No. 7 of 2003 issued by the Commission, they applied for recruitment as PTIs.
for which the essential qualifications were :  "(i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board; (ii) Certificate in Physical Education conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department; (iii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard" The Commission rejected the applications of the petitioners on the ground that they do not possess one of the essential qualifications specified in the advertisement, i.e., C.P.Ed  3.
Dharmender Singh and 16 others filed C.W.P.
No. 19739 of 2003 questioning the decision of the Commission.
The same was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on 18122003 by directing the Commission to decide their representation.
In compliance of the Court's order, the Commission reconsidered the issue, but reiterated its decision that the petitioners were not eligible to be considered for recruitment as PTIs.
This is clearly borne out from memo No. 1/8/2004/18/229 dated 522004 (marked as Annexure P.6 in C.W.P.
No. 4538 of 2004 - Dharmender Singh and 13 others v. State of Haryana and others) sent to their advocate.
The same reads as under :  "From The Secretary Haryana Staff Selection Commission, Chandigarh To Shri Pritam Singh Saini, Advocate, Punjab & Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
Memo No. 1/8/2004/18/229 dated Chandigarh the 5204.
Sub : C.W.P.
No. 19739 of 2003 - Dharmender Singh and 16 others and State of Haryana and another.
Reference on the subject noted above.
2.
In compliance of the order dated 18122003 passed by the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh in C.W.P.
No. 19739 of 2003 - Dharmender Singh and 16 others v. State of Haryana and another, the representation dated 1012004 of the petitioners have been considered by the Commission.
In this regard, it is pointed out that the essential-advertised qualification for the post of PTI has been prescribed in the advertisement No. 7/2003, Cat.
No. 3 published on 18102003 as per Haryana State Education School Cadre Group C Service Rules, 1998 are as under : (i) Matric from the Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board; (ii) Certificate in Physical Education conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Education Department, Haryana.
(iii) Knowledge of Hindi up to Matric standard FOR EX-SERVICEMEN :- i) Middle Pass ii) Training in Physical Education from a Military school.
All the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 19739 of 2003 possess the degree of BPEd/BPE, which is a higher qualification than the prescribed essential qualification for the post of PTI.
Accordingly, the petitioners do not possess the essential advertised qualification as per rules of 1998 and as such they are ineligible for the post of PTI.
The Hon'ble High Court in its judgment Babita Rani v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 1029 (P&H) : 2002(3) RSJ 199 and in the C.W.P.
No. 14702 of 2002 - Chandesh Paul v. State of Haryana and others vide judgment dated 23102003 has taken the similar view in the matter.
Hence, the claim of the petitioners for the post of PTI is hereby rejected" 4.
The petitioners have generally averred that they are eligible/entitled to be considered for appointment as PTIs.
because the qualifications of BPEd/DPEd/MPEd possessed by them are higher than and are in the line of the prescribed qualification, i.e., C.P.Ed They have relied on the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter No. 34/93/78-5GSI dated 1661979 and the directions contained in memo No. 14/126-85 Estt.
III(2) dated 1081987 and memo No. 15/28-94 Estt.
III(1) dated 181994 sent by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana (respondent No. 2) to the District Education Officers vide which persons possessing higher qualifications were treated eligible for recruitment on various posts including PTIs.
and averred that the decision of the Commission not to entertain their candidature on the ground that they do not possess the essential/advertised qualification of C.P.Ed should be declared illegal and quashed They have further averred that in the past, persons having the qualifications of M.P.Ed, BPEd and DPEd were treated eligible for recruitment as PTIs.
and those selected were appointed against the advertised posts and, therefore, non-consideration of their candidature should be declared discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioners are not eligible to be considered for selection and appointment as PTIs.
because they do not possess the prescribed essential qualification of C.P.Ed and the Commission did not commit any illegality by refusing to entertain their applications.
They have relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in P.M. Latha and another v. State of Kerala and others, 2003(2) SCT 281 (SC) : JT 2003(2) SC 423 and order dated 23102003 passed in C.W.P.
No. 14702 of 2002 - Chandesh Pal v. The Haryana Staff Selection Commission and others and averred that the petitioners cannot be considered for appointment as PTIs.
merely because they possess higher qualifications, i.e., DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed They have further averred that after the coming into force of the 1998 Rules, recruitment to the posts specified therein is to be made from amongst those having the prescribed qualifications and the petitioners, who do not possess the qualification of C.P.Ed, cannot claim eligibility on the basis of administrative instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated 1661979 or the directions contained in memos dated 1081987 and 181994 issued by respondent No. 2.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the decision of the Commission not to entertain the candidature of the petitioners for recruitment as PTIs.
only on the ground that they do not have the prescribed qualification of C.P.Ed should be declared illegal and quashed because the qualification of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed possessed by them are higher than the prescribed qualification and are in the same line.
They further argued that the impugned decision of the Commission is liable to be declared as discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because in the past, candidates having the qualifications of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed, have been selected and appointed as PTIs.
Shri Ravi Verma referred to paragraph 15(VII) of C.W.P.
No. 4538 of 2004 to show that even though, Sarvshri Priti Singh, Jagbir Singh, Jitender, Ramesh Kumar and Ved Parkash did not have the qualification of C.P.Ed, they were not only selected but were also appointed as PTIs.
in different districts and argued that refusal of the Commission to entertain the candidature of the petitioners solely on the ground that they do not possess the qualifications of C.P.Ed is liable to be nullified on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of the doctrine of equality.
In support of their argument, learned counsel for the petitioners relied on order dated 1231998 passed in C.W.P.
No. 13471 of 1995 - Dilbagh Singh and others v. Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board and others and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jyoti KK and others v. Kerala Public Service Commission and others, JT 2002 (Suppl.
1) SC 85.
7.
Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, Senior Deputy Advocate General relied on order dated 23102003 passed in Chandesh Pal's case (supra) and argued that the Commission did not commit any illegality by rejecting the applications of the petitioners because they do not possess one of the prescribed qualifications, i.e., C.P.Ed He emphasised that the curriculum of C.P.Ed is substantially different than the one prescribed for DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed and argued that the petitioners cannot claim consideration for appointment as PTIs.
simply because they possess higher qualifications.
Shri Sehrawat referred to the observations made by the Supreme Court in PM Latha's case (supra) and argued that the Court cannot compel the Commission to consider the candidature of the petitioners despite the fact that they do not possess the prescribed essential qualification of C.P.Ed  9.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
The recruitment to the post of PTI is regulated by the provisions of the 1998 Rules.
Rules 2(b), 7, 9(1)(g) and (n) and Entries 7 and 14 of Appendix `B' of the 1998 Rules which have bearing on the decision of these petitions read as under :  "Rules 2(b), 7, 9(1)(g) and (n)  2.
Definitions : In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) xx xx xx (b) direct recruitment means an appointment made otherwise than by promotion from within the Service or by transfer of an official already in the Service of the Government of India or any State Government.
7.
Qualifications : No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service, unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in Column 4 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of persons appointed other than by direct recruitment : Provided that in the case of direct recruitment the qualifications regarding experience shall be relaxable to the extent of 50% at the discretion of Commission or any other recruiting authority in case sufficient number of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, Ex-servicemen and Physically Handicapped categories possessing the requisite experience, are not available to fill up the vacancies reserved for them, after recording reasons for so doing in writing.
9.
Method of recruitment.
- (1) Recruitment in the Service shall be made, - (a) to (f) xx xx xx (g) in the case of Demonstrator in Physical Education (PT Master), - (i) 50% by promotion from amongst PTIs; and  (ii) 50% by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the Service of any State Government or the Government of India; (h) to (m) xx xx xx (n) in the case of Physical Training Instructor (PTI),- (i) by direct recruitment; or (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the Service of any State Government or the Government of India; Entries 7 and 14 of Appendix `B' Sr. No.
Designation Post Academic qualifications and experience,, if any,, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
1 2 3 4 7.
Demonstrator in Physical Education (PT Master) (i) B.A./B.Sc with DPEd degree from a recognised University (i) DPEd from a recognised University.
OR (ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard 10+2 from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by Haryana School Education Board with BPEd from a recognised University.
(iii) 3 years experience on the post of PTI.
(ii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard xx xx xx 14.
Physical Training Instructor, or (PTI) (i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board (i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board; (ii) Certificate in Physical Education conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department; (ii) Certificate in Physical Education conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department (iii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard (iii) Knowledge of Hindi up to Matric Standard" A reading of the rules and the relevant entries of Appendix `B' reproduced above shows that while the post of PT Master is required to be filled 50% by promotion from amongst PTIs.
and 50% by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation, recruitment to the post of PTI can be made either by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation.
For appointment to the post of PT Master by direct recruitment, a candidate must possess degree in Arts or Science with DPEd from a recognised University or 10+2 from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by Haryana School Education Board with degree of DPEd awarded by a recognised University and knowledge of Hindi up to Matric standard For appointment by promotion, a PTI must possess the qualification of DPEd from a recognised University and must have knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard with three years experience on the post of PTI For appointment as PTI, a candidate should have passed Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification awarded by Haryana School Education Board with Certificate in Physical Education (C.P.Ed) conducted by Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by Haryana Education Department and must have knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard It is, thus, clear that a person can be appointed as PTI with the qualification of C.P.Ed, but a PTI cannot be promoted as PT Master unless he acquired the qualification of DPEd To put it differently, the rule-making authority has recognised DPEd as a qualification higher than C.P.Ed and a PTI must possess that qualification before he can be considered for promotion to the post of PT Master.
10.
In the backdrop of the above, we shall now consider whether the petitioners, who do not possess the qualification of C.P.Ed but possess the higher qualifications, i.e., DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed, are eligible to be considered for selection for appointment as PTIs.
Theoretically, the argument of the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General that a person, who does not possess the prescribed qualification(s) is not entitled to be appointed as PTI and the Court cannot ordain the Commission or other recruiting authority to entertain the application of such person sounds attractive and ostensibly finds support from the ratio of PM Latha's case (supra) and the observations made by the Division Bench of this Court in Chandesh Pal's case (supra), but having minutely examined the entire matter with reference to the scheme and courses prescribed for C.P.Ed on the one hand and DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed on the other hand and the fact that persons possessing qualifications which are recognised by Haryana Education Department as equivalent to C.P.Ed are eligible for recruitment as PTI but the concerned authority has not undertaken exercise for determination of such equivalence, we have not felt persuaded to agree with him.
Rather, we are convinced that the decision of the Commissioner not to entertain the candidature of the petitioners who possess higher qualifications in the same line is vitiated by arbitrariness and is violative of their fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
11.
A perusal of the syllabus of C.P.Ed/DPEd /M.P.Ed conducted by Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, of which copies were made available by the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General and Shri Jagbir Malik, counsel representing the petitioners is C.W.P.
No. 5525 of 2004, shows that the scheme and courses for C.P.Ed consist of the following :  "Part-I Theory Part-II Skill and Prowess Part-III Teaching & Officiating in games and sports.
The details of the three parts are as under :  "PART-I THEORY Paper-I History and Principles of Physical Education; Paper-II Psychology with special reference to Physical Education;  Paper-III Organisation, Administration and Methods of Physical Education;  Paper-IV Elementary Anatomy, Physiology, Health Education and Yoga; Paper-V Officiating and coaching in games and sports; PART-II Skill & Prowess INTERNAL EVALUATION Group-I Performance and technique of fundamentals of 4 games selecting two games from each Part-I and Part-II Part-I Badminton, Basket Ball, Cricket, Football, Handball, Hockey, Kabadi, Kho-Kho, Volley ball, Yoga and Table Tennis.
Part-II Boxing, Gymnastics, Judo, Swimming, Wrestling, Wt.
Lifting and Cycling Group-II Performance and Technique of 3 events, i.e., One jump, One Throw and One track event.
(20 marks for performance and 10 for technique etc) Group-III Mass P.T.
Marching, Folk dance, Yogic exercises and Lazium/Tipri/Dumbell (Internal evaluation) Group-IV Project - Flag Hoisting, Morning Prayer, National anthem, Marking of Play grounds, Score sheets.
PART-III PRACTICALS (TEACHING,, COACHING AND OFFICIATING OF GAMES & SPORTS ACTIVITIES) (i) Athletics : one event out of three,, i.e. (ii) Games : 2 games one out of Part-I & Part-II Part-I Games : Badminton, Basket Ball, Cricket, Foot Ball, Hand Ball, Hockey, Kabbadi, Kho-kho, Volley Ball, Yoga and Table Tennis.
Part-II Boxing, Gymnastic, Judo, Swimming, Weight Lifting, Wrestling, Cycling, 40 x 2 = 80 marks Part-III Gymnastic Lesson Part-IV Action song/Motion story Group-II Project (Internal Marking) (i) Preparation of Note Book of lesson plan in Athletics, Games & Gymnastics Action Song/Motion Story (ii) Teaching Practice of 20 supervised lessons - 5 in each of Athletics, Gymnastics,, Games, Action Song/Motion Story" The course of instructions for Diploma in Physical Education consists of the following parts :  "Part-I Theory :  Externally evaluated Part-II Practicals :  External and Internal evaluation : Internal Assessment : The details of these parts are as under :  "Part-I Theory Paper-I History & Principles of Physical Education & Sports; Paper-II Psychology & Sociology with reference to Physical Education & Sports; Paper-III Anatomy, Physiology and Kinestology; Paper-IV Sports Management Paper-V Techniques of Officiating and Coaching; Paper-VI Health Education, Yoga and Recreation; PART-II Practicals (A) External and Internal Evaluation 1.
Officiating and coaching of athletic  2.
Officiating and coaching of game 3.
Gymnastic & indigenous to activities (a) Athletics (both for men and women) (i) Track events : Sprints, middle, long distance and relay races.
(ii) Field events : Jumps and throws.
(b) Games : Hockey, Football, Basket-ball, Hand-ball, Wrestling (Judo for Women), Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, Weight-Lifting, Volley-ball Boxing (Table-Tennis for women).
(c) Gymnastic and Indigenous activities : + Mass PT, Exercise Tables, drill and marching, yogic exercises, lazium and dumbbell.
(B) Internal Assessment Internal assessment will be evaluated internally by the committee consisting of Principal of the College as Convener of the Committee, head of the department and activity incharge as its members.
Assessment marks will be sent to the Controller of Examinations in the month of March every year.
Internal assessment will be based on the following criterion :  (i) Project Work (organisation of competitions and college athletic meet).
(ii) Performance on various fundamentals skills of games.
(iii) Performance on various fundamentals skills of athletic events.
(iv) Assessment of organisation of educational tour and picnic budgeting of sports material.
Note : While making the assessment on the basis of above mentioned criterion, the regularity, discipline & punctuality etc of the students will also be taken into consideration."
The Ordinance, scheme and courses of reading for M.P.Ed (Part-I and Part-II) consist of seven papers each, the details of which are given below :  "M.P.Ed Part-I (Previous) Name of Papers Paper-I History and Principles of Physical Education Paper-II Kinestology Paper-III Anatomy and Physiology Paper-IV Mathods, Organisation and Administration of Physical Education Paper-V Techniques of Officiating and Coaching Paper-VI (i) Health Education  Theory  Practical OR (ii) Yoga Theory Practical OR (iii) Recreation Theory Practical Paper-VII (i) Teaching of Gymnastic Lesson (Practical) (ii) Teaching and Coaching of Athletic Lesson (Practical) (iii) Teaching and Coaching of Game Lesson M.P.Ed Part-II (Final) : Paper-I Sports, Psychology Paper-II Tests, Measurement and Evaluation of Physical Education Paper-III Research, Methodology in Physical Education Paper-IV Sports Medicine Paper-V Scientific Principles of Sports Training Paper-VI (i) Supervision in Physical Education or (ii) Sports Sociology or (iii) Dissertation Paper-VII (i) Class Room Theory Lesson (Practical) (ii) Athletic Lesson (Practical) (a) Advance Teaching and Coaching of Athletic (b) Demonstration (iii) Game Lesson (Practical) (a) Advance Teaching and Coaching of Game (b) Officiating of Game other than Teaching and Coaching Game."
12.
Shri Jagbir Malik also furnished the scheme of BPEd (One Year Degree Course) conducted by Rajeev Gandhi College, Bhopal, Department of Physical Education.
The same consists of the following two broad sections :  "SECTION 1 : PRINCIPLES OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION 1.
Meaning, Objectives and aim of Physical Education : a.
Meaning of the Terms - Physical Culture, Physical Training, Physical Education, Drill, Sports, Games, Gymnastic and Athletics.
b Objectives and Aim of Physical Education c Physical Education and Education d Relationship of Physical Education to Health Education and Recreation.
e. Philosophy of Physical Education.
2.
Scientific Foundations of Physical Education : I Biological : a Growth and Development.
b Effect of Heredity and Environment.
c Difference in males and females.
d Body-types.
e. Principles of use, disuse and overuse.
f. Principles of exercises - normal lead, crest, load and overload g. Chronological, Physiological and Anatomical ages.
h. Practical Suggestions from Biology.
II.
Psychological : a.
The Psychological - Physical Unity of the Human Organism.
b Reflex action, conditioned reflex etc c Laws of learning - their application to situations on play grounds.
d Transfer of training and its importance in learning Physical Skills.
e. Theories of Play.
f. Practical suggestions from Psychology.
III.
Sociological : a.
Social nature and learning of man.
b Traditions and their influence on behaviour patterns (Social inheritance.)
c Social values and development of different trails and ideas.
d Influence of the group on the individual and vice-versa.
e Competition and Cooperation.
f. Social recognition.
g. Physical Education as Socializing Agency.
IV.
The Physical Education Profession a Leadership and its importance.
b Qualifications and qualities of a Physical Education Teacher facilities for training of Teachers-Leaders in Physical Education with particular reference to India.
c Contribution of Physical Education Teachers to General Education.
d Future development of the Profession either of the profession.
SECTION 2 : HISTORY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION 1.
A brief history of Physical Education in India from ancient to modern period Pre-Vedic period, Epic period, Hindu period, Muslim period, British period 2.
Physical Education in Ancient Greece - Homeric age, period of Greek Civilization and city states, comparative study of Spartan and Athenian Education.
The origin and development of ancient Olympic Games.
3.
Physical Education in Ancient Rome, Education and Physical Education among the Romans.
The Circus, Gladitorial contests etc Decline of Roman Civilization.
4.
Physical Education in Germany, Sweeden and Denmark.
5.
Physical Education Great Britain.
a.
The Growth and development of sports b The Play ground and the Recreation Movement, Physical Recreation, Youth Clubs, Play Field Association c The growth and development of School Physical Education.
6.
Physical Education in USA a.
The pay (play ?)
traditions of the immigrants in the colonical period b The National Period and the growth of academics.
c Growth and development of teacher training institutions.
d Trends Towards Recreation Movement.
7.
Physical Education in USSR Survey of present practices in regard to the promotion of Physical Education and Sports.
8.
Physical Education and Sports in Japan and China.
9.
Modern Olympics.
10.
Yoga in Modern Civilization a Contribution of Base-dow, Salzmah, Gussmuths Jahn, Spiess, Napotegall, Ling etc b The Turnverene.
11.
Survey of Physical Education in Modern India.
a Growth and development of activities of India origin.
b Status of Physical Education and Sports in Educational Institutions.
The integrated Schemes of National Crops (Corps ?).
c The YMCA and its contribution.
d Teacher Training Institutions in Physical Education.
e. Physical Education Associations.
f. Federation of the All India Seminar on Physical Education by the Principles of Physical Education Institutions.
g. Recommendations of the University Education on Physical Education.
h Recommendations of the Secondary Education Commission on Physical Education.
i Recommendations of the All India Seminar of State.
j. National Plan of Physical Education and Recreation.
k. National Physical Efficiency Drive.
l. Central Advisory Board of Physical Education and Recreation.
m. Sports organisation - District, State, National and International.
n. The Indian Olympic Association and other Sports Associations Federations.
o.
All India Councils of Sports.
p. National Institute of Sports."
A reading of the above reproduced scheme and courses shows that while C.P.Ed is awarded to the students who have studied the basics of Physical Education (Theory and Practical), DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed are awarded to the students who not only study the basics of Physical Education which form part of C.P.Ed course, but also undertake a more analytical and detailed study of the subjects (Theory as well as Practical) in the same line.
The C.P.Ed course consists of the following theory papers : (i) History and Principles of Physical Education; (ii) Psychology with special reference to Physical Education; (iii) Organisation, Administration and methods of Physical Education; (iv) Elementary Anatomy, Physiology, Health Education and Yoga; and (v) Officating and Coaching in Games and Sports.
In addition to theory papers, a candidate is required to clear Skill and Prowess and practicals (Teaching, Coaching and Officiating of Games and Sports activities).
For obtaining the qualification of DPEd, a candidate has to successfully pass the following theory papers : (i) History and Principles of Physical Education and Sports; (ii) Psychology and Sociology with reference to Physical Education and Sports; (iii) Anatomy, Physiology and Kinestology; (iv) Sports Management; (v) Techniques of Officiating and Coaching; (vi) Health Education, Yoga and Recreation.
These are also part of theory papers of BPEd and M.P.Ed courses in addition to other appers.
Likewise, for DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed, the candidates are required to successfully pass the practicals and training in different games and sports.
They are also subjected to external and internal evaluation.
It is, thus, clear that all the subjects/papers and practicals/training, which form part of C.P.Ed course are integral part of the courses of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed and no candidate can be awarded diploma/degree in Physical Education without clearing theory as well as practical examinations and training.
To put it differently, DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed are in the line of the qualification of C.P.Ed Therefore, a candidate, who has obtained the qualification of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed will be deemed to have studied the subjects which form part of the course of C.P.Ed This is the precise reason why respondent No. 2 had issued memos dated 1081997 and 1.8.1998 for consideration of the candidature of those possessing higher qualifications of DPEd and BPEd for appointment as PTIs.
and candidates possessing higher qualifications were appointed as PTIs.
13.
There is no dispute between the parties that the qualifications of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed are higher than C.P.Ed This is also evidenced from the fact that in terms of Rule 7 read with Rule 9(1)(g) and Entry 7 of Appendix `B' of the 1998 Rules, a person holding the post of PTI can be considered for promotion to the post of PT Master only after he has obtained the qualification of DPEd  14.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that the decision of the Commission not to entertain the candidature of the petitioners despite the fact that they possess higher qualifications in the same line is arbitrary and legally unsustainable and the same has resulted in violation of the fundamental right to equality guaranteed to the petitioners under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
15.
The question whether a candidate possessing higher qualification in the line of the prescribed qualification is eligible to be considered for appointment on the advertised post is no longer res integra and has to be answered in favour of the petitioners in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jyoti KK v. Kerala Public Service Commission and others (supra).
The facts of that case were that Kerala Public Service Commission had invited applications for the posts of Sub-Engineers (Electrical) in Kerala State Electricity Board The essential qualifications notified by the Commission included Diploma in Electrical Engineering of a recognised institution after three-years course of study.
The appellants, who were degree holders, applied for recruitment against the advertised posts.
The Commission rejected their applications on the ground that they do not possess the advertised qualifications.
Before the High Court, it was argued on behalf of the Commission that the appellants do not possess the advertised qualifications and, therefore, they were not eligible to be considered The High Court upheld the contention of the Commission and dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellants.
The Supreme Court reversed the order of the High Court and held :  "If a person has acquired higher qualifications in the same faculty, such qualification can certainly be stated to presuppose the acquisition of the lower qualifications prescribed for the post.
In this case, it may not be necessary to seek far.
Under the relevant rules, for the post of assistant engineer, degree in electrical engineering of Kerala University or other equivalent qualification recognised or equivalent thereto has been prescribed For a higher post, when a direct recruitment has to be held, the qualification that has to be obtained, obviously gives an indication that such qualification is definitely higher qualification than what is prescribed for the lower post, namely, the post of sub-engineer.
In that view of the matter the qualification of degree in electrical engineering presupposes the acquisition of the lower qualification of diploma in that subject prescribed for the post, shall be considered to be sufficient for that post.
In the event the government is of the view of that only diploma holders should have applied to the post of sub- engineers but not all those who possess higher qualifications, either this rule should have excluded in respect of candidates who possess higher qualifications or the position should have been made clear that degree holder shall not be eligible to apply for such post.
When that position is not clear but on the other hand rules do not disqualify per se the holders of higher qualifications in the same faculty, it becomes clear that the rule could be understood in an appropriate manner as stated above.
In that view of the matter, the order of the High Court cannot be sustained" 16.
In Dilbagh Singh's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (GS Singhvi, J) was a member, considered the question whether persons possessing the qualification of BPEd were eligible to be considered for selection as PTIs.
In that case, the petitioners had challenged the selection and appointment of the private respondents as PTIs.
on the ground that they do not possess the essential qualifications advertised by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board The qualifications specified in the advertisement issued by the Board were as under :  i) Matric pass (Full subjects).
ii) Certificate in Physical Education conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department; OR i) Matric pass (Full subjects).
ii) Certificate of having received training in Physical Education under the National Discipline Scheme.
Note : Knowledge of Hindi up to Matric standard in either case.
OR (For Ex. servicemen).
i) Middle pass.
ii) Training in Physical Education from a Military School.
17.
The petitioners averred that the private respondents, who had obtained the qualification of BPEd, were not eligible to be considered for appointment as PTIs.
and their selection had resulted in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents, it was averred that candidates having higher qualifications in the same line are always eligible for appointment as PTIs.
This Court accepted the plea of the official respondents and dismissed the writ petition vide order dated 1231998, the relevant portion of which is reproduced below :  "The issue which remains to be examined is whether the selection and appointments of the private respondents are liable to be quashed on the ground that they do no possess the essential qualifications.
The petitioners have pleaded in paragraph 8 of the writ petition that the respondents have passed BPEd which is not the same as prescribed qualification i.e. C.P.Ed and as such, they could not have been considered for selection as PTIs.
To this, the respondent No. 1 has given the following reply in paragraph 6 of the written statement : "6.
That in reply to para 6 of the writ petition it is stated that vide Annexure P.1 minimum prescribed qualifications were advertised for the posts of PTI for Secondary Education Deptt.
of Haryana Government.
The candidates possessing higher qualifications directly in the same line were also considered eligible and allowed participation in the selection.
It is settled position of law that higher qualifications in the same line is not a bar but the candidates with higher qualifications in the same line are always eligible provided, of course.
In view of this position, the candidates with the degrees of DPEd, BPEd were also allowed participation in the selection along with the candidates having certificate in the Physical Education, i.e., C.P.Ed Perusal of record shows that in the criterion dated 6.7.1994 framed for the purpose of the qualification C.P.Ed, DPEd and BPEd have been treated eligible and candidates possessing these have been considered The candidates possessing higher qualification of DPEd and BPEd were made entitled to slightly more marks as compared to the C.P.Ed candidates.
The candidates with M.P.Ed and post-graduation were given special consideration by way of allotting special marks in the criterion.
Copy of criterion is at Annexure R.1/2.
In view of this position, the averments of the petitioners to the contrary are wrong and denied" Learned Assistant Advocate General has, on the basis of the record made available to her, stated that the respondents Ajay Sheoran and Harinder Singh have passed BPEd and respondents Sukhbir Singh and Rakesh Kumar have passed M.P.Ed Therefore, so far as respondents Sukhbir Singh and Rakesh Kumar are concerned, there cannot be any contest on the issue of their eligibility with regard to respondents Ajay Sheoran and Harinder Singh Doon also, we do not find any illegality in the action of the Board to consider their cases because they possess qualifications higher than the essential qualifications specified in the advertisement.
It is well settled principle of law that consideration of the candidature of the persons possessing higher qualifications does not vitiate the selection made by the recruiting agency."
18.
The afore-mentioned two decisions fully support the claim of the petitioners that they are eligible to be considered for appointment as PTIs.
because they possess higher qualifications which are in the line of prescribed qualifications of C.P.Ed  19.
The matter deserves to be considered from another angle.
Before coming into force of the 1998 Rules, the State Government/Education Department had not only treated the candidates possessing higher qualifications of DPEd/BPEd eligible for recruitment as PTI, but has also defended their selection.
It, however, appears that after promulgation of the 1998 Rules, the State Government/competent authority did not undertake exercise for deciding the issue of equivalence and whether or not the candidates having higher qualifications of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed should be treated eligible for recruitment as PTI and that is why, the Commission refused to entertain the candidature of the petitioners.
20.
In our opinion, the decision of the Commission suffers from a fundamental fallacy, inasmuch as, it has failed to recognise the fact that the petitioners possess the qualifications higher than the prescribed qualification which are in the same line.
The essential qualifications prescribed for the post of PTI under the 1998 Rules are similar to those prescribed under the Punjab Education Service, Class-III, School Cadre, Rules, 1955 (for short, `the 1955 Rules'), as applicable to the State of Haryana.
When the State Government decided that persons possessing higher qualifications should be considered for recruitment to the posts encadred under the 1955 Rules including the PTIs., it must have done so after taking cognizance of the fact that higher qualifications were in the line of the essential qualifications prescribed under the 1955 Rules.
Likewise, respondent No. 2 will be deemed to be cognizant of the essential qualifications prescribed under the 1955 Rules, when he issued direction for consideration of the candidature of those having the qualification of BPEd/DPEd for recruitment as PTIs.
The filing of these petitions could have been avoided if after coming into force of the 1998 Rules, the concerned authority had applied mind on this issue and taken appropriate decision keeping in view the instructions contained in letter dated 1661979 and the directions contained in memos dated 1081987 and 181994 issued by respondent No. 2 and the fact that in the past, the department had treated those having the qualifications of DPEd/BPEd/M.P.Ed eligible for appointment as PTIs.
21.
Before concluding, we consider it proper to deal with the decisions, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents.
In PM Latha's case (supra), the Supreme Court dealt with the question whether the candidates one can claim consideration and answered the same in the negative.
The facts of that case were that as per the advertisement issued by Kerala Public Service Commission for recruitment to the posts of teachers in Government Primary Schools, candidates with qualifications of Trained Teacher's Certificate only were entitled to compete for selection.
Notwithstanding this, the Commission considered the candidates possessing the qualification of BEd A learned Single Judge of Kerala High Court allowed the petition filed by the appellants and held that candidates with BEd qualification could not have been included in the select list because they were not eligible in terms of the advertisement.
Accordingly, he quashed the select list and directed that the candidates with BEd qualification should not be considered for appointment.
The Division Bench upheld the decision of the Single Judge, but upset the direction given by him for consideration of the candidature of only those, who possessed Trained Teacher Certificate to the exclusion of those having the qualification of BEd The Supreme Court referred to the provisions contained in Kerala Education Act, 1958 and Kerala Education Rules and held as under :-  "There is no force in the argument that BEd qualification is a higher qualification than TTC and, therefore, the BEd candidates should be held to be eligible to compete for the post.
On behalf of the appellants it is pointed out that Trained Teacher's Certificate is given to teachers specially trained to teach small children in primary classes whereas for BEd degree the training imported is to teach students of classes above primary.
BEd degree-holders, therefore, cannot necessarily be held to be holding qualification suitable for appointment as teachers in primary schools.
Whether for a particular post, the source of recruitment should be from the candidates with TTC qualification or BEd qualification is a matter of recruitment policy.
There is sufficient logic and justification in the State prescribing qualification for post of primary teachers as only TTC and not BEd Whether BEd qualification can also be prescribed for primary teachers is a question to be considered by the authorities concerned but the Court cannot consider BEd candidates for the present vacancies advertised, as eligible."
In Chandesh Pal's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court considered the question whether the petitioners, who had obtained the degree of M.P.Ed, were eligible to be appointed as Demonstrator in Physical Education.
The Division Bench referred to column No. 3 of Appendix `B' of the 1998 Rules and by placing reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in PM Latha's case (supra) held that the petitioners were not entitled to be considered for appointment as Demonstrator in Physical Education.
22.
In our view, the judgments of the Supreme Court in PM Latha's case (supra) and of the Division Bench of this Court in Chandesh Pal's case (supra) do not have any bearing on the questions raised before us in the context of the qualifications specified in column No. 3 of Entry 14 of Appendix `B' of the 1998 Rules which clearly postulate consideration of the persons possessing qualifications equivalent to C.P.Ed In those cases, the Supreme Court and this Court did not consider the questions relating to equivalence of qualifications and whether the candidates possessing higher qualifications in the same line are entitled to be considered for appointment on the advertised posts.
In PM Latha's case (supra), it was neither pleaded nor any material was placed before the Court to show that the degree of BEd possessed by the private respondents was in the line of the advertised/essential qualifications.
Similarly, in Chandesh Pal's case (supra), it was neither pleaded nor any evidence was produced before the Court to show that the qualification of the petitioners was in the line of the essential qualifications.
Moreover, in Chandesh Pal's case (supra), attention of the Division Bench does not appear to have been drawn to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jyoti KK v. Kerala Public Service Commission (supra) and the scheme and courses of examination leading to the award of Diploma in Physical Education and Degrees in BPEd/M.P.Ed Therefore, the judgments in PM Latha's case (supra) and Chandesh Pal's case (supra) cannot be made basis for denying relief to the petitioners.
23.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed The decision of the Commission not to entertain the candidature of the petitioners for the posts of PTI is declared illegal and quashed It shall declare the result of selection within next 15 days and the selected candidates be appointed strictly in the order of merit.
If some eligible candidates were left out from being considered, then the Commission shall interview them and declare a composite result of the entire selection.
Thereafter, the competent authority shall make appointment strictly in the order of merit.
The Bench Secretary is directed to give attested copy of this order to the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana for being forwarded to the competent authority for necessary action.
C.W.P.
No. 5525 of 2004  Order pronounced The writ petition is allowed For reasons, see separate detailed order of today passed in C.W.P.
No. 3743 of 2004 - Multan and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2004(4) SCT 45 (P&H).
Petitions allowed