Hemant Gupta J - The petitioner, a Manager with respondent-Bank, was charge- sheeted on 06.03.2004 (Annexure P/6-1).
The charges include of reckless financing without due care/precautions in sanctioning, disbursing the loans and without taking Bank's interest into consideration.
The petitioner was alleged to have grossly violated Bank's norms, Rules and Regulations and concealed the facts from the higher authorities.
The petitioner was also charged for not following the credit discipline as he did not conduct pre- sanction surveys and post-sanction inspections and also did not ensure end use of funds by verifying assests created out of Bank's finance.
Another charge against the petitioner was that he has allowed overdrawing in number of accounts beyond the sanctioning powers vested in him and did not obtain prior permission from the competent authority nor got his action confirmed subsequently and that he did not get proper documents in number of cases, as per the Bank's guidelines.
Thus, the charge against the petitioner, was that he has abused his official position and powers and has exposed the Bank's funds to the grave financial risk.
Another charge against the petitioner was that he has failed to charge interest in the borrowal accounts of the firms and thus, he has failed to discharge his duties with utmost honesty, devotion and diligence.
There were also allegations against the petitioner that he has failed to submit monthly statements of irregular accounts to the controlling Officer, utilised the fixed deposit receipts lying with the Banks as collateral security in one account to another account to cover the overdrawings allowed in the said account; that he accommodated the named parties by prejudicing the third parties cheques much beyond the powers sanctioned and vested in him.
It was, thus, alleged that the petitioner has acted otherwise than in the best of his judgment in performance of duties and acted in the manner prejudicial to the interest of the Bank and exposed the Bank's funds to great financial risk.
The detailed statement of allegations are contained in Annexure P/6-1.
2.
On the basis of the charge-sheet, after giving an opportunity to participate in such inquiry and to cross-examine the witnesses and to lead evidence, the Inquiry Officer gave his report on 31122004 (Annexure P12).
The Disciplinary Authority found that except charge No. 2, all other charges stand proved.
Another show cause notice was given to the petitioner proposing punishment in respect of each charge.
The Disciplinary Authority, after considering all the documents passed order of punishment on 25.07.2005 (Annexure P17) in respect of each charge proved, including the one for compulsory retirement for charge Nos. 3, 4 and 6 and reduction in the basic pay of the petitioner in respect of charge Nos. 5 and 7.
The petitioner was also ordered to be reverted in respect of charge No. 1.
The appeal against the said order of punishment was dismissed on 09112005 (Annexure P19).
Thus, the challenge in the present writ petition is to the orders of punishment (Annexures P17 and P19).
3.
The only argument, which was raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner with vehemence was that the documents on the basis of which the respondent-Bank has sought to prove the charges against the petitioner were not supplied to the petitioner and therefore, the enquiry conducted is not fair and reasonable and violates the principles of natural justice and, therefore, the entire proceedings initiated against him fall to the ground as the fair opportunity to contest the enquiry proceedings was not provided to him.
4.
The said argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
In reply, it has been pointed out that the petitioner has raised a grievance in respect of non-supply of investigation report, but the said investigation report was not the subject matter of the charge-sheet and there is no reference of the same in the charge-sheet.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner has always been adopting delaying tactics despite being accommodated all times.
The petitioner was given seven days' time to submit his reply to the show cause notice issued on 16072003.
On 14082003, the petitioner requested for inspection of the Bank's records.
The petitioner was supplied all the documents by the Presenting Officer in the proceedings held on 25052004 and on being asked to admit the documents, the petitioner asked for time to inspect the documents.
The Inquiry Officer allowed the inspection for 04.06.2004 and the defence assistant and the petitioner duly confirmed on 11062006 that they have inspected all the documents.
A copy of the letter confirming the inspection of the documents is appended as Annexure R.1 with the reply.
On 15062004, more documents were submitted by the Presenting Officer.
On 16062004, the petitioner made request for supply of numerous documents and the Inquiry Officer vide order dated 16062004 allowed the production of the documents, which were relevant.
It is also pointed out that in terms of the UCO Bank Officer Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 as amended, the petitioner was to give the relevancy of the documents and the examination of the witnesses so that the delinquent does not go on roving enquiry and a fishing expedition.
It is pointed out that the petitioner has inspected the documents and copies of the relevant documents as demanded have also been supplied Still further, whether in fact, prejudice has been caused to the employee or not on account of the alleged non-supply of the documents has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case.
5.
A perusal of the Inquiry Report shows that in respect of production and consideration of the documents, it was observed to the following effect :-  "To substantiate the allegations, the PO submitted 686 documents with serial No. 1-26 on 25052004 and 80 documents with serial No. 1-9, totaling 766, alongwith the following management witnesses to be examined by him: 1) DN Kalra, Inspecting Officer, Regional Office, Chandigarh.
2) Nawal Kishore Sharma, Asstt.
Manager B/O R.B.
Amritsar.
3) KK Kaushik, Sr.
Manager B/O R.B.
Amritsar.
Subsequent to the inspection of the document from the original in the branch, by the defence and admission of the same by them, the EO allowed the admission of the documents in the proceeding on 16062004.
The documents were exhibited and marked as EXM-1 to EXM-35 with further sub- division and respective numbers in the seriatim of the list submitted by the PO.
The PO who submitted list of three management witnesses for examination, examined only two witnesses and their statements were recorded as MW1 and MW2 on various dates and closed his evidence on 13092004.
Mr. SC Makkar who had been named and engaged as Defence Assistant by the CSOE to defend him in the charge-sheet was allowed to join the proceedings on 06.05.2004 subsequent to submission of his consent letter of the date, but on 20072004, the CSOE informed the EO and submitted that letter in this regard that Mr. SC Makkar is unable to continue as his defence Assistant and he would be defending his charge-sheet himself in the proceedings of enquiry.
The CSOE was given opportunity to arrange another Defence Assistant, but he could not engage or arrange another one and defended himself in the rest of the proceedings in the enquiry.
The relevancy of the documents requisitioned by CSOE was discussed in the proceedings of 16062004 and the documents allowed by the EO to CSOE, were made available to the CSOE.
The CSOE did not submit any list of defence witness to be examined by him, however, the documents submitted by him in proceedings of 18082004 were allowed for admission by the EO, subsequent to the raising of No Objection by the PO for admission of the same in the enquiry.
The exhibition and marking of the document was done as EXD-1 and EXD-18 with further divisions & sub- divisions in the seriatim of the documents submitted by the CSOE.
The CSOE did not offer any recording of the oral submission or submission of any written submission and the examination of the CSOE also could not take place in the absence of any Defence Assistant but to the satisfaction of the provision of 6(17) of the UCO Bank Officers Employees Discipline & Appeal Regulation 1976, the EO asked a few questions to the CSOE and recorded the reply during his closed of his evidence while concluding the proceedings on 14092004.
The parties were asked to submit their respective written briefs within 15 days from the concluding proceedings of 14092004 by the PO and further 15 days from the date of receipt by the CSOE.
The briefs of the PO were recorded on 25102004 that too with much persuasion and reminder and were received almost one month late of the stipulated period.
The reply to the briefs of the Presenting Officer by the CSOE had been received on 30112004 that too with telephonic reminder, much persuasion and written reminders at the residential address of the CSOE.
I have perused the entire oral as well as documentary evidences as relied upon or advanced by both the parties including their contentions as contained in their respective briefs, and my findings on the allegations are as follows :- The allegations pertain to the irregularities said to be committed during the tenure of the CSOE as Manager of the Ram Bag, Amritsar have been in the charge-sheet in paragraphs of 16 allegations with further sub-divisions of paragraph/allegation 13 into 1, 2, 3 and 4 and the findings are being presented para-wise.
The CSOE in his written briefs has taken up some points which are of general nature and I would like to take up first before touching upon the regular allegations.
The observation/findings of such points are as follows :- 1) As contended by the CSOE that during the submission of the reply to the charge-sheet he was not provided proper opportunity to inspect the relevant records, it is the purview of the Disciplinary Authority to provide opportunity in the initial stage and I have nothing to comment on this, however, I do not agree to the contention of the CSOE when he says that he was not provided opportunity to inspect the documents from the originals and the vital documents were not provided to him, it is totally baseless and after- thought as CSOE was provided each and every opportunity of inspecting the documents and it was subsequent to his inspection and admission of the documents that the admission of the same was allowed by the Enquiry Officer on 16062004.
All the documents allowed by the Enquiry Officer, as requisitioned by the CSOE were supplied to him and the same were admitted in the enquiry on 18082004."
Apart from the said narration in the Inquiry Report, Annexure R1 is the acknowledgement of inspection of the documents by Shri SC Makkar, the Defence Assistant and by the petitioner on 11062004 to the effect that they have inspected all the documents.
Therefore, on facts, it is not made out that the documents were not made available for inspection to the petitioner or the Defence Assistant.
6.
Even otherwise, the petitioner has not given any details of the documents, which have not been supplied to him.
If a particular document, which has been taken into consideration but has not been supplied or permitted to be inspected, only then the subsequent question of prejudice on account of non- supply/inspection of the documents would arise.
Since there is no allegation of the petitioner in respect of a specific document, therefore, on the basis of bald allegations that the relevant documents have not been supplied will not be sufficient to hold that the inquiry stands vitiated.
7.
Still further, there is no allegation that on account of lack of supply of documents or inspection, the petitioner has suffered any prejudice.
The enquiry proceedings cannot be said to be vitiated on account of any procedural irregularity unless the petitioner is able to prove that he has suffered prejudice on account of such irregularity.
In the present case, firstly, the petitioner has not been able to substantiate his allegations of non-supply of documents and secondly, there is no allegation of having suffered any prejudice by the petitioner.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently also argued that the punishment imposed is highly disproportionate to the misconduct said to be proved against the petitioner.
Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kailash Nath Gupta v. Enquiry Officer (RK Rai), Allahabad Bank and others, 2003(2) SCT 1018 : (2003)9 SCC 480.
However, the said judgment provides little assistance to the petitioner.
It has been held therein that power of interference in exercise of judicial review, with the quantum of punishment is extremely limited.
It is only when relevant factors are not taken note of which have some bearing on the quantum of punishment, the Court can direct reconsideration in an appropriate case to shorten litigation and indicate the punishment to be awarded.
However, the present is not a case, wherein the relevant factors have not been taken note of by the Disciplinary Authority.
9.
In Disciplinary Authority-cum-Regional Manager, Central bank of India v. Nikunja Bihari Patnaik, 1996(2) SCT 760 : (1996)9 SCC 69, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the argument that no loss has resulted from the acts of alleged misconduct of the Scale-I Officer of the Bank.
It was held that in some instances, the funds of the Bank have been placed in jeopardy; the advances have become sticky and irrecoverable.
It was further found that it is not a single act; it is a course of action spreading over a sufficiently long period and involving a large number of transactions.
In the case of a Bank for that matter in the case of any other organisation - very officer/employee is supposed to act within the limits of his authority.
If each officer/employee is allowed to act beyond his authority, the discipline of the organisation/bank will disappear; the functioning of the Bank would become chaotic and unmanageable.
Each officer of the Bank cannot be allowed to carve out his own little empire wherein he dispenses favours and larges.
No organisation, more particularly, a Bank can function properly and effectively if its officers and employees do not observe the prescribed norms and discipline.
10.
The aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court are aptly applicable to the facts of the present case.
Various allegations levelled against the petitioner have been proved by the Inquiry Officer and have been affirmed by the Disciplinary Authority.
The procedure of conduct of inquiry has not been violated.
Since, the petitioner was holding the responsible post of trust as a Manager of the Bank, which the petitioner has not been able to maintain, therefore, the punishment awarded cannot be said to be excessive or disproportionate, which may warrant interference by this Court in exercise of its power of judicial review.
Hence, the present writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.