Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - Questioning the second show cause notice dated January 9th, 2007 issued by the managing director of the first respondent,qua disciplinary authority, the petitioner took out this writ petition alleging that though by representation dated January 11th, 2007 he requested the authority to supply to him a copy of the inquiry report, no step was taken for that purpose.
2.
Considering the case of the petitioner that without supplying a copy of the inquiry report and giving opportunity of making representation against findings of the inquiry officer the disciplinary authority issued the second show cause notice proposing punishment.
I entertained the writ petition, moved ex parte, by order dated January 18th, 2007 and made an interim order restraining the respondents from taking any further step in the proceedings.
In response to notice of the case, the first respondent has entered appearance.
Its counsel raises the question of maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that first respondent being not a state or other authority within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner concedes that nothing has been stated in the writ petition to show that the first respondent is either an authority or a state within the meaning of Art12 of the Constitution.
He further concedes that nothing has been stated either to say that the disciplinary authority committed breach of any statutory provision by issuing the second show-cause notice in question.
Facing with the question of maintainability of the writ petition, he prays for adjournment for the purpose of filing a supplementary affidavit giving the particulars to show that the first respondent is a state within the meaning of art.12 of the Constitution.
4.
In my view, there is no scope to grant leave to the petitioner to file a supplementary affidavit, since the question involved has to be decided on the basis of the facts already stated in the writ petition.
The fundamental requirement for maintaining the writ petition was making the relevant averments that the first respondent is amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
Once the petitioner ignored compliance with that requirement, I do not think he is entitled to incorporate the fundamental facts in the writ petition by filing a supplementary affidavit.
A plea of maintainability when goes to the root of jurisdiction, has to be decided on the basis of the averments made in the writ petition itself.
5.
Besides, after going through the bye-laws of the first respondent, which is a co-operative society registered under the West Bengal Cooperative Societies Act, 1983.
I am satisfied that it is nothing but a mere co-operative society.
It is not controlled by the State government in any manner whatsoever, nor are service conditions of its employees governed by any statutory rules.
Service conditions of its employees are governed by settlement reached by and between the first respondent and the employees association.
The settlement was reached in terms of provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
6.
In support of his contention that writ is not maintainable against a co-operative society, even when it takes action against its employee, counsel for the first respondent relies on the decisions in Arjed Ali Gazi v. State of West Bengal, 1990(2) CLJ 456 (Cal.
)], Supriyo Basu v. West Bengal Housing Board & Ors, (2005)6 SCC 289, Bikash Talukdar v. State of West Bengal & Ors, (2005) 11 SCC 593, Shivaji v. Shetkari Sahakari SK Ltd & Anr., (2005) 13 SCC 414, and PG Foils Ltd and Anr. v. National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation & Ors, 2006(2) CHN 308.
I wanted him to consider the apex Court decision in UP State Co-operative Land Development Bank Ltd v. Chandra Bhan Dubey and Ors, (1999)1 SCC 741.
7.
I agree with him that the first respondent, being just nothing but a simple co-operative society, is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
In this connection reference can also be made to the apex Court decision in Bhadra Shahakari S.K.
Niyamita v. Chitradurga Mazdoor Sangh and Ors, (2006)8 SCC 552.
In UP State Co-operative Land Development Bank's case it was held that a co-operative society controlled by the State government would be amenable to writ jurisdiction.
Here the affairs of the society are in no way controlled by the state government.
Service conditions of its employees are governed by the terms and conditions of settlement that is titled as the WB State Co-operative Agriculture and Rural Development Bank Limited, Service Regulations.
Hence remedy of the petitioner, if any, is either before the forum established under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or before the ordinary civil Court.
8.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.