Pratap Kumar Ray, J - Heard the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
2.
Assailing the selection process and thereby selection of respondent No. 10, this writ application has been filed by the writ petitioner, a candidate for the post of Gram Panchayat Karmee for the concerned Gram Panchayat.
The respective parties have filed their oppositions, replies as well as Supplementary Affidavits by referring the factual matrix and the documents of the selection process.
Score sheets also have been produced as well as examination papers of the written test.
The post of Gram Panchayat Karmee is required to be filled up following the rules called The West Bengal Panchayat (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of Gram Panchayat Karmee) Rules, 1995, issued in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 224 of the West Bengal Panchayat, Act, 1973 by the Governor which was duly notified in the Gazette, namely the Calcutta Gazette published Extraordinary dated November 13, 1995.
3.
Under Rule 7 of the said Rules, it is provided that a Block Level Selection Committee should be constituted consisting of seven members which are as follows.
"(1) Sabhapati of the Panchayat Samiti comprising the Gram Panchayat for which appointment of Gram Panchayat Karmee is under consideration......Chairman;  (2) Sahakari Sabhapati of the Panchayat Samiti referred to in clause (1)........Member;  (3) Block Development Officer of the Block comprising the Gram Panchayat for which appointment of Gram Panchayat Karmee is under consideration ......Member;  (4) Joint Block Development Officer of the Block referred to in clause (3) .....Member;  (5) Extension Officer for Panchayats of the Block referred to in clause (3) ..... Member-Secretary;  (6) Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat referred to in clause (1)......Member; and (7) Upa-Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat referred to in clause (1) .....Member"  4.
It is an admitted position that due to vacancy in the post of joint Block Development Officer of the concerned Block, there was no representative of that category which is saved by third proviso of the said Rule 7 which speaks that due to vacancy in the office or offices of one or more members of the Committee at the tine of convening or holding the meeting, the resolution of the meeting shall not be challenged on that ground.
From the said Rule 7 of Procedure for recruitment, it appears from sub-Rule (4) thereof that the Selection Committee was obliged to prepare a panel of three candidates on considering the marks as allotted in the written test and in the oral interview.
The first proviso of sub-Rule (4) of Rule 7 has been satisfied as in the instant case marks in the written test was 85 and marks in the oral test was 15.
But the second proviso of the said sub-Rule (4) has been placed for consideration by this Court by the learned Advocate for the writ petitioner by contending, inter alia , that the same was not followed by the members of the Selection Committee Under the second proviso of the said sub- rule (4) it was incumbent upon the Committee holding the oral interview to allot marks under different heads by considering the physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour of a candidate.
The writ petitioner also has challenged the marks as allotted in the written test by contending inter alia , that in the written test 50 marks was allotted for the test of taking note of dictation in Bengali language and out of 50 the selectee, the respondent No. 1, was allotted 48 marks whereas the writ petitioner who had taken note of the dictation properly only got 35 marks.
This variation of 13 marks in the dictation test has no justification as per the submission of the learned Advocate for the petitioner.
The Court directed production of the relevant answer scripts.
The respondent authority produced the same.
On bare perusal of the said answer scripts, xerox copy of which is kept with the record, it appears that the writ petitioner and the respondent No. 1 both followed the dictation properly save and except a little mistake here and there.
But for allotment of the marks there is a big variation; one got 48 marks and another got 36 marks.
Out of 50, the writ petitioner was allotted only 36 marks and the respondent No. 1 was allotted 48 marks.
On perusal of this, this Court is not finding any justification thereof and the learned Advocate appearing for the State respondent also failed to justify the issue and the respondent No. 10 also on perusal of the marks of the examination papers also could not answer the issue save and except the answer that it was done by the Selection Committee.
Score sheets of the oral test have been produced by the State respondent by filing an affidavit annexing all the relevant documents namely, individual score sheets of the respective members of the Committee, final score sheets thereof.
On adding the total marks of written and oral test.
From the oral test sheet it appears that the Selection Committee divided the 15 marks in oral test under two heads : one for appearance and personality by allotting full marks 2 thereof and another for oral allotting 13 full marks.
Under the statutory provision as specified in the second proviso of sub-Rule (4) of Rule 7, statutes mandated that the Selection Committee, shall, for oral interview, taken into consideration, inter alia , physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour of a candidate.
In view of statutory provision thereof with particular stipulation of the different consequences for consideration, namely, physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour, it to be assumed that the legislature intended that the Selection Committee should allot different marks in respect of different headings for consideration as stipulated, namely, physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour of a candidate.
From the oral score sheets it appears that it was not done and contrary to that "appearance and personality heading" and another heading created with the word "oral".
Under the physical fitness consideration as stipulated in the statute it could be assessed under the heading "appearance" even if it to be considered the issue in that angle, but alertness and sense of discipline and general demeanour cannot be capsuled under the heading "appearance and personality".
Besides the aforesaid four headings as was directed to be considered by the Statute allotting oral marks for the oral interview, there was no other heads stipulated for oral examination by question and answer; but the Selection Committee allotted 13 marks for oral without any categorisation thereof.
The writ petitioner has categorically submitted in the writ application that out of political consideration the selection was made as some of the members were in the Selection Committee who were in the post of Sabhapati, Panchayat Samity, Saho Sabhapati of Panchayat Samity, Prodhan of Gram Panchayat and Upo-Prodhan of Gram Panchayat respectively who naturally belonged to a particular political group and as such political consideration weighed much in selecting the candidate for the post in question.
It has been further submitted on perusing the score sheets as produced by filing Supplementary Affidavit by the writ petitioner that out of those members in the Selection Committee, Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan allotted zero marks for personality and appearance as well as under the heading of oral marks, to the writ petitioner.
It is submitted that under any circumstances there could not be any possibility of allotment of zero marks by the Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan in terms of the statutory provision of second proviso of sub- Rule (4) of Rule 7 of the procedure for recruitment.
On a careful scrutiny of the score sheets it appears before this Court that the Selection Committee committed gross illegality so far as categorisation of different heading of marks under the oral interview column by not introducing separate marks for physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour.
It further appears that there was no scope of clubbing together all the aforesaid heads in one column as those are not interlinked with each other.
Physical fitness relates to the health condition of the candidate and it has no nexus with the alertness and sense of discipline as those are the outcome of the mental phenomenon derived from motor sensory nerves of the body in question which identifies the alertness of a candidate.
When the physical fitness relates to general health, alertness indicates the inclination of its mental state of affairs which also indicates the answer of sense of discipline.
But from the score sheet it appears that all those factors never were considered and even no marks were allotted under different leads as per statute.
Furthermore it appears that under any circumstances a candidate could not be allotted zero marks for physical fitness, alertness, sense of discipline and general demeanour.
Here lies the main issue.
It appears from the records that Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan allotted zero marks to the petitioner whereas allotted full total 15 marks to the petitioner whereas allotted full total 15 marks of the respondent No. 10.
Such type of consideration of the matter speaks a volume.
The petitioner has categorically contended in the writ application and in the Supplementary Affidavit that out of political consideration, the Selection Committee motivated themselves with a fixed mind to select the man of their choice and accordingly marks for the written examination and the oral interview was patterned so that respondent No. 10 could be placed as a first candidate of the panel.
It appears that Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan became over jealous by allotting marks to the petitioner who is a person of food health and there was no indication that he was physically handicapped or unfit and thereby had no ground to secure marks in terms of the heads as specified under the second proviso of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 7.
From this score sheet it further appears that another candidate also has been allotted zero marks by the said Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan.
Total five candidates appeared before the Selection Committee for the oral interview.
From the cause title it appears that one Sri Pratap Singh, respondent No. 9, a member of the Selection Committee, was holding the post of Upo-Prodhan of the Gram Panchayat concerned and another Sri Aijul Haque, a member of the Selection Committee was holding the post of Prodhan of the concerned Gram Panchayat and both allotted the identical marks in the oral interview as it appears from the respective score sheets.
It appears that respondent No. 10, Sri Thakur Ch.
Sarkar, was allotted 15 marks out of total 15.
It proves the connivance of the said Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan to favour someone and to resist another one relating to the appointment to the post in question.
The score sheets signed by the Prodhan and Upo-Prodhan allotting marks for oral interview to the candidates appear from pages 14 and 15 to the Affidavit in opposition of the respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
5.
Having regard to the pattern of the category of different heads in the oral interview as already discussed, the same is not supporting categorisation as fixed by the statute in terms of the second proviso of sub-Rule (4) of Rule 7.
Hence the Selection Committee made a gross illegality for holding the interview by setting up heading as per their choice.
On deciding 15 marks under two heads; one for appearance and personality by allotting 2 marks and another under the heading "For Oral" allotting 13 marks.
The action of the Selection Committee accordingly de hors of the statutory provision, that is, the second proviso of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 7.
It is settled law that statutory body created under the statute is required to act in terms of the statute.
They cannot go beyond the statute, cannot act otherwise and cannot act as per their own choice.
Reliance may be placed to the judgment passed in the case Maniruddin Bepari v. The Chairman, Municipal Commissioner Decca, reported in 40 CWN 17; K Ramdas Shenoy v. Chief Officers Town Municipal Council UDIPI, reported in 1974(2) SCC 506; SR Tiwari v. District Board Agra now Antaram Zilla Parishad, Agra through its Secretary, reported in AIR 1964 SC 1680; Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mill Private Limited reported in 2003(2) SCC 111.
Paragraph 195 at page 334 of the book The Construction of Statute by Earl.
T Crawford, 1940 publication is relevant for decision which reads as such.
"195.
Express Mention and Implied Exclusion (Expressio, Unius Est Exclusio Alterius.
As a general rule, in the interpretation of statutes, the mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another thing.
It therefore logically follows that if a statute enumerates the things upon it is to operate, everything else must necessarily, and by implication, be excluded from its operation and effect.
For instance, if the statute in question enumerates the matters over which a Court has jurisdiction, no other matters may be included.
Similarly, where a statute forbids the performance of certain things, only those things expressly mentioned are forbidden.
So also, if the statute directs that certain acts shall be done in a specified manner, or by certain person, their performance in any other manner than that specified, or by any other person than one of those named, is impliedly prohibited.
This maxim or general principle of construction, as must be apparent, is based upon the probable intention of the legislature.
Hence, where that intention clearly reveals that the lawmakers did not mean that the express mention of one thing should operate to exclude all others, of course, the principle is not applicable.
Consequently, where the statutory language is plain and the meaning clear, there can be no implied exclusion.
In other words, the principle is to be used only as a means of ascertaining the legislative intent where it is doubtful, and not as a means of defeating the apparent intent of the legislature.
Nor does the principle of construction have any application where the statute merely affirms existing law.
Neither does it apply to matters omitted by oversight, or where it clearly appears that something was expressly mentioned for another reason or merely because of caution.
Nor does this maxim or principle of construction have any application to the title of an act."
As will appear in the discussion relative to the ejusdem generis rule, the rule that the expression of one thing is the exclusion of another, is also in direct contradiction to the habits of speech of most persons.
For this reason, the rule must be applied with extreme caution.
Perhaps it can be safely applied only where the legislative enactment appears to be carefully drawn in the light of existing rules of construction.
Perhaps the rule's proper status lis indicated in State ex rel Curtis v. De Crops (134 Ohio St. 295, 16 N.E.
(2) 459) :  "This maxim properly applies only when in the natural association of ideas in the mind of the reader that which is expressed is so set over by way of strong contrast to that which is omitted that the contrast enforces the affirmative inference that which is omitted must be intended to have opposite and contrary treatment .....The maxim of interpretation is often helpful but its wise application varies with the circumstances."
6.
The Selection Committee herein was formed under the Rule framed in terms of the statute West Bengal Panchayat Act, 1973.
Thus the Selection Committee in terms of the Rule 7 of the said Rules was bound to follow the second proviso to Sub-Rule (4) of the Rule 7 by considering the different factors as stipulated thereof for allotting the oral interview marks to the candidates which admittedly has not been done as it appears from the mark sheets as produced and annexed in the affidavit of the State respondents.
Hence there is a total breach of the said provision.
Furthermore the bias of the members of the Selection Committee has been proved from their action itself by allotment of the marks in favour of respondent No. 10 by two of the members, namely, Aijul Haque and Pratap Singh who are holding the post of Prodhan and Upo-prodhan respectively of the concerned Gram Panchayat, a political personality as the post of Prodhan and Upoprodhan is being occupied by the persons after being elected in the Panchayat on contesting the election under the symbol of any political party.
7.
Considering the aforesaid facts and having regard to the manner in which the selection process was followed due to the breach of recruitment rule itself, this Court has no other alternative but to quash the entire selection process and also the selection panel as prepared and the appointment thereof as made in favour of respondent No. 10.
The appointment of respondent No. 10 accordingly stands quashed and set aside.
8.
Leave is granted to the writ petitioner to add the prayer of Quo Warranto.
Such prayer of Quo Warranto is made in view of the findings above directing respondent No. 10 to vacate the post forthwith.
9.
The Committee is directed to process the selection process de novo by holding the written test and oral interview.
10.
The written test and oral interview was earlier held accordingly stands set aside and quashed.
11.
Let there be a de novo proceeding of the entire thing and that to be done by allowing the candidates who earlier appeared.
12.
It has been submitted by the learned Advocate appearing for the State respondent that in the meantime there has been a change of the different members who would constitute the Selection Committee in terms of rule thereof.
13.
Let new Selection Committee be prepared and selection be completed within six months from this date.
The writ application accordingly is allowed.
14.
It is recorded that although the members of the Selection Committee were made parties in this proceeding, but except the members who are holding the office in the State, the other members of the Selection Committee did not contest the matter.
15.
Selection Committee will follow the second proviso of sub- rule (4) of Rule 7 of the West Bengal Panchayat (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of Gram Panchayat Karmee), Rules 1995.
For oral interview they will allot separate marks under separate heads as specified in the statute.
16.
Let the original score sheets be handed over to the learned Advocate for the State since Xerox copies of the same are already in the affidavits filed by the State respondent.
Prayer made by respondent No. 10 for stay of operation of this order is refused.
Let Xerox plain copy of the operative portion of the order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the learned Advocates appearing for the parties on the usual undertaking.
Appeal allowed.