P Jyothimani, J - The writ petition is filed for the issue of writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the records connected with the Memo R. No. 6406/DA/96/SI dated 20496 of the 2nd respondent and Letter No. 25215/L- 2/2006-4 dated 17.10.2006 of the 1st respondent and quash the same and direct the respondents to promote the petitioner as Joint Director of Health Services on par with the petitioner's juniors and fix the seniority and pay arrears accordingly.
2.
The charge memo has been issued against the petitioner under rule 17(b) of the Tamil Nadu Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules and the petitioner has submitted his explanation.
Thereafter, there was an enquiry report submitted and after the enquiry report, the petitioner has also submitted a further explanation on 1231998.
Ultimately, the respondent has issued GO (D) No 1235, Health and Family Welfare (D2) Department dated 3082001 imposing a punishment of storage of increment for six months without cumulative effect.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that the said order was communicated to the petitioner on 622002.
The petitioner has made an appeal to the 1st respondent on 342002.
It was in GO (D) No 890, Health and Family Welfare Department dated 1962003 the Government being the review authority having found that the permission sought for the peruse certain records has been rejected by the enquiry officer and therefore the defect has crept in the order passed by the disciplinary authority in imposing punishment, in review of the same on 1962003 while disposing of the review application, the Government has directed de novo proceedings to be initiated.
"6.
The Government have examined the case carefully with connected records taking into account the views of Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission.
The Government have accepted the views of the Commission.
The Government accordingly direct that the orders issued in the Government order second read above imposing the punishment of stoppage of increment without cumulative effect be set aside.
The Government also direct the Director of Public Health and Preventive Medicine to restart the disciplinary proceedings from the stage where the defect had crept in (i.e.) from the stage of according permission to the delinquent officer for perusal of records."
It was after the said order passed in the said GO nothing has transpired.
The Government has specifically passed GO (313) No. 44, Health and Family Welfare Department (L2) Department dated 11.5.2006 while framing a panel for the post of Joint Director, Public Health and Preventive Medicine, in which the name of the petitioner was not included.
It was under those circumstances, the petitioner has made a representation to the Government on 2562006.
Since the said representation was not considered, the petitioner had to move this Court by W.P. No. 21338/2006.
This Court while disposing of the said Writ Petition has directed the respondents to consider the representation of the petitioner for the purpose of promotion.
However, no further order has been passed.
It is the contention of the learned Senior Counsel that in spite of the fact that as early as on 1962003 the earlier order of the original authority imposing the order of punishment of stoppage of increment for six months without cumulative effect was set aside and directed a de novo enquiry, as on date there is no further proceedings for the past three years.
Even assuring that the punishment given by the lower authority was accepted, the period of punishment is over the petitioner would have been eligible for next promotion.
However, citing an incident that the disciplinary proceeding is pending which is based on a direction given in the de novo enquiry, the right of the petitioner is hampered.
The present writ petition is filed challenging the letter of the 1st respondent dated 17.10.2006 under which the first respondent taking into consideration that on the crucial date of promotion, namely, 1522006 the petitioner's name has not been included in the panel for the post of Joint Director, Public Health and Preventive Medicine for the year 2005-2006 since there is pendency of charge- sheet under Rule 17(b) of the Tamil Nadu Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules and therefore, according to the learned Senior Counsel this is only intended to prevent the petitioner from getting promotion somehow or other.
4.
On the other hand, the learned Government Advocate would submit that a direction can be given to the respondents to complete the disciplinary proceedings and pass appropriate orders.
5.
It is not even the case of the respondents that except the present disciplinary proceedings on which the de novo enquiry was taken, any other disciplinary proceeding is pending against the petitioner.
In fact, in a similar situation while referring to the relevant rule, namely, Rule 39(d) of the Tamil Nadu State and Subordinate Services Rules which reads as under.
"Where it is necessary to promote an officer against whom an enquiry into allegations of corruption or misconduct is pending the appointing authority may promote him temporarily pending enquiry into the charges against him.
The competent authority shall have discretion to make regular promotion in suitable cases."
A Division Bench consisting of their Lordships Mr. Justice Dharma Rao Elipe and Mr. Justice A Kulasekaran has held that the Government has got an authority to promote an officer against whom an enquiry into allegations of corruption or misconduct is pending.
In the present case, it is not even the case of the petitioner that any criminal case is pending against him.
This Court also passed many orders including the one dated 8.11.2006 in W.P. No. 35993/2006 by following the dictum laid down by the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Chaman Lal Goyal, (1995 (2) SCC 570 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is always open to the appointing authority to give promotion to the concerned persons if they are otherwise qualified and the same cannot be curtailed merely on the ground of disciplinary proceedings, however, held that such promotion can be given subject to the final order that may be passed in the disciplinary proceedings.
6.
I have considered the rival submissions.
7.
On the face of it I am fully satisfied even in 2003 an order of punishment of stoppage of increment for six months without cumulative effect was set aside on the ground that a mistake has crept in the disciplinary proceedings and directed de novo enquiry.
For the past three years, there is no further proceeding against the petitioner.
In such circumstances, the argument advanced by the learned Government Advocate that a direction may be given to the Government to complete the enquiry, is not acceptable.
As held by the Division Bench of this Court, Rule 39(d) of the Tamil Nadu State and Subordinate Services Rules enables the Government to give such promotion if such person is otherwise eligible.
I am of the considered view that merely giving a direction to the Government to pass orders on the disciplinary proceedings is not going to meet the ends of justice.
In view of the same, considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the legal position as elicited above, the writ petition is disposed of and the following order is passed :  "(i) The respondents are directed to proceed with the enquiry directed to be commenced on de novo basis as per the order of the Government dated 1962003 in GO (D) 890 Health and Family Welfare Department, D-2 Department and complete the disciplinary proceedings within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of the order after giving sufficient opportunity to the petitioner.
(ii) In the meantime, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Joint Director of Health Services, on par with the petitioner's juniors and in accordance with the direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 1995 (2) SCC 570 by giving promotion to the petitioner to the said post if he is not otherwise disqualified, however, subject to the final order that may be passed in the disciplinary proceedings.
The said order shall be passed by the respondents within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this order."
No costs.
Consequently, connected MP Nos. 1 and 2 are disposed of.
Order accordingly.