HS Bhalla, J - The appellant lost his bread on 2061978 when his services were terminated by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar.
In order to revive his bread, he knocked the door of the lower Court by filing a suit for declaration by virtue of which, he challenged his dismissal order dated 2061978 passed by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar.
He was non- suited to the lower court and his suit was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 25.8.1982 and he had no other option but to prefer an appeal against this decree and his appeal was allowed by the learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar on 481984 and the judgment and decree passed by lower Court was set aside and the impugned judgment and decree was declared as illegal and against the rules.
2.
Aggrieved against this judgment and decree passed in favour of the respondent, the Punjab State knocked at the door of this Court.
3.
I have heard learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab and with his assistance have gone through the record of the case.
4.
A perusal of the file clearly spells out that the respondent was employed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways.
He was charge-sheeted on 13.7.1977.
He replied to the Charge-sheet and denied the charges and thereafter a regular inquiry was conducted against him.
The inquiry report was attacked by the respondent on number of grounds, which have been recapitulated in the judgment of the learned lower court and they are not required to be reproduced in order to avoid repetition.
5.
It is an admitted case of the Punjab State that Inquiry Officer assumed the role of prosecutor when he conducted cross-examination on the respondent when he stepped into the witness box as his own witness in his defence.
It is settled law that any inquiry into charges against a delinquent official must necessarily be in conformity with rules of fairplay and the Inquiry Officer holding the inquiry cannot take a different role from that of a person who is to adjudicate on the dispute impartially and without any bias.
If he steps into the shoes of a Presenting Officer, then, to my mind, he becomes disqualified and it could no longer be said that the result of the Inquiry is fair.
The Supreme Court in Meenglas Tea Estate v. Its Workmen, (1963-2 Lab LJ 392) held as under:  " The tribunal held that the enquiry was vitiated because it was not held in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
It is contended that this conclusion was erroneous.
But we have no doubt about its correctness.
The enquiry consisted of putting questions to each workman in turn.
No witness was examined in support of the charge before the workman was questioned.
It is an elementary principle that a person who is required to answer a charge must know not only the accusation but also the testimony by which the accusation is supported.
He must be given a fair chance to hero the evidence in support of the charge and to put such relevant questions by way of cross-examination as he desires.
Then he must be given a chance to rebut the evidence led against him.
This is the barest requirement of an enquiry of this character and this requirement must be substantially fulfilled before the result of the enquiry can be accepted.
A departure from this requirement in effect throws the burden upon the person charged to repel the charge without first making it out against him.
In the present case neither was any witness examined nor was any statement made by any witness tendered in evidence.
The enquiry, such as it was, was made by Mr. Marshall or Mr. Nichols who were not only in the position of Judges but also of prosecutors and witnesses.
There was no opportunity to the persons charged to cross-examine them and indeed they drew upon their own knowledge of the incident and instead cross-examined the persons charged.
This was such a travesty of the principles of natural justice that the tribunal was justified in rejecting the findings and asking the company to prove the allegation against each workman de novo before it."
Justice Gajendragadkar in the decision of the Supreme Court in Associated Cement Companies Ltd v. Their Workmen, (1963)2 Lab LJ 396 (SC) said at page 399 thus:  " it is true that domestic enquiries need not be conducted in accordance with the technical requirements of criminal trials, but they must be fairly conducted and in holding them, considerations of fairplay and natural justice must govern the conduct of the enquiry officer."
I would also like to observe that the role of the accused or the witness and of the Judge cannot be played by one and the same person and it is futile to expect when those roles are combined that the Judge can hold the scales of justice even.
I find force in the pleas taken up by the respondent in the written statement filed by him that the inquiry has been conducted in a manner which is against the procedure laid down in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The object of questioning of delinquent servant by the Inquiry Officer is only to give him an opportunity to explain the incriminating circumstances appearing in the evidence adduced against him.
But in the instant case, I find that Inquiry Officer has cross-examined delinquent officer when he stepped into the witness box as his own witness.
This is not permissible under the rules.
The government servant may, if he chooses, examine himself on his side.
If he does not choose to examine himself, there is no question of his examination.
But in that event, he can only be cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.
So the cross-examination of the delinquent respondent by the Inquiry Officer is irregular and that naturally has caused prejudice to his case.
No other point was raised nor any survives for consideration.
In the light of what has been discussed above, I do not find any illegality or impropriety in the judgment and decree dated 481984 passed by learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar.
Consequently, appeal filed by the Punjab State fails and is hereby dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.