Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the challenge is to the award dated 24111981 (Annexure P-8) passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal') in reference No. 353/1978 made by the appropriate Government, published in the Haryana Government Gazette, Part I dated March 30, 1982.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of this petition are that the petitioner was appointed by respondent No. 2 as a Laboratory Assistant with effect from 11.2.1967 on a total remuneration of Rs. 124/- per month.
The petitioner was not entitled to any allowances.
He was confirmed in the said post with effect from 121968 on a total remuneration of Rs. 150/- per month with no allowances.
The petitioner was promoted as Senior Laboratory Assistant with effect from 141972 on a total remuneration of Rs. 265/- per month.
On 11101976, the petitioner was promoted as a Foreman in Carbon Section on temporary basis.
The petitioner was continued to be designated as Foreman till 261978 when his services were terminated vide letter dated 261978.
The petitioner served a demand notice on 2161978 demanding reinstatement with continuation of service and full back wages.
3.
The Government of Haryana referred the dispute to the Tribunal with following terms of reference :-  "Whether the termination of services of Shri Harish Kumar was justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief is he entitled ?"
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the Tribunal formulated the following issues :-  "(1) Whether Shri Harish Kumar is a workman ?
(2) Whether the termination of services of the workman was justified and in order ?
(3) Relief."
Issue No. 1 was treated to be preliminary issue by the Tribunal.
The petitioner examined himself as WW-1 and the Management examined Shri Gurcharan Singh, Secretary as MW-1.
The Tribunal vide award dated 24111981 held that the petitioner is not a workman and, hence rejected the claim of the petitioner.
This award of the Tribunal has been challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Shri Sanjiv Bindra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner raised two-fold submissions.
Firstly, it was submitted that the Management had admitted in the statement of Shri Gurcharan Singh, Secretary (MW-1) that the certified standing orders apply to the petitioner who was a foreman and thus, it was argued by the learned counsel that the Management is estopped from claiming that the petitioner is not a workman.
In support of this proposition, the learned counsel relied upon SA Sarang v. WG Forge & Allied Industries Ltd and others, 1996(1) LLJ 67 and Cricket Club of India and Another v. Baljit Shyam and Another, 1998(1) LLJ 176.
6.
The learned counsel next contended that the nature of duties of the petitioner was that of a workman and those were not supervisory in nature.
He submitted that the documents Exhibit M-1 to Exhibit M-85 relied upon by the Management established that the petitioner was a workman and the findings recorded by the Tribunal to the contrary are perverse and unsustainable.
He refuted the findings recorded by the Tribunal on the basis of documents, detailed as under :-  (a) Documents Exhibits M-1 to M-3 are in the nature of gate passes which could have been filled by the workmen themselves.
(b) Documents Exhibit M-4 to M-16 and M-26 to M-32 relate to recommending of short leaves to the workmen by the petitioner.
(c) Documents Exhibits M-17 to M-25 and M-33 to M-54 are documents whereby the petitioner had detained the workmen for over-time which he could do being Foreman.
(d) Documents Exhibit M-55 to M-59 are short leave passes for an hour or two but the petitioner had no power to sanction leave for a day or two.
(e) Documents Exhibits M-60 to M-66 relate to requisitioning of material from store for small items.
(f) Documents M-67 to M-70 relates to issuing of milk etc. to the workmen.
(g) Documents Exhibit M-71 to M-85 are production charts written by the petitioner which he was duty bound as foreman, this work being clerical in nature.
7.
Shri Dinesh Nagar, learned counsel appearing for the Management countenanced the submissions of the petitioner by submitting that the factual findings recorded by the Tribunal that the petitioner is not a workman cannot be gone into in writ jurisdiction.
He relied on documents Exhibit M-1 to M-85 to submit that the nature of duties of the petitioner was supervisory in nature and, therefore, the petitioner did not fall within the definition of `workman' under Section 2(s) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act') and thus, the reference made to the Tribunal was erroneous and unwarranted.
8.
In reply thereto, counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon decision of the Supreme Court in M/s Trambak Rubber Industries Limited v. Nashik Workers Union and others, 2003(3) SCT 702 (SC) : 2003(4) SLR 769, and submitted that the High Court can interfere if there was patent illegality in the impugned award and where the material evidence, especially the evidence of the witnesses examined was not considered at all and conclusions reached were wholly perverse and do not reasonably follow from the evidence on record.
9.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and in my opinion, the writ petition deserves to succeed.
`Workman' has been defined in Section 2(s) of the Act as under :-  "Workman" means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceedings under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment, or as a consequence of that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person - (i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or (ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a person; or (iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  (iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature."
10.
The Management had produced Shri Gurcharan Singh, Secretary as MW-1.
His statement has been attached as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, the relevant portion whereof is reproduced as under :  ".....It is correct that the certified standing orders apply to the Foreman.
It is not within my knowledge where Harish Kumar has taken any disciplinary action against the workmen.
Shri Harish Kumar had no power to sanction increment to the workers.
He was to recommend the increments for consideration by the Management.
He was foreman in the production department.
Above 50 workmen worked in the shift in the department in which Shri Harish Kumar was Foreman.
I have not brought the attendance register of this department.
It is incorrect that only 15 workers worked in the shift in which Shri Harish was working as Foreman.
Shri Harish Kumar was incharge of the shift.
The duties of the workers were not identical.
It is correct that all those workers and Shri Harish Kumar were a team for giving production in that department.
Shri Harish Kumar was leader of the team and was responsible for the production.
It is correct that in case of the deficiency of production, Shri Harish Kumar could be held responsible.
In case, there was defect or breakdown in the machinery, Shri Harish Kumar was to contact the maintenance department and get the defect removed.
He was responsible for the quality of production.
It is correct that he used to correct any defect arising during the course of production.
There is a separate department for preparation of ink for corbonising and it was not the duty of Sri Harish Kumar.
Shri Harish Kumar might have been preparing printing ink for back printing of the carbon paper earlier than promotion to the post of Foreman.
It was his duty to watch the carbon paper being produced on the machine.
And he used to correct any defect in this production of carbon paper."
11.
The Bombay High Court in SA Sarang's case (supra) held that where an employee is covered by Model Standing Orders which undisputably apply only to workman, the employer is estopped from denying that the employee was not a workman.
The relevant portion of the judgment is extracted as under :-  ".....If an employer continuously and consistently proposes and takes decision against its employee on the footing that he is covered by the Model Standing Orders (thereby implying that the employee is a "workman" within the meaning of the Act); then such employer must be estopped from denying the said fact when a dispute regarding the dismissal of the employee finally lands up before an industrial adjudicator....." This view has been reiterated by the Bombay High Court in a latter decision in Cricket Club of India and another (supra).
12.
The Secretary of the Management while appearing as a witness of the Management had categorically admitted in his evidence as extracted above that the certified standing orders apply to the foreman.
The Tribunal had ignored this aspect of the matter while adjudicating issue No. 1 against the petitioner.
13.
Dealing with the second submission of the counsel for the petitioner, it is to be noted that the Hon'ble Apex Court has laid down that for determining whether an employee is a workman or not, it is the primary and basic duties which constitute the criterion and not the duties which are incidental or secondary.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in Ved Prakash Gupta v. M/s. Delton Cable India (P) Ltd., AIR 1984 SC 914, held in para 12 of the judgment as under :-  "A perusal of the evidence of WW-1 and MW-1 regarding the nature of the duties performed by the appellant shows that the substantial part of the work of the appellant consisted of looking after the security of the factory and its property by deputing the watchmen working under him to work at the factory gate or sending them to watch-towers or around the factory or to accompany visitors to the factory and making entries in the visitors' register as regards the visitors and in the concerned registers as regards materials entering or going out of the premises of the factory.
It must be noted that MW-1 has admitted in his evidence that there is nothing in writing to show what duties are to be carried out by the appellant.
Placed in such a situation the appellant might have been doing other items of work such as signing identity cards of workmen, issuing some small items of stores like torch-cells etc. to his subordinate watchmen, which can be got from the stores even under the signatures of watchman and filling up application forms of other workmen and countersigning them or recommending advances and loans or for promotion of his subordinates.
It must also be remembered that the evidence of both WW-1 and MW-1 shows that the appellant could never appoint or dismiss any workman or order any enquiry against any workman.
In these circumstances we hold that the substantial duty of the appellant was only of a Security Inspector at the gate of the factory premises and that it was neither managerial nor supervisory in nature in the sense in which those terms are understood in industrial law.
In the light of the evidence and the legal position referred to above we are of the opinion that the finding of the Labour Court that the appellant is not a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act is perverse and could not be supported.
On the evidence available on record we hold that the appellant clearly falls within the definition of a workman in Section 2(s) of the Act and that the reference of the dispute under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act is valid in law."
14.
The Supreme Court in Arkal Govind Raj Rao v. Ciba Geigy of India Limited, Bombay, AIR 1985 SC 985, in paras 6, 8 and 10 of the judgments the relevant portions whereof are extracted held as under :-  "6.
Where the employee has multifarious duties and a question is raised whether he is a workman or someone other than a workman the Court must find out what are the primary and basic duties of the person concerned and if he is incidentally asked to do some other work, may not necessarily be in tune with the basic duties these additional duties cannot change the character and status of the person concerned.
In other words, the dominant purpose of employment must be first taken into consideration and the gloss of some additional duties must be rejected while determining the status and character of the person.
8....The definition of the expression workman hereinbefore extracted clearly shows that the person concerned would not cease to be a workman if he performs some supervisory duties but he must be a person who must be engaged in a supervisory capacity.
Even as a Group Leader of Group II, the evidence produced would show that primarily he continued to work and perform the same duties which have been found to be clerical but along with others in the group he also incidentally looked after the work of other members of the group who were only two in number.
It is, therefore, not possible to concur with the inference drawn by the Labour Court contrary to the record that while functioning as Group Leader of Group II, even though appellant was performing his clerical duty the incidental supervisory duties performed by him would make the appellant a person employed in supervisory capacity.
10.
The Labour Court in para 25 of its decision observed that there are numerous documents which positively show that the appellant was performing supervisory and administrative duties.
A number of letters were produced by the employer to show that the appellant was doing some administrative work such as putting up indent for printed stationery which bears the endorsement that the appellant requested his three colleagues Shri Sawant, Shri Khedkar and Shri Pradhan to give their requirements to him.
If the department collects the details from every employee working in the department and one of them undertakes the same, it hardly makes any difference in the status and character of the employee.
There are other letters especially Exs.
16/33 to 16/38 by which the appellant had directed other clerks to take note of certain documents and report them to him.
This cannot be said to be either managerial or supervisory function but in fact clerical in as much as the part of his duty asked other clerks to take such note of certain circulars and return the documents to him because that was part of his duty...." 15.
In the light of the above legal position, I have examined the evidence produced on record.
The petitioner while appearing as WW-1 before the Tribunal deposed that he was performing the following duties :-  "....Namely looking attendance of the workman, to check quoting of carbon paper on the machine and to paste sterco on the rolls of the machine for printing of carbon papers and to prepare ink for carbon papers.
I had no authority at all to suspend any workman or to grant leave or to appoint any workman.
My duty used to be in shifts.
I was a foreman."
16.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the documents Exhibit M-1 to M- 85 were either in the nature of issuing gate passes or recommending for leaves, detention of workmen for overtime, short leave passes for an hour or two, issuing slips requisitioning material from stores for small items, issuing of milk etc. to the workmen and preparation of production charts.
The petitioner was held to be a leader of the team for giving production.
He was foreman only in name but was not performing any supervisory duties.
17.
A perusal of oral as well as documentary evidence referred to in earlier part of the judgment shows that the primary and dominant duties of the petitioner were that of a workman and at times he was to perform certain duties as leader of the team for proper functioning of the industry.
The conclusion drawn by the Tribunal on the basis of these documents that the petitioner was performing supervisory duties is not correct.
18.
The test that one must employ in such cases is what was the primary, basic or dominant nature of duties for which the person whose status is under enquiry, was employed.
A few extra duties would hardly be relevant to determine the status.
The word like `managerial' or `supervisory duties' have to be understood in their proper connotation.
Having examined the evidence, the Tribunal, even after discussing the same, erred in holding that the duties of the petitioner were supervisory in nature.
The learned Trial drew impermissible inferences and recorded a finding which is perverse.
In fact, the Tribunal failed to evaluate the evidence in its correct perspective, i.e., when primary and basic duties of a person are shown to be clerical and some stray assumptions are made which create confusion, the gloss has to be removed to see the reality.
The petitioner undoubtedly is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act.
In my opinion, the findings thus recorded by the learned Tribunal on issue No. 1 are perverse and are hereby set aside.
19.
The plea of the respondent-Management that the High Court should not interfere in the findings of fact recorded by the Tribunal has been negatived by the Hon'ble Apex Court in M/s. Trambak Rubber Industries Ltd.'s case (supra) wherein the Apex Court laid down as under :-  " ....We are of the view that the High Court has not transgressed the limitations inherent in the grant of the writ of certiorari.
The High Court has rightly perceived of patent illegality in the impugned award warranting interference in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
The High Court is right in pointing out that the material evidence especially the admissions of the witness examined on behalf of the management were not considered at all.
Moreover, the conclusions reached are wholly perverse and do not reasonably follow from the evidence on record, for instance the fact that no appointment letters were issued or filed does not possibly lead to the conclusion that the management's version must be true..." The Hon'ble Supreme Court on the facts and circumstances of the case, further held as under :-  "On the facts and evidence brought on record, the conclusion was inescapable that the appellant-employer resorted to unfair labour practice.
There would have been travesty of justice if the High Court declined to interfere with the findings arbitrarily and without reasonable basis reached by the Industrial Court."
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the award of the Tribunal dated 24111981 (Annexure P-8) declaring the petitioners not a workman is set aside.
The matter is remanded to the Tribunal for disposal of the reference afresh in accordance with law, expeditiously preferably within a period of six months.
The respondent-Management, in the facts and circumstances of the case, shall bear the costs which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.