MM Kumar, J - The order dated 1692004 (P-9) imposing punishment of stoppage of one increment with permanent effect, passed by respondent No. 2, is the subject matter of challenge in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It has further been ordered that the petitioner is not entitled to anything more than subsistence allowance already drawn during the suspension period from 6.12.1994 to 1842002.
The aforementioned order was challenged in appeal under the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 (for brevity, `the Rules') and the Appellate Authority i.e. Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government Haryana, Home Department (respondent No. 1) has upheld the same vide its order dated 2092005 (P-12).
The order passed by the Appellate Authority has also been challenged by the petitioner.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner has been working as Clerk in the respondent department since 3111991.
A preliminary enquiry was held against him with the allegation that he had forged the Government record.
In the preliminary enquiry he was exonerated by the Enquiry Officer vide his report dated 1781994 (P-1).
Despite exoneration of the petitioner in the preliminary inquiry, a case FIR No. 209, dated 2121994, under Section 466 IPC, was registered at Police Station, Panchkula, whereupon the petitioner was placed under suspension, vide order dated 12121994 (P-2).
Thereafter, vide order dated 1842002 (P-3), pending trial of the aforementioned case, the petitioner was reinstated in service.
A charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner on 552003 (P-4).
The petitioner replied on 2052003 (P-5).
On 1612004, the trial Court acquitted the petitioner in the aforementioned criminal case by holding that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the charges against the accused (P-6).
Shri Anil Kumar, IPS, AIG/T, who was appointed as Enquiry Officer to hold regular departmental enquiry against the petitioner, sent his inquiry report vide letter dated 1752004 (R-2) to respondent No. 2, by concluding as under :-  "8.
Although the defaulter was acquitted by JMIC, Ist Class, Panchkula on the doubt basis for not proving the charges by the prosecution and Sh. Sudhir Choudhary, IPS has also acquitted him in the Preliminary Enquiry, yet according to me as Inquiry Officer, the charge for entry and cutting in the records is proved against the erring personnel".
The Disciplinary Authority-respondent No. 2 agreed with the opinion expressed by the Enquiry Officer and proposed penalty of stoppage of two future annual increments with permanent effect.
In this regard a show cause notice dated 3062004 (P-7) was issued to the petitioner suggesting as to why the proposed punishment be not inflicted upon him.
It is significant to point out that a copy of the inquiry report was not given to the petitioner before forming an opinion accepting the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
It is obvious that the Enquiry Officer and the Disciplinary Authority are two different individuals.
In paras 8 and 9 of the writ petition, the aforementioned averment has been made.
However, respondent No. 2 proceeded to pass the order of punishment, dated 1692004 (P-9), which has been upheld by the Appellate Authority on 2092005 (P-12).
3.
The aforementioned factual position is not disputed by the respondents in the written statement.
However, in reply to paras 8 and 9 it has been asserted that the petitioner was served with the show cause notice proposing the penalty and also by handing over a copy of the inquiry report as per the procedure prescribed in the Rules.
Some other details with regard to holding of inquiry and granting opportunity to the petitioner has also been given in the written statement.
4.
The only question which requires consideration on the basis of the arguments addressed by the learned counsel for the parties is whether the report of the Enquiry Officer should have been furnished to the delinquent petitioner before the Disciplinary Authority arrived at its conclusion with regard to the guilt or innocence of the petitioner in respect of the charges levelled against him.
It is admitted position that the report of the Enquiry Officer was furnished to the petitioner along with the show cause notice dated 3062004 (P-7).
In the aforementioned show cause notice the Disciplinary Authority had recorded his conclusion and had accepted the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
A perusal of the show cause notice dated 3062004 (P-7) makes the aforementioned position explicit and the same reads as under :-  "Sh. Anil Kumar, IPS, AIG/T who was appointed as Enquiry Officer to hold regular departmental enquiry against you, Shri Ramesh Kumar, Clerk for the charges levelled against you vide charge-sheet dated 552003 has submitted his findings dated 1252004.
A copy of the report is enclosed for your information.
On careful consideration of the findings I fully agree with the conclusions reached by the Enquiry Officer in respect of the charges levelled against you and hold that these charges stand proved.
I am provisionally of the opinion that a penalty of stoppage of two furture (future ?)
annual increments with permanent effect should be imposed on you.
Before I take action I desire to give you an opportunity of showing cause against the action porposed (proposed ?)
to be taken.
Any representation which you may like to make in that connection will be considered by me before the proposed action is taken.
Such representation, if any, should be made in writing and submitted to me as to reach the undersigned not later than 15 days of the receipt of this notice by you.
If no reply is received within the stipulated period, it will be presumed that you have nothing to say in your defence and final orders will be passed accordingly.
Dt. 3062004.
Sd/- Director General of Police  Haryana" (Emphasis added)  5.
It is, thus, obvious that the inquiry report was not furnished to the petitioner before applying its mind by the Disciplinary Authority to the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) S.C.T.
319 : (1993)4 SCC 727, has held that such a course is not open to the Disciplinary Authority and the law requires furnishing of an inquiry report to a delinquent employee in cases where the Enquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority are two different entities so as to provide an opportunity of hearing to the delinquent employee.
In para Nos. 29 and 30(iv) of the judgment, the following observations have been made, which are extracted below :-  "29.
Hence it has to be held that when the enquiry officer is not the disciplinary authority, the delinquent employee has a right to receive a copy of the enquiry officer's report before the disciplinary authority arrives at its conclusions with regard to the guilt or innocence of the employee with regard to the charges levelled against him.
That right is a part of the employee's right to defend himself against the charges levelled against him.
A denial of the enquiry officer's report before the disciplinary authority takes its decision on the charges, is a denial of breach of the principles of natural justice.
30.
Hence the incidental questions raised above may be answered as follows : xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx x xx xxx  (iv) In the view that we have taken, viz. that the right to make representation to the disciplinary authority against the findings recorded in the enquiry report is an integral part of the opportunity of defence against the charges and is a breach of principles of natural justice to deny the said right, it is only appropriate that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan case should apply to employees in all establishments whether Government or non- Government, public or private.
This will be the case whether there are rules governing the disciplinary proceedings or not and whether they expressly prohibit the furnishing of the copy of the report or are silent on the subject.
Whenever the nature of punishment, further, whenever the rules require an inquiry to be held, for inflicting the punishment in question, the delinquent employee should have the benefit of the report of the enquiry officer before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charges levelled against him.
Hence question (iv) is answered accordingly".
When the facts of the instant case are examined in the light of the principles laid by the Hon'ble Supreme Court no doubt is left that the disciplinary authority has failed to furnish a copy of the enquiry report to the delinquent employee before concurring with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
It is also obvious that Enquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority are two different entities, therefore, the principles extracted above have to be followed.
Thus, the petition deserves to succeed.
6.
We have been put to thinking as to why such an error has been committed by the Disciplinary Authority.
The answer is not far to seek.
The Disciplinary Authority has followed the Rules religiously.
A close look at Rule 7(6) of the Rules would make it patent that the Disciplinary Authority is required to furnish the copy of enquiry report to the petitioner at the stage of proposing punishment which could be arrived after recording a delinquent employee guilty of charge.
Rule 7(6) of the Rules is extracted below for facility of reference and the same reads as under :  "7.
Inquiry before imposition of certain penalties.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx  (6) After the enquiry against a Government employee has been completed, and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the Government employee shall, if the penalty to be imposed is major penalty, be supplied with a copy of the report of enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause, within reasonable time, not ordinarily exceeding one month against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted upon him.
Any representation submitted by him in this behalf shall be taken into consideration before final orders passed : Provided that if the punishing authority disagrees with any part or whole of the findings, of the enquiring authority, the point or points of such disagreement, together with a brief statement of the ground thereof, shall also be supplied to the Government employee".
A perusal of the above extracted Rule 7(6) of the Rules would show that law has changed by virtue of the judgments in the cases of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 : (1991)1 SCC 588 and B Karunakar's case (supra).
However, Rule 7(6) continues to be static.
The result is disastrous for the Disciplinary Authority as it continued to follow Rule 7(6).
The rules which were framed in the year 1987 would certainly require to be creased out in accordance with the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The necessity for incorporation of the above suggestion has been felt in view of the fact that number of cases appear before the Court by virtue of lapse committed by the Disciplinary Authorities.
Another petition bearing C.W.P.
No. 15524 of 2005 has been allowed by us today for the same reason.
If the amendment is carried it would avoid unnecessary burden on the public exchequer, wastage of precious time and advance public interest.
7.
In view of the above factual and legal position, order of the Disciplinary Authority, dated 1692004 (P-9) along with all subsequent proceedings are quashed.
In other words, the order dated 1692004 (P-9) and order dated 2092005 (P-12) are also set aside.
The Disciplinary Authority shall proceed with the inquiry on the assumption that the petitioner is deemed to have been supplied the copy of the inquiry report today in the Court i.e. 1552006, as has been agreed between the parties and the respondents shall now proceed with the inquiry proceedings in accordance with law from that stage.
The petitioner may file his reply within a period of four weeks from today, which shall also be considered by the Disciplinary Authority in accordance with law.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
8.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The office is directed to send a copy of this order to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, for taking necessary action as per the suggestion made.
Petition allowed.