SS Saron, J - The petitioners in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek directions to allow them to exercise their option for pensionary benefits scheme in terms of circular dated 681993 (Annexure P1) as clarified vide circular dated 981994 (Annexure P2).
Besides, they seek the counting of work charge service rendered by them along with the regular service for the grant of pensionary benefits.
2.
The petitioners were initially appointed on work charge basis and subsequently their services were regularized and they were promoted on various posts in the erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board (HSEB - for short) now known as Uttar Haryana Bilji Vitran Nigam Limited (Nigam - for short).
The particulars of the service record of the respective petitioners has been mentioned in the legal notice (Annexure P5).
3.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents in which objection has been taken regarding failure of the petitioners to exercise their option within the time fixed by the aforesaid circulars dated 681993 (Annexure P1) as subsequently clarified on 981994 (Annexure P2).
The petitioners, it is submitted, had failed to exercise their option as to whether they intend to count the period of work charge service towards pensionary benefits within three months, even though it was duly intimated.
It is submitted that the petitioners were fully aware of the circulars that had been issued by the HSEB as wide publicity was given and it was even pasted on the notice board of the XEN (Operation Division) of the Nigam (respondent No. 3).
Besides, one Balbir Singh, Driver.
working in the said office, had exercised his option within time and was given the benefit of regular service.
Therefore, it is stated that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the benefit of the circular afore-referred is liable to be given to the petitioners and that the work charge service rendered by them is liable to be counted towards pensionary benefits.
It is submitted that the respondents did not get the circular noted down from the respective petitioners which is contrary to various judgments of this Court.
6.
In response, learned counsel for the respondents had opposed the prayer and contended that the petitioners cannot now exercise their option at this belated stage as they failed to do so within the stipulated time.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
8.
In terms of the instructions dated 681993 (Annexure P.1), the Haryana Government notification dated 421992 with regard to the counting of service rendered by workers in work-charge capacity towards pensionary benefit scheme was adopted subject to conditions mentioned therein which inter alia include that an employee on regularization from work-charge service to regular service is to submit an option within a period of three months from the date of regularization or from the date of issue of the circular, whichever is later as to whether he/she intends to count the period of work-charge service rendered by him/her towards pensionary benefits or intends to continue to be a member of Employees Provident Fund (`EPF' - for short).
In case the option is not given within the stipulated period of three months, it would be presumed that he/she intends to continue to be a member of EPF.
Further, that in case an employee opts for pensionary benefits he/she is to refund the entire amount of employer's share of contribution along with interest thereon towards their EPF in lump-sum for crediting to the Board's (HSEB) account.
The employee's contribution along with interest has to be deposited with the Board (HSEB) for crediting to his/her General Provident Fund (`GPF' - for short).
In terms of the subsequent instructions (Annexure P.2) certain clarifications were given on points that had been raised.
One of the query that was clarified was with regard to the time limit of three months fixed by the Board for submitting the option which expired on 5111993 and there was a demand for extension of time limit for exercising the option.
It was clarified that a period of three months from the date of issue of the clarification may be allowed to the employees to exercise their option for availing the pensionary benefits to those who could not avail this opportunity earlier.
In both the circulars dated 681993 (Annexure P.1) and 981994 (Annexure P.2), it has been provided that this may be got noted from all the employees who were to acknowledge the receipt of the letter.
The petitioners claim that despite the said requirement of getting the instructions noted from the employees the same were not got noted from them.
9.
The question whether the petitioners are entitled to count the work-charge service rendered by them towards pensionary benefits is not res integra.
A Full Bench of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, 1988(5) SLR 25, has held that work-charge service followed by regularization is to be counted towards qualifying service for the purpose of pensionary benefits.
The relevant rule in the Punjab Civil Services declining the counting of work- charge service towards pensionary benefits was struck down by the Full Bench.
Therefore, the petitioners would evidently he entitled to count the work- charge service rendered by them as the work-charge service was followed by regular service rendered by them.
The question regarding changing the option after the time fixed has lapsed has been considered and necessary permission to change the option has been granted by this Court in other cases.
A Division Bench of this Court in Mahinder Singh v. Executive Engineer and another, 2005(4) SCT 633 : 2005(4) SCT 633, to which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a member, held that unless it is established that the circular issued for exercise of option was brought to the notice of the employee he cannot be denied from exercising the same in the time merely because he did not do so immediately when the circular was issued.
In the case of Lalu Ram v. State of Haryana, (C.W.P.
No. 2476 of 1997), decided on 9101997, a Division Bench of this Court considered the case where the employee had not given his option for adopting the pensionary scheme and had failed to comply with the conditions imposed therein, that is, depositing the employer's share of contribution towards G.P.F.
with upto date interest.
It was held by this Court that the respondents therein had not placed any material on record to show that the instructions issued had been got noted in writing from the petitioner in the said case.
In the absence of any such material it was held that it cannot be assumed that the petitioner while in service knew about the contests of the instructions that had been issued.
It was noticed that the circular in question specifically provided that "these instructions may please be got noted from the employees and acknowledge the receipt of the letter".
In Hakam Singh, Driver v. Executive Engineer and another, CWP No. 12758 of 2000), decided on 2952002, another Division Bench directed the respondents to allow the petitioners therein to avail the benefit of pensionary scheme as there was no proof that they were ever served on the basis of instructions regarding switching over to the pensionary scheme.
In Darshan Singh v. Chief Accounts Officer, (CWP No. 2402 of 2997), decided on 2781997, another Division Bench of this Court allowed the writ petition for computation of the service rendered by the petitioner therein towards retiral benefits.
The claim of the petitioner was resisted as he had not exercised his option to claim the benefit of service towards pension.
It was, however, held that the amount deposited by the employer from the date of the appointment of the petitioner therein till his retirement along with interest shall be refunded by the petitioner.
In the case in hand also there is no material on record to show that the circulars dated 681993 (Annexure P.1) and 981994 (Annexure P.2) were brought to the notice of the petitioners.
Therefore, the declining of pension scheme to the petitioners on account of the fact that they failed to exercise their option is without basis.
The petitioners would, however, be required to refund the amount deposited by the employer from the date of their respective appointments till retirement along with interest.
10.
The reliance placed by the respondents on the judgment in the case of Tejpal Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP 10083 of 2002, decided on 742003, does not apply to the case in hand as in the said case as a matter of fact, from the written statement, it was shown that the petitioner therein was having knowledge of the date from which his service was to be counted towards pension.
11.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the petitioners would be entitled to change their option for the pensionary benefit scheme.
This would, however, be subject to the condition that the petitioners do not claim the benefit of ad hoc service towards provident fund and the amount deposited by the employer from the date of payment till retirement of the respective petitioner along with interest is refunded by him.
If the petitioners deposit the said amount of employer's share along with interest thereon up to the date of deposit within two months from the receipt of certified copy of the order and also comply with all other conditions as contained in circular dated 681993 (Annexure P1) as clarified vide circular dated 981994 (Annexure P2), the respondents shall allow the petitioners to exercise their option for pensionary benefits scheme.
The work-charge period of service followed by regularization shall also be counted for the grant of pensionary benefits.
Petition allowed.