GS Singhvi, J - Smt. Kailash Sharma, who had filed this petition on 1031988 for quashing order Annexure P13 dated 12.10.1987 passed by District Education Officer (Schools), Kapurthala removing her from service by way of punishment and for issuance of a direction to the respondents to take her back in service with consequential benefits, is no longer in this world to reap the benefits of the ultimate order which may be passed by this Court and her husband Shri OP Sharma, who was brought on record as the legal representative of late Smt. Kailash Sharma vide order dated 24.4.1987, is pursuing the cause of his late wife.
2.
At the commencement of hearing, Shri NP Mittal, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that even though, the impugned order has been challenged on various grounds set out in the writ petition including the one relating to violation of the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short, the Rules) and Article 311 of the Constitution of India, he is not pressing the same and his client will feel satisfied if the order of punishment is substituted by a lesser penalty, like compulsory retirement which too is a major penalty specified in clause (vii) of Rule 5 of the Rules.
3.
For deciding whether the punishment of removal from service imposed on late Smt. Kailash Sharma by District Education Officer (Schools), Kapurthala calls for interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, I may briefly notice the facts.
4.
The petitioner was appointed as JB.T.
Teacher in the pay scale of Rs. 60- 120/- vide order dated 381960 issued by Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar.
She was promoted as Hindi Teacher vide order dated 1621972.
While she was posted at Government High School, Ramidi, the petitioner's relation with Head Master got strained.
According to her, she was harassed by the then Head Master on various counts and representations made by her to the higher authorities did not yield the desired result.
on 341984, she was served with a charge-sheet for holding an enquiry under Rule 8 of the Rules on the allegation of remaining absent from duty.
Smt. Mohinder Kaur, Deputy Education Officer (Schools), Kapurthala, who was appointed as enquiry officer vide order dated 2951984, submitted report with the finding that the charge of absence from duty has been proved against the delinquent.
District Education Officer (Schools), Kapurthala accepted the enquiry report and issued notice to late Smt. Kailash Sharma proposing her removal from service.
A copy of the enquiry report was sent to her along with show cause.
After giving opportunity of personal hearing to her, the officer concerned passed the impugned order.
5.
Shri NP Mittal argued that the impugned order is liable to be quashed because while imposing one of the severest penalties i.e. removal from service, the punishing authority did not take into consideration the unblemished service record of late Smt. Kailash Sharma of more than 22 years and the fact that the misconduct found proved against her did not involve moral turpitude.
In support of his argument, Shri Mittal invoked the doctrine of proportionality and relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank and others v. PC Kakkar, (2003)4 SCC 364 : 2003(1) SCT 1033 (SC).
Shri Mittal then argued that the punishing authority has the discretion to impose minor as well as major penalties specified in Rule 5 of the Rules and it is always not necessary to impose the punishment of removal or dismissal from service simply because the charge of misconduct is proved against the delinquent.
He submitted that in the facts and circumstances of this case, the punishment of compulsory retirement would meet the ends of justice and therefore, punishment of removal from service may be substituted with that of compulsory retirement.
6.
Ms. Rita Kohli, learned Deputy Advocate General fairly admitted that the order of punishment is silent about the consideration of the past record of late Smt. Kailash Sharma, but argued that doctrine of proportionality should not be invoked in the present case because she was found guilty of grave misconduct of remaining absent from duty for 2 years and a half and even during the course of personal hearing, she did not show her inclination to join duty.
Ms. Kohli submitted that the discretion exercised by the punishing authority to impose penalty of removal from service upon late Smt. Kailash Sharma does not suffer from any legal infirmity requiring interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
I have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments and have gone through the entire record.
8.
A mention of the doctrine of proportionality was made by Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Services, (1984)3 WLR 1174 (HL) in the following words :-  "Judicial review, has I think developed to a stage today when without reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the development has come about, one can conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon which administrative action is subject to control by judicial review.
The first ground I would call `illegality', the second `irrationality' and the third `procedural impropriety'.
That is not to say that further development on a case by case basis may not in course of time add further grounds.
I have in mind particularly the possible adoption in the future of the principle of `proportionality' which is recognised in the administrative law of several of our fellow members of the European Economic Community......" 9.
In Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India and others, AIR 1987 SC 2386, the Supreme Court invoked the doctrine of proportionality and quashed the order of punishment on the ground that it was strikingly disproportionate.
Some of the observations made in that decision are extracted below :-  "Judicial review generally speaking, is not directed against a decision, but is directed against the "decision making process".
The question of the choice and quantum of punishment is within the jurisdiction and discretion of the Court Martial.
But the sentence has to suit the offence and the offender.
It should not be vindictive or unduly harsh.
It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias.
The doctrine of proportionality, as part of the concept of judicial review would ensure that even on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the exclusive province of the Court-Martial, if the decision of the Court even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, then the sentence would not be immune from correction.
Irrationality and perversity are recognised grounds of judicial review."
10.
The proposition laid down in Ranjit Thakur's case (supra) was reiterated in Ex. Naik Sardar Singh v. Union of India and others, 1992(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 583 : 1992(2) SCT.
688 : AIR 1992 SC 417 and the punishment imposed on the appellant was quashed on the ground of arbitrariness.
11.
In BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 484 : 1996(1) SCT 617 (SC), the Supreme Court reviewed various judicial precedents and expressed the view that the High Court and the Tribunal should be loathe to interfere with the discretion exercised by the disciplinary authority.
Ramaswamy, J, speaking for himself and B.P.
Jeevan Reddy, J, observed as under :-  "The disciplinary authority and on appeal, appellate authority, being fact- finding authorities have exclusive power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain discipline.
They are invested with the discretion to impose appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or gravity of the misconduct.
The High Court/Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally substitute their own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the relief, either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority to reconsider the penalty imposed, or to shorten the litigation, it may itself, in exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support thereof."
12.
In his concurring opinion, BL Hansaria, J observed as under :-  "The High Court would be within its jurisdiction to modify the punishment/penalty by moulding the relief.
It may, however, be said that this power of moulding relief in cases where the change against the public servant is of being in possession of property disproportionate to his known source of income can be invoked by a High Court only when the punishment/penalty awarded shocks the judicial conscience.
In this connection, it may be noted that the mere fact that there is no provision parallel to Article 12 relating to the High Courts, can be no ground to think that they have not to do complete justice and if moulding of relief would do complete justice between the parties, the same can not be ordered.
Absence of provision like Article 142 is not material."
13.
In Union of India v. G Ganayutham, (1997) 7 SCC 463 : 1997(4) SCT 214 (SC), the Supreme Court explained the decision of the House of Lords in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Civil Services (supra) in the following words :-  "Proportionality is "concerned with the way in which the decision- maker has ordered his proprieties; the very essence of decision-making consists surely, in the attribution of relative importance to the factors in the case".
This is precisely what proportionality is about.
Proportionality used in the human rights context involves a balancing test and the necessity test.
The balancing test means scrutiny of excessive onerous penalties or infringement of rights or interest and a manifest imbalance of relevant consideration.
The necessity test means that infringement of human rights in question must be by the least restrictive alternative.
"What is therefore needed is a preparedness to hold that a decision which overrides a fundamental right without sufficient objective justification will, as a matter of law, necessarily be disproportionate to the aims in view.....
The deployment of proportionality sets in focus the true nature of the exercise; the elaboration of a rule about permissible priorities."
14.
Their Lordships also referred to the Wednesbury and CCSU principles evolved by British Courts and culled out the following propositions :-  "(1) To judge the validity of any administrative order or statutory discretion, normally the Wednesbury test is to be applied to find out if the decision was illegal or suffered from procedural improprieties or was one which no sensible decision-maker could, on the material before him and within the framework of the law, have arrived at.
The court would consider whether relevant matters had not been taken into account or whether irrelevant matters had been taken into account or whether the action was not bona fide.
The court would also consider whether the decision was absurd or perverse.
The court would not however go into the correctness of the choice made by the administrator amongst the various alternatives open to him.
Nor could the court substitute its decision to that of the administrator.
This is the Wednesbury test.
(2) The court would not interfere with the administrator's decision unless it was illegal or suffered from procedural impropriety or was irrational in the sense that it was in outrageous defiance of logic or moral standards.
The possibility of other tests, including proportionality being brought into English administrative law in future is not ruled out.
There are the CCSU principles.
(3) (a) As per Bugdayacy, Brind and Smith as long as the Convention is not incorporated into English law, the English courts merely exercise a secondary judgment to find out if the decision-maker could have, on the material before him, arrived at the primary judgment in the manner he has done.
3 (b) If the Convention is incorporated in England making available the principle of proportionality, then the English courts will render the primary judgment on the validity of the administrative action and find out if the restriction is disproportionate or excessive or is not based upon a fair balancing of the fundamental freedom and the need for the restriction thereupon.
(4) (a) The position in our country, in administrative law, where no fundamental freedoms as aforesaid are involved, is that courts/tribunals will only play a secondary role while the primary judgment as to reasonableness will remain with the executive or administrative authority.
The secondary judgment of the court is to be based on Wednesbury and CCSU principles as stated by Lord Green and Lord Diplock respectively to find if the executive or administrative authority has reasonably arrived at his decision as the primary authority.
(4) (b) Whether in the case of administrative on executive action affecting fundamental freedoms, the courts in our country will apply the principle of "proportionality" and assume a primary role, is left open, to be decided in an appropriate case where such action is alleged to offend fundamental freedoms.
It will be then necessary to decide whether the courts will have a primary role only if the freedoms under Articles 19, 21 etc. are involved and not for Article 14."
15.
In Om Kumar and another v. Union of India, 2001(1) SLR 2999 : 2001(1) SCT 214 (SC), the Supreme Court referred to the propositions laid down in G Ganayutham's case (supra) and observed as under:-  "Thus from the above principles and decided cases, it must be held that where an administrative decision relating to punishment in disciplinary cases in questioned as arbitrary under Article 14, the Court is confined to Wednesbury principles as a secondary reviewing authority.
The Court will not apply proportionality as a primary reviewing Court because no issue of fundamental freedoms nor of discrimination under Article 14 applies in such a context.
The Court while reviewing punishment and if it is satisfied that Wednesbury principles are violated, it has normally to remit the matter to the Administrator for afresh decision as to the quantum of punishment.
Only in rare cases where there has been long delay in the time taken by the disciplinary proceedings and in the time taken in the Courts and such extreme of rare cases can the Court substitute its own view as to the quantum of punishment."
16.
In Director General, PRF and others v. Ch.
Sai Babu, (2003)4 SCC 331 : 2003(1) SCT 820 (SC), the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Normally, the punishment imposed by a disciplinary authority should not be disturbed by the High Court or a tribunal except in appropriate cases that too only after reaching a conclusion that the punishment imposed is grossly or shockingly disproportionate, after examining all the relevant factors, including the nature of the charges proved, the past conduct, penalty imposed earlier, the nature of duties assigned having due regard to their sensitiveness, exactness expected and discipline required to be maintained, and the department/establishment in which the delinquent person concerned works."
17. in Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank and others v. PC Kakkar (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court reiterated the view expressed in the decisions to which reference has been made hereinabove and held :-  "It is settled that the court should not interfere with the administrator's decision unless it was illogical or suffers from procedural impropriety or was shocking to the conscience of the court in the sense that it was in defiance of logic or moral standards.
In view of Wednesbury principle the court would not go into the correctness of the choice made by the administrator open to him and the court should not substitute its decision to that of the administrator.
The scope of judicial review is limited to the deficiency in decision-making process and not the decision.
Therefore, unless the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or the Appellate Authority shocks the conscience of the court/tribunal, there is no scope for interference.
Further, to shorten litigation it may, in exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate punishment by recording cogent reasons in support thereof.
In the normal course if the punishment imposed is shockingly disproportionate it would be appropriate to direct the disciplinary authority or the Appellate Authority to reconsider the penalty imposed."
18.
The same view was expressed in Dev Singh v. Punjab Tourism Development Corporation Ltd and another, (2003) 8 SCC 9 : 2003(4) SCT 249 (SC).
19.
In the present case, I find that while directing its attention to the gravity of the charge found proved against late Smt. Kailash Sharma, i.e., absence from duty and the fact that she was not willing to join duty except in Government Higher Secondary School, Kapurthala, the punishing authority blissfully ignored the fact that as on the date of commencement of the period of absence, she had served for 22 years and during that long period, there was no cause of complaint from any quarter regarding her behaviour, conduct, performance or integrity.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has not even been suggested that before absenting from duty w.e.f.
171982, late Smt. Kailash Sharma had committed any misconduct or any adverse remark was recorded in her Annual Confidential Reports.
Rather, their main emphasis is on her failure to get the leave sanctioned and join duty.
In my opinion, the omission to consider the unblemished service record of 22 years of the delinquent is sufficient to record a conclusion that the punishment is vitiated due to non-application of mind.
20.
I am also inclined to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the punishment of removal from service imposed by the punishing authority which has the effect of depriving late Smt. Kailash Sharma of the pension and other retiral benefits is wholly arbitrary and is such which shocks the conscious of the Court.
21.
In view of the above conclusion, I may have remanded the case to the disciplinary authority to re-consider the question of punishment to be imposed on the delinquent, but keeping in view the fact that she is no longer in this world and the case has remained pending in this Court for 15 years, I am satisfied that no useful purpose would be served by remanding the case.
I also feel that ends of justice would be met by setting aside the punishment of removal from service and substituting the same with compulsory retirement w.e.f.
171982 i.e. the date from whcih late Smt. Kailash Sharma absented from duty.
22.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
Order Annexure Pl3 is upheld in so far as finding of guilty is concerned.
However, the punishment of removal from service is set aside and is ordered to be substituted with that of compulsory retirement w.e.f.
171982.
As a consequence, the legal representative of late Smt. Kailash Sharma shall be entitled to get retiral benefits which would have been payable to her had she been retired w.e.f.
171982.
The concerned authority is directed to calculate the retiral benefits payable to the legal representative of Smt. Kailash Sharma by treating her to have been compulsory retired by way of punishment w.e.f.
171982.
The needful be done within a period of six months from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order.
Petition partly allowed.