Nirmal Yadav, J - In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to count the period of service rendered by him on daily- wage/work-charge basis along with the regular service for pensionary benefits.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Wireless Operator on daily-wage basis on 931987 and he joined as such on 2131987.
He was promoted as work-charge Electrician on 2141993.
The services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from 341997.
He retired from the services of the respondents on attaining the age of superannuation on 3172002.
Since the period of 6 years and 29 days spent on daily-wage service was not counted towards pension and other pensionary benefits in spite of submitting several representations, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 10841 of 2002, which was disposed of by this Court by issuing directions to the respondents to pass an appropriate speaking order within a period of 4 months from the date the certified copy was brought to their notice.
The respondents passed a speaking order dated 3102002 stating that only work-charge service and regular service would be counted towards pension.
The total period of aforesaid services was 9 years, 3 months and 13 days and the same being less than 10 years, pension was not payable to the petitioner.
The petitioner challenged the order dated 3102002 by filing C.W.P.
No. 17946 of 2002.
This Court quashed the order dated 3102002 vide order dated 24112002, which is reproduced as under :-  "The petitioner seeks counting of his service as a daily wager and work charge, towards his pension, gratuity and other pensionary benefits.
He had approached this Court earlier in CWP 10841 of 2002 in which a direction has been issued that the legal notice served on the respondent by the petitioner should be decided within a specified period, by passing an appropriate speaking order.
The order dated 3102002, Annexure P-2 has been passed in the meanwhile.
We find that the aforesaid order is not a speaking one and does not take into account the judgments of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, 1989(II) Recent Service Judgments 629; Malook Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) Service Cases Today 133; Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) Service Cases Today 795 and Hazura Singh v. State of Punjab, 2004(1) SCT 695 (P&H) : 2003(3) Recent Services Judgments 336.
We, accordingly, quash the aforesaid order and direct the respondent Board to consider petitioner's case afresh in the light of the aforesaid Judgments within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by it."
The respondents have again rejected the petitioner's claim for grant of pensionary benefits by passing the impugned order dated 16.4.2004 (Annexure P-4), still holding that only the work-charge and regular service of 9 years, 3 months and 13 days would be counted towards pensionary benefits, which is less than 10 years.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(II) RSJ 629 (supra) and also on the judgments of this Court in Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) SCT 795 (supra); Hazura Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 2003(4) RSJ 336 (supra) and Nasib Singh v. The State of Punjab and another, 1999(4) SCT 233 (P&H) : 1999(4) RSJ 244.
4.
The respondents have filed reply stating that the petitioner has rendered regular service only for 9 years, 3 months and 13 days, which is less than 10 years and as such, he cannot be granted pensionary benefits as prescribed under the rules.
He has rendered service as daily wager for a period of 6 years and 29 days, which cannot be counted towards qualifying service for pension.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner referred to Rules 3.17A and 423 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume (2) to contend that service rendered on daily-wage basis is also to be counted for pensionary benefits, if the employee was holding a substantive post on the date of his retirement.
For facility of reference, the aforesaid Rules 3.17A and 423 are reproduced as under :-  "3.17(A) (1) Subject to the provisions of Rule 423 and other rules and except in the cases mentioned below, all service rendered on establishment, interrupted or continuous, shall count as qualifying service :- (i) Service rendered in work-charged establishment.
(ii) Service paid from contingencies : Provided that after 1st January, 1973 half of the service paid from contingencies will be allowed to count towards pension at the time of absorption in regular employment subject to the following conditions :- (a) Service paid from contingencies should have been in a job involving whole-time employment (and not part-time or for a portion of the day).
(b) Service paid from contingencies should have been in a type of work or job for which regular post could have been sanctioned e.g. Malis, chowkidars, khalasis etc. (c) The service should have been one for which the payment is made either on monthly or daily rates computed and paid on a monthly basis and which though not analogous to the regular scale of pay should bear some relation in the matter of pay to those being paid for similar jobs being performed by staff in regular establishment.
(d) The service paid from contingencies should have been continuous and followed by absorption in regular employment without a break.
(iii) casual or daily rated service.
(iv) Suspension adjudged as a specific penalty.
317A(2) An interruption in the service of a Government employee caused by willful absence from duty or unauthorised absence without leave, shall entail forfeiture of the past service.
423.
In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service record, an interruption between two spells of service rendered under the State Government shall be treated as automatically condoned, and the pre- interruption service shall be treated as qualifying service for pension purposes, except where the interruption has been caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service or due to participation in a strike, but the period of interruption itself shall under no circumstances be reckoned as qualifying service for pension purposes."
7.
The petitioner was appointed as Wireless Operator on daily-wage basis on 2131987.
He was further promoted as work-charge Electrician with effect from 2141993 and since then he had been continuously working upto 241997 as the services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from 341997.
8.
In Kesar Chand's case (supra), the Full Bench while dealing with a similar controversy held as under :-  "Once the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised, there appears to be hardly any logic to deprive him of the pensionary benefits as are available to other public servants under Rule 317 of the Rules.
Equal protection of laws must mean the protection of equal laws for all persons similarly situated.
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness because a provision which is arbitrary involves the negation of equality.
Even the temporary or officiating service under the State Government has to be reckoned for determining the qualifying service.
It looks to be illogical that the period of service spent by an employee in a work-charged establishment before his regularisation has not been taken into consideration for determining his qualifying service.
The classification which is sought to be made among Government servants who are eligible for pension and those who started as work-charged employees and their services regularized subsequently, and the others is not based on any intelligible criteria and, therefore, is not sustainable at law.
After the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised, he is a public servant like any other servant.
To deprive him of the pension is not only unjust and inequitable but is hit by the vice of arbitrariness and for these reasons the provisions of sub-rule (ii) of Rule 317 of the Rules have to be struck down being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
The aforesaid view was further reiterated by this Court in the cases of Joginder Singh, Hazura Singh and Nasib Singh (supra).
A conjoint reading of the rules, quoted above and the observations of the Full Bench would reveal that it is by now well established that period of service rendered on daily- wage/work-charges prior to regularisation of services is liable to be counted for the purpose of gratuity and pension.
9.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that services rendered by the petitioner on daily-wage and work-charge basis should be counted as qualifying service for pensionary benefits.
The petitioner was working as a whole-time employee and was paid wages on monthly basis.
The respondents have not disputed that there was no wilful absence from duty by the petitioner.
In such circumstances, the period of service of 6 years and 29 days rendered by the petitioner on daily-wage basis has to be reckoned while computing the pensionary benefit of the petitioner.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition, quash the order, Annexure P-4 and direct the respondents to redetermine the pensionary benefits of the petitioner by taking into consideration his daily-wage service of 6 years and 29 days.
The consequential benefits accruing to the petitioner shall be paid to him within a period of two months of the receipt of a certified copy of the order.
Petition allowed.