Viney Mittal, J - In December 1982, Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana advertised 15 posts of Forest Rangers.
11 of the posts were reserved for members belonging to category of Scheduled Castes, Backward Class and Ex- Servicemen.
Four posts were to be filled up purely on the basis of merit.
However, it was stipulated that if suitable members belonging to the aforesaid three categories were not available, then 10 out of the 11 posts would be filled up from candidates belonging to general category.
Petitioner, Shakti Singh, along with others applied for the aforesaid post.
The petitioner was placed at serial No. 5.
However, he was not appointed.
The petitioner along with other unsuccessful candidates filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3239 of 1983.
The said writ petition was dismissed.
In the year 1986, one Sohan Lal (present respondent No. 4) approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 4761 of 1986.
He was placed at serial No. 8 in the merit list.
He prayed for the issuance of a writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to appoint him.
The writ petition filed by Sohan Lal was allowed.
Consequently, Sohan Lal was appointed.
Similarly, some other candidates lower in merit than the present petitioner, including the one placed at serial No. 15 in the merit list, were given the letters of appointment.
Petitioner, Shakti Singh, along with the other similarly situated persons, higher in merit, approached this Court yet again.
They claimed that since persons lower in merit had been appointed, therefore, they were also entitled to appointment.
The writ petition filed by the aforesaid writ petitioners was dismissed by a Single Bench of this Court vide order dated October 31, 1990.
It was held that the claim of the aforesaid writ petition was barred by the principle of constructive res judicata.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid decision, the writ petitioners filed a Letters Patent Appeal being LPA No. 275 of 1991.
The Letters Patent Bench vide judgment dated November 30, 1998 allowed the appeal and, consequently, the writ petition filed by the aforesaid petitioners was allowed.
Directions were issued to the respondents to consider the claim of the aforesaid appellants for appointment as Forest Ranger on the basis of their position in the merit list.
However, their claim for backwates was specifically given up by them by making a statement.
A copy of the order passed by the Division Bench in the Letters Patent Appeal has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the present petition.
2.
As a consequence of the aforesaid directions, petitioner, Shakti Singh was issued appointment letter as Forest Ranger on October 1, 2001 (Annexure P-2).
While issuing the aforesaid appointment letter, it was specifically stipulated that his seniority would be decided later on.
Consequently, the petitioner, after joining the aforesaid post, made a representation to the competent authority for fixation of his seniority at the appropriate place.
It was claimed by him that since his place in the merit list at the time of selection was at serial No. 5, therefore, he was entitled to seniority from the day his junior had been appointed.
A legal notice was also issued by the petitioner.
In the aforesaid legal notice, it was claimed that one Raj Kumar Jangra (present respondent No. 3) was shown at serial No. 6 in the aforesaid merit list and, therefore, the petitioner was entitled to a place over and above aforesaid Raj Kumar Jangra.
However, respondents issued a gradation list of Range Forest Officers as on 112002 (Annexure P-6).
In the aforesaid gradation list, the petitioner has been shown at serial No. 84 and his date of appointment has been shown as 1102001.
Persons, who were lower in merit, in the selection list, namely Sohan Lal, Bijender Rana, Satbir Singh Kadiyan, Harish Kumar Walia and Sadhu Singh have been shown at serial No. 9, 10, 11, 12 and 31 respectively.
The petitioner has impugned his placement in the seniority list through the present petition and has, accordingly, approached this Court.
3.
It has been specifically averred by the petitioner in the writ petition that he was placed at Serial No. 5 in the merit list, whereas the private respondents were shown lower in merit.
The details given by the petitioner showing his merit position and the merit placement of the private respondents is as under :  Sr. No. Name Merit position 1.
Shakti Singh (petitioner) 5 2.
Raj Kumar Jangra (Res.
No. 3) 6 3.
Sohan Lal (Res.
No. 4) 8 4.
Bijender Rana (Res.
No. 5) 9 5.
Satbir Singh Kadiyan (Res.
No. 6) 10 6.
Harish Kumar Walia (Res.
No. 7) 14 7.
Sadhu Singh (Res.
No. 8) 15 4.
The petitioner has further detailed out the date of appointment of the private respondents, as reflected in the gradation list as under :  Sr. No. Name Date of Appointment 1.
Raj Kumar Jangra (Res.
No. 3) 1.6.1984 2.
Sohan Lal (Res.
4) 1.3.1989 3.
Bijender Rana (Res.
No. 5) - do - 4.
Satbir Singh Kadiyan (Res.
No. 6) - do - 5.
Harish Kumar Walia (Res.
No. 7) - do - 6.
Sadhu Singh (Res.
No. 8) 1.7.1992 However, the place of Raj Kumar Jangra, respondent No. 3, has not been indicated in the gradation list, since in the meantime, the aforesaid respondent had been promoted in Haryana Forest Service (Group `B') on October 29, 1999.
A copy of the promotion order of respondent No. 3 has been appended as Annexure P-7 with the present petition.
5.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
A joint written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, whereas respondent No. 3 has filed a separate written statement.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner had been appointed on the basis of the direction issued by this Court in the Letters Patent Appeal and, accordingly, he was entitled to his placement/seniority in the gradation list from the date of his appointment.
It has further been maintained by the respondents that since earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner had been dismissed, therefore, he could not make any grievance on the basis of the original selection.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record of the case.
In our considered view the present writ petition deserves to be allowed.
7.
The narration of the facts noticed above, clearly shows that although the original claim of the petitioner along with other persons had been rejected by this Court when Civil Writ Petition No. 3239 of 1982 was dismissed but subsequently in the year 1986, he was ordered to be appointed.
Aforesaid Sohan Lal was placed at Serial No. 8 in the merit list.
It was on the basis of the aforesaid placement of Sohan Lal and his appointment, that the claim of the petitioner and some other persons was allowed by the Division Bench, while allowing Letters Patent Appeal on November 13, 1998.
It is, thus, apparent that essentially the petitioner succeeded in getting the appointment on the strength of his original placement in the merit list.
The Division Bench considered the aforesaid fact and found that since persons lower in merit had been appointed subsequently, therefore, the petitioner and persons higher in merit, were also entitled to be appointed.
Thus, the stand taken by the respondents that the original merit list had become irrelevant, on the dismissal of the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner, is absolutely without any substance.
It is also not in dispute that Raj Kumar Jangra and other private respondents were place in the merit list lower than the petitioner, who was placed at serial No. 5.
Raj Kumar Jangra was offered appointment on June 1, 1984.
His seniority has also been reckoned from the aforesaid date.
Since Raj Kumar Jangra was placed at serial No. 6 in the merit list, therefore, obviously petitioner was entitled to be placed higher in the seniority list, than Raj Kumar Jangra, respondent No. 3.
The stand taken by the respondents giving the earlier history of the case is totally irrelevant.
The petitioner, accordingly, is held entitled to a place higher than the private respondents and even Raj Kumar Jangra.
8.
At this stage, we may also notice that Raj Kumar Jangra, respondent No. 3, had been promoted in Haryana Forest Service (Group `B') with effect from October 29, 1999.
Once the petitioner has been held entitled to his placement over and above Raj Kumar Jangra, then obviously, he is entitled to be considered for promotion from the day the aforesaid respondent No. 3 was promoted.
9.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the present petition is allowed.
Official respondents are directed to recast the seniority list assigning the appropriate place to the petitioner over and above the placement of Raj Kumar Jangra in the seniority list.
It is further directed that the claim of the petitioner for further promotion shall also be considered by the official respondents from the day the aforesaid respondent No. 3, Raj Kumar Jangra was also promoted.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.