Nirmal Yadav, J - The petitioner has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for grant of pension and other retiral benefits along with interest.
2.
The facts, in brief, are that petitioner joined the respondent-Board as Sweeper on daily-wage basis in the month of April/May 1979.
He joined on work-charge basis in August 1979.
Services of the persons junior to the petitioner were regularised.
However, the petitioner's service was never regularised.
He retired on 13.6.2002.
On his retirement, the petitioner was not granted pensionary and other retiral benefits as he was treated to be a work-charge employee.
The petitioner represented to the respondents for grant of aforesaid reliefs.
However, when no positive response was given, he served notice through his counsel vide Annexure P-2.
It is pleaded that as per the Board's Circular No. 4691 dated 171991, Memo No. 2784/W/Estt.2 dated 1022000 the petitioner's employer share of provident fund could be adjusted in his pensionary benefits and he should be granted pensionary benefits.
According to the petitioner, even after serving for more than 23 years with the respondent-Board, his services were not regularised.
On account of non- regularisation of his service, pensionary benefits have not been granted to the petitioner and, therefore, he prays that respondents be directed to firstly, regularise his service and then grant him pensionary and other retiral benefits.
3.
Pursuant to notice of motion issued on 1252005, written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents stating that petitioner has suppressed the material facts.
The petitioner himself did not give the consent for regularisation of his service, though move was initiated by the respondent- Board to regularize his service.
When he was asked for regularisation, he refused to give his consent for regularisation of his service and opted to continue on work-charge basis.
His share as well as the employer's share of provident fund had been regularly deposited with the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner and the benefits accruing, as per his option, have been given to him.
Since the petitioner's service was not regularised, therefore, he is not entitled to grant of pension.
The persons whose names have been mentioned by the petitioner in the petition were junior to him and they were appointed in the year 1970 and 1971, whereas, the petitioner was appointed on 1.8.1979.
The only stand taken by the respondents in refusing pensionary benefits to the petitioner, is that the petitioner himself refused to give consent for regularisation of his service and, therefore, he is not entitled to any relief.
In support of their arguments, the respondents have relied on Annexure R/1 i.e. a letter purported to have been written by Charan Dass, petitioner.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
5.
There is no dispute and rather it is the admitted case of both the parties that petitioner had been continuously working as Sweeper on work-charge basis since August 1979.
Therefore, the post of Sweeper continued to exist with the respondent-Board from the date, petitioner joined till he retired.
Therefore, it is clear that the work of the post of Sweeper was available with the respondent-Board.
The plea taken by the respondents that petitioner himself refused to give consent for regularization, cannot be accepted as no sane person would give such consent against his own interests, which assumes much importance in the case of an illiterate person like the present petitioner.
Therefore, no importance can be given to Annexure R-1 as the petitioner being an illiterate person would not even know the consequences of such a writing.
It is well settled that any admission made in ignorance of legal rights cannot bind the maker of the admission.
It appears that this writing was obtained by the office of the respondent-Board in routine at the time of retirement of the petitioner.
Moreover, the respondent-Board has to regularize the services of its employees as per the policy dated 2111993.
Otherwise also, no employee would give consent for non-regularisation of his services.
6.
In the replication it has been categorically pleaded that the petitioner is an illiterate person and he was not competent to give his consent.
He was never apprised to any letter stating that his service is to be regularised as per the Board's instructions issued for regularisation of services of work- charge employees.
Therefore, the respondent-Board cannot be permitted to take advantage of lack of knowledge of legal rights of the petitioner.
In support of his submissions, the petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 376 as well as a decision rendered by this Court in Indian Oil Corporation v. The Municipality Thanesar, 1989 SLJ 49.
In Shri Krishan's case (supra), Supreme Court has held as under :-  "9.
Mr. Nandy, counsel for the respondent placed great reliance on the letter written by the appellant to the respondent wherein he undertook to file the requisite permission or to abide by any other order that may be passed by the University authorities.
This letter was obviously written because the appellant was very anxious to appear in part-II Examination and the letter was written terrorem and in complete ignorance of his legal rights.
The appellant did not know that there was any provision in the University Statute which required that he should obtain the permission of his superior officers.
But as the respondent was bent on prohibiting him from taking the examination he had no alternative but to write a letter per force.
It is well settled that any admission made in ignorance of legal rights or under duress cannot bind the maker of the admission.
In these circumstances we are clearly of the opinion that the letter written by the appellant does not put him out of Court.
If only the University authorities would have exercised proper diligence and care by scrutinizing the admission form when it was sent by the Head of the Department to the University as far back as December, 1971 they could have detected the defects or infirmities from which the form suffered according to the University Statute.
The Head of the Department of Law was also guilty of dereliction of duty in not scrutinizing the admission form of the appellant before he forwarded the same to the University."
In the circumstances of the present case, we are satisfied that denial of pensionary and other retiral benefits shall cause extreme hardship to the petitioner.
The respondent-Board itself has issued policy for regularisation of work-charge/daily-wage/ casual employee vide letter No. 200186/201586/ 2P40 dated 2111993.
As per clause (b) of the said policy, the work-charge/daily- wage/contingent workers working as Sweeper, Mali, Chowkidar, Beldar and Receptionist and on other posts created under TIE-4, where the progress is not susceptible to measurement, shall be regularised after creation of requisite number of posts wherever so required.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner has served the department for more than 23 years.
As per the written statement, it is apparent that there was nothing against him which might have disentitled him to get the pension.
As per the decision of a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(II) RSJ 629, the period of service rendered by an employee on work-charge basis prior to regularisation of his service has to be considered as qualifying service while determining the pension due to him.
In the present case, the only plea taken by the respondents is that petitioner refused to give his consent for regularisation, which, of course, cannot be accepted on the face of it.
The petitioner could not have given such a consent and his signature might have been obtained at the time of his retirement, rather his service should have been regularised as per the aforesaid regularisation policy adopted by the Board.
Thus, the respondents cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own failure to regularise the service of the petitioner.
8.
Taking into consideration the totality of facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that petitioner is entitled to the pensionary benefits.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner in accordance with their policy dated 2111993 within one month of receipt of a certified copy of this order and grant him the consequential pensionary benefits within one month thereafter subject to petitioner's fulfilling the eligibility conditions stipulated in the aforesaid policy.
Petition allowed.