Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - By this writ petition dated October 1st, 2004 the petitioner challenges the steps taken by the respondents to continue and conclude the disciplinary proceeding initiated against him by issuing the charge-sheet dated April 10th, 1990.
2.
Counsel for the petitioner proposes that since on more or less identical charges the petitioner has been acquitted by the competent criminal Court, the disciplinary proceeding that was initiated in the year 1990 cannot be proceeded with any further.
He relies on the decision reported at (1999) 3 SCC 679.
He next contends that the subsistence allowance is not paid to the petitioner on the basis of the revised scales of pay, though similar benefits have been given to all other employees, including employees who suffered suspension like him.
3.
Counsel for the respondents submits that the disciplinary proceeding that was stayed by order passed in the writ petition filed by the petitioner must be concluded now, as the criminal case has terminated.
He points out that though the petitioner has made a mention of his first writ petition of 1993, he has wilfully suppressed the fact of his filing another writ petition in the year 1994.
He contends that challenging the order of acquittal a revision application has been filed, and that it is pending decision in this Court.
Regarding subsistence allowance his submission is that it is being paid strictly according to the rules.
4.
As to the first contention, after considering the decision cited, I am of the view that the proposition is not acceptable.
In the authority relied on no such proposition was laid down that after acquittal in the criminal case the disciplinary proceeding can no further be proceeded with.
As will appear from the judgment, in that case their Lordships of the Supreme Court did not grant liberty to the employer to proceed afresh (an ex parte enquiry had been held against the employee in that case) because of the peculiar circumstances noted in that case.
It follows therefore that even after acquittal by the criminal Court the disciplinary proceeding can be proceeded with, and that it is immaterial whether the charges in both the proceedings are more or less similar or not.
5.
The disciplinary proceeding that was initiated as back as April 10th, 1990 was stayed (till the termination of the criminal case) by this Court by passing necessary order in the 1993 writ petition filed by the petitioner.
It is not disputed that because of such stay the proceeding could not be concluded.
If now because of the petitioner's acquittal in the criminal case the respondents are not permitted to proceed with and conclude it, they will be deprived of their right and power to do so without any sanction of law.
In my view, in such a case the employer has the right and power to proceed with the pending disciplinary proceeding and conclude it.
6.
Regarding the subsistence allowance aspect, I am of the view that the respondents must pay such allowance to the petitioner strictly in accordance with the relevant rules.
If the petitioner has any grievance, he is free to agitate it before the competent authority, and it is the duty of the competent authority to look into his grievance and take necessary step.
Counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decision reported at 1992(1) CHN 398.
I think the grievance should first be raised before the competent authority.
So regarding this issue also I find no necessity to entertain the writ petition.
7.
For the above reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There will be no order for costs.
8.
It is made clear that the disciplinary proceeding shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible, and that the petitioner shall be given all reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied, if applied for.
10.
Xerox copy of this judgment and order duly counter-signed by the Assistant Registrar (Court) shall also be supplied to the parties, on usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.