SS Nijjar, J (Oral) - With the consent of counsel for the parties, the writ petition is taken up for final disposal at motion stage itself.
2.
The husband of the petitioner was working with the Haryana State Electricity Board (now Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.) on work charged basis from 161967.
His services were regularised on 2761970.
At the time of his death, he was working as regular ALM.
The petitioner submitted the claim for family pension, but the same was not granted.
Ultimately, the petitioner served a legal notice on 7112003.
When no decision was taken on the same, the petitioner filed CWP No. 283 of 2004 which was disposed of by this Court by order dated 912004.
The respondents were directed to treat the legal notice as a representation and taken a decision thereon within a period of four months.
It was also directed that if the petitioner's claim is to be denied, the respondents should pass a speaking order and communicate the same to the petitioner.
In compliance of the orders passed by this Court, the respondents have conveyed a decision dated 2742004 rejecting the claim of the petitioner.
It has been stated that at the time of the death of the husband of the petitioner, the total service to the credit of the deceased was four years and one day ie less than 5 years.
Minimum service requried for grant of family pension under the Civil Service Rules Vol. II is five years.
The respondents have distinguished the judgments of this Court passed in the cases of Savitri Devi v. State of Haryana and another, 1996(2) SCT 809 (P&H) : 1996(2) RSJ 854 and Smt. Sharmila Devi v. UHBVL and others, 2002(2) SCT 179, on the ground that at the relevant time, under the instructions, the minimum qualifying service required was of only one year.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the matter is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgments of this Court.
Learned counsel has also relied on the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court passed in CWP No. 12449 of 2003 decided on 842005.
3.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
They have not denied the service details as given by the petitioner in paragraph 2 of the writ petition.
It is stated that at the time of the death of the husband of the petitioner in the year 1976, minimum qualifying service for eligibility of pension was five years services, under Clause 4(i) of the Pension Scheme.
Qualifying period of five years was reduced to one year by Notification dated 28.9.1979.
Subsequently, vide Notification dated 421992, even the service rendered by a work charged employee was also made reckonable towards retiral benefits.
It is also stated that the petitioner had been appointed on compassionate ground as a Peon in January, 1978.
She would, therefore, not be entitled to any family pension.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is entitled to family pension under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
Under Rule 4 of the aforesaid Scheme, minimum service required is of one year.
In the case of Smt. Savitri Devi (supra), the Scheme has been interpreted by the Division Bench and it has been held that even less than one year service is enough for the grant of family pension.
The respondents are duty bound to implement the judgment.
The aforesaid judgment has been followed by a Division Bench of this Court in the case Sharmila Devi (supra).
In the judgment rendered in Smt. Savitri Devi (supra), it has been held as under:-  "3.
The mandate of the aforementioned provision appears to be that in case the Government servant at the time of entry into service produces a Medical Certificate of Fitness, the family would be entitled to family pension even if he dies within less than one year."
Following the aforesaid judgment rendered in Smt. Savitri Devi (supra), a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a member, has also allowed CWP No. 12449 of 2003 (Jagwati and another v. State of Haryana and others).
In our opinion, the matter is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment.
In view of the above, the petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the family pension alongwith the arrears to the petitioner within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.