Tapan Sen, J. (Oral) - The petitioner in the instant case prays for quashing the order dated 2011999 as contained in Annexure P-10 by which the representation of the petitioner was rejected.
The petitioner makes a further prayer for the issuance of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to release the sum of Rs. 6,221/- together with interest at the rate of 18% being the sum said to be wrongly deducted from the gratuity of the petitioner.
2.
Prior to joining the services of the Respondents, the petitioner was working in the Railways.
It appears that the petitioner had been deputed to the Haryana State Electricity Board after the expiry of his term of deputation.
This was made taking into consideration the consent given by him to serve the Haryana State Electricity Board after obtaining a No Objection Certificate from the authorities of the Northern Railways.
Thereafter the Haryana State Electricity Board issued an office order dated 211981 purporting to be a letter of appointment by reason whereof he was sought to be absorbed as a Loco Foreman in the scale of Rs. 200-450/- with effect from 3091980.
It appears that after he was so absorbed as a Loco Foreman on 211981, the respondents issued an office order dated 2521981 by which the scale granted to the petitioner being the scale of Rs. 200-450/- was substituted to Rs. 600-1100/- with effect from 1.4.1979.
This is evident from paragraph 2 of the impugned order dated 2011999, as contained in Annexure P-10.
3.
It is further evident from the same paragraph read with Annexure P-2, that on 6121983, the Haryana State Electricity Board issued another office order by which the pay scale of Rs. 600-1100/- was substituted to Rs. 700-1150/-.
It is also evident from reading of Annexure P-4, which is the letter dated January 1997, and which relates to the pay fixation of the petitioner written by the Senior Accounts Officer, that the petitioner was duly recognised as a Foreman Grade I and was allotted seniority vide Sr. No. 38 in the seniority list of the said Foremen Grade I, showing his scale of pay to be Rs. 700-1150/-.
4.
Thus, the statement made in the impugned order to the effect that the Accounts Officer had fixed the pay of the petitioner wrongly/erroneously in the scale of Rs. 700-1150/- with effect from 24.9.1980, does not appear to be correct.
Even assuming that there was an erroneous fixation, even then, it cannot be said that the petitioner was in any way responsible for the said error nor have the respondents been able to establish that the petitioner, in any manner, committed a fraud or misrepresentation upon the respondents in such a way that he managed to snatch a higher scale of pay.
Following the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana and others, reported in 1995 Suppl (1) SCC 18, this Court holds that if the respondents have made any recovery from the petitioner, the same appears to this Court to be grossly irregular.
There does not appear to be any reasonable nexus in resorting to the impugned action and the documents on record to show that the fixation of pay of the petitioner was erroneously made.
The statement to the effect that the petitioner was not promoted as a Foreman also does not appear to be correct because Annexure P-1 is a document of the respondents themselves which shows that the petitioner had been included in the seniority list of Foremen Grade I.
There is neither any document on the record nor have the respondents filed any written statement in this case showing that they had issued any office order withdrawing the aforementioned seniority list or passing any order to the effect that the promotion given to the petitioner as a Foreman was wrong.
These statements, appearing in the impugned order, therefore, appear to have been resorted to only for the sake of taking these pleas without there being any supportive material in support of what the respondents have to say in the impugned order.
Consequently, the order dated 2011999, as contained in Annexure P-10, is quashed and the amount of Rs. 46,221/- which has been recovered from the petitioner allegedly for wrong pay fixation and towards excess payment must be returned to him forthwith.
5.
However, the payer for interest at the rate of 18% which has been deducted from gratuity appears to be on the higher side.
Even Banks do not give this much of interest these days.
But taking into consideration the fact that recovery was made from gratuity without any basis, the petitioner should, at the same time, be compensated.
In that view of the matter, this Court holds that the respondents should pay him costs of Rs. 25,000/- as compensation for illegally encroaching upon his right to gratuity.
As a consequence of this order the Writ Petition is allowed and it is held that the respondents are bound to refix the pension of the petitioner.
After the aforementioned order was dictated, learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that a time frame be fixed so that the money recovered is returned to the petitioner without any further delay to him.
This Court is not inclined to pass any order on the aforementioned prayer of the petitioner because when a Court does not fix a time frame, it means immediately and therefore, the respondents are to act immediately and forthwith.
Petition allowed.