MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of directions to the Addl.
Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Ropar to take up the Civil Suit titled as Sri Dasmesh Academy, Anandpur Sahib v. Sri Dasmesh Academy Karamchari Union, Anandpur Sahib and others.
It has also been prayed that the Civil Judge be further directed to dispose of the application for issuance of ad-interim injunction filed under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity the Code).
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the plaintiff-petitioner-Sri Dasmesh Academy, Anandpur Sahib (for brevity the Academy) has filed a civil suit for permanent injunction retraining the defendant-respondents from interfering or obstructing the ingress or egress of students, employees, staff and executives who are carrying out their studies and duties in the Academy.
A further prayer has been made to the effect that defendant-respondents be retrained from holding demonstrations and shouting slogans within the radius of 300 Mts.
of the boundaries of the Academy and also not to interfere in its normal functioning in any manner whatsoever.
The averments made by the plaintiff- petitioner shows that on 422003 a decision for retrenchment of the surplus staff of the Academy was taken as it was undergoing financial crisis.
Defendant-respondent Nos. 2 to 21 who are Class IV employees of the Academy have been served with three months notices dated 1952003 for dispensing with their services and it is claimed that this decision is based on the principle of last come first go.
The issuance of retrenchment notices resulted into resentment amongst the defendant-respondent Nos. 2 to 21 who held demonstrations by forcibly entering the office of the Vice Principal.
The allegations are that defendant-respondents threatened the Vice Principal with dire consequences if the notices were not withdrawn.
They have been holding demonstrations and shouting slogans.
Employees Union, defendant-respondent No. 1 issued a letter on 2062003 threatening to hold a demonstration on 272003 and 1372003 in case the notices issued were not withdrawn.
The matter has been reported to the police vide DDR No. 24 dated 2062003.
It is apprehended that defendant-respondents would indulge in slogans shouting, and violence after the Academy reopens.
The Academy was to reopen on 1472003 which was post-poned to 2872003.
The suit has been filed with the afore mentioned averments alongwith an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code.
The suit was presented on 1172003 during the vacations and it was registered.
Notice of the suit as well as of the application was issued for 1972003.
The case was adjourned to 2272003.
The learned counsel has stated that hearing of the case is now fixed for 482003.
3.
Shri I.P. Singh, learned counsel has argued that as the Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Anandpur Sahib is on leave from 21.7.2003 to 2672003 and therefore the application for issuance of ad-interim injunction was not taken up on 272003 and was adjourned to 482003.
According to the learned counsel the Academy is to reopen on 2872003 and the students as well as the staff has to report on 27.7.2003.
As the Civil Judge is on leave upto 2672003, the matter requires urgent attention because as functioning of the Academy would be paralysed which is to reopen on 2872003.
Learned counsel has further submitted that the suit be transferred to the Court of Addl.
Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Ropar who had initially heard the case on 1972003.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel, I do not find any merit in this petition because the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution could be exercised only in cases where grave injustice is likely to result.
Plaintiff-petitioner has filed a civil suit, sought the help of the executive authorities by moving appropriate application before the Sub Divisional Magistrate and they have also lodged a report with the police.
There are adequate provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for brevity the Code) to override the situations presented in such a crisis.
Sections 129 to 132 of Chapter X of the Code deals with unlawful assembles and clothe the Executive Magistrate or Officer Incharge of Police Station or even other officers to disperse such an assembly by use of civil force.
Similarly, under Sections 132 to 143 of the Code public nuisance can be removed even by use of force.
The application filed by the petitioner under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has to be examined in the light of the remedies already availed and available to the plaintiff-petitioner.
It is true that Civil Court order would be mandatory and would impose an obligation on executive authorities to implement the same yet the executive authorities also enjoy overwhelming powers in this sphere.
Moreover, the petitioners have invoked these provisions itself.
In such a situation should this Court exercise its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution  5.
It is well settled that jurisdiction of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution is confined to exercise of superintending power with the object to ensure that the inferior Courts remain within the limits of their authorities and do not exceed the same.
This proposition of law was enunciated by their Lordships in the case of Ouseph Mathai v. M Abdul Khadir, 2002(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 182 : (2002) 1 SCC 319.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :  "It is not denied that the powers conferred upon the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution are extra ordinary and discretionary powers as distinguished from ordinary statutory powers.
No doubt Article 227 confers a right of superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises the jurisdiction but no corresponding right is conferred upon a litigant to invoke the jurisdiction under the said article as a matter of right.
In fact power under this article casts a duty upon the High Court to keep the inferior courts and tribunals within the limits of their authority and that they do not cross the limits, ensuring the performance of duties by such courts and tribunals in accordance with law conferring powers within the ambit of the enactments creating such courts and tribunals.
Only wrong decisions may not be a ground for the exercise of jurisdiction under this article unless the wrong is referable to grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of power by the subordinate courts and tribunals resulting in grave injustice to any party."
Similarly in Laxmikant Revchand Bhojwani v. Pratap Singh, 1995(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 638 : JT 1995(7) 400, the Supreme Court adversely commented upon the endeavour of the High Court to extend jurisdiction in matters which are already occupied by other, statutory authorities under the Rent Act.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :  "Before parting with this judgment we would like to say that the High Court was not justified in extending its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India in the present case.
The Act is a special legislation governing landlord-tenant relationship and disputes.
The legislature has, in its wisdom, not provided second appeal or revision to the High Court.
The object is to give finality to the decision of the appellate authority.
The High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India cannot assume unlimited prerogative to correct all species of hardship or wrong decisions.
It must be restricted to cases of grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of fundamental principles of law or justice, where grave injustice would be done unless the High Court interferes."
When the principles laid down in the afore-mentioned judgments are applied to the facts of the present case it becomes evident that in the instant case there is no obligation cast on the Civil Judge to immediately take up the matter and pass an order.
The provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code provides for discretionary relief which in the facts and circumstances of the case may or may not be granted.
Moreover, the High Court cannot exercise jurisdiction by directing the Civil Judge to pass order in such an area which is already occupied by other statutory authorities, Tribunals or the Courts.
The petitioners have already invoked the jurisdiction of executive and police authorities which has mitigated the urgency reflected in the application filed under Order 39 Rules and 1 and 2.
By filing a report to the police as well as to the Sub Divisional Magistrate who are under a statutory obligation to maintain peace, law and order, the petitioners have taken steps in right direction.
The numerous provisions in the Code which casts a duty on the Sub Divisional Magistrate to pre-empt any effort to breach peace, tranquility, unlawful assembly so on and so forth.
Even otherwise there is no reason for the plaintiff-petitioner to rush to this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution when all the remedies have already been availed by him.
Therefore, this petition is without merit and is thus liable to be dismissed.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.