SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 11.7.2001 (Annexure P-13/T) passed by respondent No. 1, by which the claim of the petitioner for notional promotions on the posts of Assistant Registrar (Examinations) and Registrar w.e.f.
181993 and 191993 respectively, has been rejected.
The petitioner also prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to treat the petitioner as having been promoted on the aforesaid two dates with all consequential benefits.
2.
The undisputed facts are that the petitioner joined as a Clerk in the Head Office of the Director of Public Instructions in the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union, on 27.8.1955.
He retired as Superintendent Grade-I on 31121994 from the office of DPI (Schools), Punjab, Chandigarh.
At the time of retirement, he was drawing Rs. 3,700/- pm basic pay.
The service conditions of the petitioner are governed by the Punjab Education Department (State Services, Class-II) Rules, 1965.
Promotions under these rules are to be made on the basis of Seniority-cum-merit.
The work and conduct of the petitioner has been satisfactory throughout his service career and he was entitled to promotion in the normal course.
On the basis of reservation of the posts in favour of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes, the petitioner would have been entitled to promotion as Assistant Registrar (Examinations) w.e.f.
181993 and Registrar w.e.f.
191993.
3.
After the decision in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab, 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC) : 1995(6) SCC 684, Civil Appeal No. 3792-94 of 1989, decided on 131996, the State of Punjab issued instructions dated 9.10.1996 (Annexure P-6).
It was notified in these instructions that in Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (General and Common Conditions of Services) Rules, 1994, it is provided that inter se seniority of the persons appointed to posts in each cadre of service shall be determined by length of continuous service on such posts in that cadre of the service.
This rule cannot be now applied in fixing of the seniority between reserved category and general category candidates in promoted category.
It was further notified that the principle laid down by the Supreme Court has to be implemented while fixing the seniority of the reserved category candidates and general category candidates.
It was decided by the Government that promotions made on or after 19.10.1982 are required to be reviewed.
On review of the promotions, an order was passed on 22.11.1996 wherein the petitioner was recommended to be promoted on the post of Assistant Registrar on 181993 and Registrar on 1.9.1933.
Relying on the aforesaid communication, the petitioner made representation on 372000 seeking notional promotions and fixation of his pay for the purposes of re- fixation of his pension.
When no decision had been taken by the Government, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 16079 of 2000 which was decided on 24112000 with a direction to the respondents to consider the representation filed by the petitioner and also the recommendation made by the Director and take the final decision thereon, in accordance with law by passing a speaking order.
In obedience to the aforesaid order of this Court, the respondents have passed impugned order on 11.7.2001 (Annexure P-13/T).
The claim of the petitioner has been rejected on the ground that the instructions of the Government dated 131996 have to be applied prospectively.
Since the petitioner retired on 31121994, his case for promotion, even though recommended by the DPI, cannot be considered.
4.
The petitioner challenges the aforesaid order (Annexure P-13/T) on the ground that it is contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua (supra) and the clarification issued in the case of Ajit Singh-II v. State of Punjab, 1999(4) SCT 1 (SC).
After considering the entire matter, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "19.
In fact, some general candidates who have since retired, were indeed entitled to higher promotions, while in service if Ajit Singh-II is to apply, they would get substantial benefits which were unjustly denied to them.
The decision in Ajit Singh-II is binding on us.
Following the same, we set aside the judgment of the Tribunal and direct that the seniority lists and promotions be reviewed as per the directions given above, subject of course to the restriction that those who were promoted before 131996 on principles contrary to Ajit Singh-II need not be reverted and those who were promoted contrary to Sabharwal before 1021995 need not be reverted.
This limited protection against reversion was given to those reserved candidates who were promoted contrary to the law laid down in the above cases, to avoid hardship.
20.
We are here adding one more protection to the retired reserved candidates in these cases.
Though their seniority is revised at the level of Executive Engineer or above and though they might not have been promoted if the law laid down by this Court in Ajit Singh-II and Sabharwal (as explained in Ajit Singh-II) were applicable to them at the relevant time, still for purposes of their retiral benefits, the said benefits shall be computed on the basis of the post factually held by them at the time of retirement and on the emoluments actually drawn by them and not on the basis of the result of any review that is now directed.
21.
So far as the general candidates are concerned, their seniority will be restored in accordance with Ajit Singh-II and Sabharwal (as explained in Ajit Singh-II) and they will get their promotions accordingly from the effective dates.
They will get notional promotions but will not be entitled to any arrears of salary on the promotional posts.
However, for purpose of retiral benefits, their position in the promoted posts from the notional dates - as per this judgment - will be taken into account and retiral benefits will be computed as if they were promoted to the posts and drawn the salary and emoluments of those posts, from the notional dates.
5.
In view of the aforesaid pronouncement of law, the petitioner is clearly entitled to notional promotions as recommended by the respondents in Annexure P-8/T In fact the respondents have themselves reviewed the promotions of various categories.
The petitioner has attached orders dated 1012000 and 332001 wherein the Chief Secretary has reviewed a large number of promotions in the Secretariat Establishment.
6.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order (Annexure P13/T) dated 11.7.2001 is hereby quashed.
The petitioner is held entitled to the notional promotions on the post of Assistant Registrar (Examinations) w.e.f.
181993 and on the post of Registrar w.e.f.
191993.
In view of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the petitioner shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary on the promotional posts.
However, for the purpose of retiral benefits, his position in the promoted posts from the notional dates will be taken into account and retiral benefits will be computed as if he was promoted to the posts and had drawn the salary and emoluments of those posts, from the notional dates.
Let the pension of the petitioner be refixed.
The needful be done within a period of two months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.