JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was inducted into the service of Haryana Police Department as a constable on 7.6.1951.
He was thereafter promoted to the rank of Head Constable.
While discharging duties against the post of Head Constable he attained the age of 55 years on 1511986.
Through a communication dated 2131986, the petitioner was sought to be retired from service on account of his having attained the age of 55 years.
The petitioner's retirement was based on the ground that his services were no longer required.
As a consequence of the passing of the aforesaid order, the petitioner was relieved from his duties.
2.
Through the instant writ petition, the petitioner has impugned the order passed by Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, dated 2131986, vide which he was retired from service on attaining the age of 55 years.
He has also impugned the action of the respondents in not making him payment of encashment of unutilised earned leave, in terms of the instructions issued by the State Government.
3.
The emphatic contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that there was no material whatsoever to justify the action of the respondents in prematurely retiring the petitioner by the order dated 2131986.
In this behalf, it is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that for a period of 14 years preceding the passing of the impugned order dated 2131986, no adverse Annual Confidential Report was ever communicated to the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents, in order to justify the passing of the impugned order dated 2131986, has invited the Court's attention to the assertions made in paragraph 2 of the written statement.
Paragraph 2 of the written statement is being extracted hereunder :-  "2.
That the contents of para No. 2 of the petition are admitted to be correct to the extent that the petitioner was recruited as a Constable and was enrolled as Police Officer with effect from 7.6.1951.
However, the contents of the remaining para are denied, petitioner was awarded punishment of stoppage of two future increments with permanent effect entailing a reduction in pay from Rs. 132/- to Rs. 130/- w.e.f.
22.2.1972 for showing negligence; that while ASI Mast Ram handed over one Mohinder Singh to the defaulter with direction to take him into Police Station, but he after taking liquor and accepting some illegal gratification let him off."
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that the instant writ petition deserves to be dismissed on account of non- disclosure of material particulars.
In this behalf, it is pointed out that the petitioner was inflicted with the punishment of stoppage of two future increments with cumulative effect, whereby his emoluments were reduced from Rs. 132/- to Rs. 130/- w.e.f.
22.2.1972.
5.
On the Court's query whether any adverse Annual Confidential Report had been recorded against the petitioner for the period of 14 years preceding his premature retirement, learned counsel for the respondents fairly acknowledged that there was not even a single report adversely commenting upon the work and conduct of the petitioner for a period of 14 years preceding his pre-mature retirement.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in order to assail the impugned order dated 2131986, has invited the Court's attention to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Daya Nand Dalal v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(3) SCT 695 (P&H) : 1999(2) Recent Services Judgments 465.
Pointed reliance has been placed on the conclusions drawn by the Division Bench in the aforesaid case, in respect of the issue of premature/compulsory retirement.
The aforesaid conclusions as have been recorded in Daya Nand Dalal's case (supra), are being extracted hereunder :-  "The propositions, which emerge from the above analysis of the Rules, the instructions and the various judicial precedents referred to hereinabove, are :- (a) The employer is not required to comply with the principles of natural justice before an order of premature retirement of an employee is passed because such an order is not punitive and it does not cast any stigma on the employee.
However, where the order of retirement is passed as a measure of punishment, the employer has to make an inquiry in accordance with the rules and the principles of natural justice.
(b) The decision to retire an employee is to be on forming the opinion that it is in public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily.
(c) Though the satisfaction of the government about the utility and fitness of the employee to be retained in service is subjective, the same has to be formed on an objective consideration of the relevant factors.
(d) The Government or the committee, who is entrusted with the task of making an evaluation of the record of the employee, must consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter, but greater importance should be attached to the record of the employee and his performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would only include the entries in the confidential reports (bad as well as good) and the punishment, if any, imposed.
(e) If the government servant is promoted to higher post after consideration of the adverse reports, if any, then such reports will lose their sting.
This principle will apply with greater rigour where promotion is based purely on merit.
(f) Where the rule empowering the government/appropriate authority to prematurely retire a servant is silent, the government can issue administrative instructions laying down guidelines for exercising of power of premature retirement.
Such guidelines are to be kept in view while considering the case of the employee for premature retirement/compulsory retirement but they cannot be read as controlling the discretion of the government/appropriate authority.
(g) If the record of the employee in relation to earlier years contains average and not so good entries but, in the later years his performance shows positive improvement, then there must exist some cogent reasons for exercise of the power of pre-mature retirement.
(h) The Court will ordinarily not interfere with the bona fide exercise of power by making an evaluation of the service record of the employees as an appellate authority but where the exercise of power by the government or the appropriate authority is vitiated by violation of the statutory provisions governing the exercise of such power or where the appropriate authority fails to apply its mind to the record of the employee in an objective manner or where the appropriate authority forms opinion about the utility of the employee by relying on extraneous factors, then the Court not only has power but duty to exercise the power of judicial review to invalidate order of retirement."
On the basis of the aforesaid, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that there was no material whatsoever to justify the petitioner's premature retirement order dated 2131986 and that the aforesaid order having been passed without any material justification, must be deemed to have been passed without adopting the procedure delineated in the conclusions recorded by this Court in Daya Nand Dalal's case (supra) (already extracted above).
7.
I find justification in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the absence of any adverse entry in the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner for 14 years preceding his premature retirement (by an order dated 2131986), it is inevitable to conclude that the record of service of the petitioner, for the 14 years preceding his premature retirement, was satisfactory and unblemished.
It is wholly unjustified on the part of the respondents to prematurely retire an employee whose work and conduct is satisfactory.
In so far as the infliction of the punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is concerned, it is clear that the aforesaid order of punishment was passed in 1972.
For the alleged delinquency attributed to the petitioner, he was duly punished by inflicting upon him a punishment commensurate to the guilt proved and established against him at that juncture.
It was open to the respondents to remove the petitioner from its employment at that juncture by choosing to inflict upon him the punishment of dismissal, or termination, or compulsory retirement.
Having not taken recourse to the aforesaid punishment, at that stage, it is now not open to the respondents to exercise the aforesaid option at the present juncture.
Permitting the respondents to prematurely retire the petitioner on the basis of the allegations for which he was punished in 1972 would amount to allowing the respondents to punish the petitioner twice on account of the same delinquency.
8.
In view of the above, it is apparent that the order of premature retirement dated 2131986 was based on wholly extraneous considerations.
The said order is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
Ordered accordingly.
9.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is, that he has not been paid encashment of unavailed earned leave, in terms of the instructions issued by the State Government.
In order to repudiate the aforesaid claim, learned counsel for the respondents points out that encashment of unavailed earned leave is not permissible to an employee who has been prematurely retired.
The instant objections raised by the respondents stand negated, (even if the same was justified), since the order of premature retirement in the instant case has been found to be unsustainable in law.
In view of the above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order of premature retirement dated 2131986 is set aside.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits including encashment of earned leave in terms of the instructions issued by the State Government.
Payment shall be made to the petitioner in compliance with the instant order, within 4 months from today.
Petition allowed.