Surya Kant, J - This joint writ petition has been filed by three petitioners seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders dated April 2, 2004 (Annexures P-5, P-6 and P-7) whereby their services, no longer required by Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering and Technology, Bhatinda (hereinafter referred to as the College), they have been repatriated and were relieved from duty with immediate effect to join their parent department(s).
According to the petitioners, their deputation could not have been cancelled before the expiry of the term expressly stipulated in the orders dated 1102003, 182002 and 6112003, Annexures P-1, P-3 and P-4 respectively vide which they were sent on deputation to the aforementioned college.
They have also questioned the competence of the Principal of the College (respondent No. 3) who, according to the petitioners, was incompetent to pass the impugned orders.
2.
The Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering & Technology, Punjab is run by a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
The Minister, Technical Education, Punjab is the ex officio Chairman of the Board of Governors, the other members whereof are also either the government functionaries and/or nominees of the State Government.
It is, however, not disputed that the Society has framed its own bye-laws to govern the affairs of the College.
According to the respondents, the college was initially established by the Govt. of Punjab but with effect from 1st March, 1992, its control and management was transferred to the Society.
The College does not receive any kind of grant from the State of Punjab and is being run by its Board of Governors with the resources generated by the College at its own level.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 is a Lecturer in Electrical Engineering in Technical Education Department, Punjab.
Similarly, petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Technical Assistant in Shahid Bhagat Singh College of Engineering and Technology at Ferozepur which is established by the Govt. of Punjab.
Likewise, petitioner No. 3 was working as a Lecturer (Senior Scale) in Guru Nanak College at Budhladha (a private institute) at the relevant time.
Three separate orders were passed in purported compliance with the directions issued by the Minister, Technical Education, Punjab-cum-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the College.
Vide first order dated October 1, 2003 (Annexure P- 1), petitioner No. 1 was sent on deputation to the college "for a period of 3 years" and vide order dated August 1, 2002 (Annexure P-3), petitioner No. 2 was sent on deputation to the College with a stipulation that "the duration of the deputation will be initially for three years".
Vide order dated November 6, 2003 (Annexure P-4), petitioner No. 3, who was a lecturer (Senior Scale), was appointed as Deputy Registrar on deputation in the College "for a period of 2 years".
4.
While the petitioners were working in the College on their above mentioned respective posts, they were served with similar worded orders dated April 2, 2004 (Annexures P-5, P-6 and P-7) whereby their deputation was terminated and they were repatriated to their respective parent departments.
For ready reference, we may reproduce the contents of one of the such orders, which reads as follows :-  "Your service are no longer required in this college.
Therefore you are hereby relieved from duties with immediate effect to join your parent department.
Charge be handed over to the HOD/Coordinator.
This has the approval of the higher authorities."
5.
It appears that aggrieved at the orders Annexures P-5 to P-7, the petitioners made a representation to the Minister, Technical Education-cum- Chairman of the Board of Governors, who in turn got issued an order dated April 12, 2004 (Annexure P-11), para 2 whereof reads as under :-  "The matter has been considered and it has been decided that the following staff, who are on the deputation with the college, and whose deputation has been cancelled by you are hereby allowed to continue on deputation with the college, till further order of the Hon'ble Technical Education Minister (Chairman, BOG) : 1.
Dr. Jaskaran Kaur, Deputy Registrar 2.
Sh. Rajinder Singh, Sr. Tech.
3.
Sh. Gursharan Singh, Peon 4.
Sh. Gurinder Pal Singh, Lecturer 5.
Sh. Jaspinder Singh, Lecturer."
6.
The aforementioned order, however, appears to have not worked to the advantage of the petitioners, thereby prompting them to knock at the door of this Court through this writ petition.
7.
Upon notice, reply has been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab by the Principal Secretary, Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, in paragraph 2 whereof, the following stand has been taken :-  "That the respondent No. 3 college i.e. Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering & Technology, Bhatinda is being run by an autonomous society registered under Societies Registration Act.
All the affairs of the college are managed by their Competent Authority in accordance with their own Bye- laws.
The orders Annexures P-1, P-2, P-4 & P-11 were issued by the Government conveying the decision of the Technical Education Minister i.e. Chairman, Board of Governors, Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering & Technology, Bhatinda."
Thus, the State Government, has not insisted upon sticking to its stand which is reflected in the order dated April 12, 2004 (Annexure P-11).
8.
A separate written statement has been filed on behalf of the College, inter alia, taking a preliminary objection that the petitioners have no right to continue on deputation as a matter of right and their repatriation orders have been passed separately, therefore, a combined writ petition is not maintainable.
On merits, it has been averred that the Punjab Civil Services Rules, upon which reliance has been placed by the petitioners, are not applicable on the employees of the College as their service conditions are governed by the bye-laws; that no grant-in-aid has been given by the Govt. of Punjab for the last three years and salary of the employees is being paid out of the fee collected from the students; that the repatriation orders have been issued after getting the approval of the Principal Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab vide his order dated March 5, 2004 (Annexure R-3/1); that while taking the petitioner No. 1 on deputation to the College, the institute never circulated any requirement to take an employee on deputation; the college started post-graduate programme in Electrical Engineering leading to M Tech., therefore, it required MTech/ME qualified teacher whereas petitioner No. 1 is only Bachelor of Engineering; that the order vide which petitioner No. 1 was taken on deputation suffers from various illegalities/irregularities; the College has to bear a financial liability of more than Rs. 2,20,000/- per annum in terms of salary and other benefits payable to petitioner No. 1 despite the fact that the College is passing through a financial crisis; that petitioner No. 2 belongs to Bhatinda, therefore, he wants to continue on deputation; although he was working as a Technical Assistant in the parent department in the pay scale of Rs. 5800-9200 but he was taken on deputation in the College on the post of Junior Technician which is in the pay scale of Rs. 3120-4200 but had to be paid salary in the higher scale thereby bearing an excess expenditure of Rs. 72,000/- per annum apart from Rs. 10,000/- as liability towards leave salary and other contributions; the post against which petitioner No. 2 had been taken on deputation was also never circulated nor was there a requirement to fill up the same; likewise, the post against which petitioner No. 3 had been taken on deputation was never circulated as there was no need to fill up this post; that petitioner No. 3 was working as a Lecturer (Senior Scale) in a private Arts/Science College and her deputation to the College is totally impermissible and against public interest; that she does not fulfil the required qualifications and experience for the post of Deputy Registrar; that the College is passing through financial crisis yet has been burdened to incur expenditure to the tune of Rs. 3,50,000/- per annum in terms of salary payable to petitioner No. 3, besides the fact that her services are not required by the College.
9.
A pointed reference has been made to Annexure R-3/1 wherein it finds mention that the services of the petitioners were not required on the respective posts held by them and that there are five deputationists including the three petitioners who are causing a financial liability to the tune of Rs. 11 lacs per annum upon the College.
It also contains the approval granted by the Director, Technical Education as well as the Principal Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Govt. of Punjab for relieving the petitioners.
10.
We have heard Shri Baltej Singh Sidhu, learned counsel for the petitioners, Shri CM Munjal, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 and Shri Sukhdeep Singh Bhindar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and have perused the pleadings.
11.
The primary contention of Shri Sidhu, learned counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners were taken on deputation under the orders passed by the Chairman of the Board of Governors whereas no such approval was obtained while passing the impugned orders Annexure P-5 to P-7.
His second contention is that the petitioners were taken on deputation for specified terms, therefore, their deputation period could not have been shortened by repatriating them prematurely.
Reliance has been placed by him upon Rules 1025 and 1028 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules also.
On the other hand, Shri Bhindar, learned counsel for the college has contended that the petitioners have no legally vested right to continue on deputation; that their repatriation has been ordered in public interest as their services were not required and the College was facing financial crisis; that the petitioners were taken on deputation in a calendestine manner as has been explained in relation to each one of them in the written statement; that their repatriation is justified in law.
Reliance has been placed upon two judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kunal Nanda v. Union of India and another, 2000(2) SCT 809 (SC) : 2000(5) SCC 362 and Rameshwer Parshad v. Managing Director, UP Rajkiya Nirman Nigam Limited and others, 1999(4) SCT 785 (SC) : 1999(8) SCC 381.
12.
In service jurisprudence, "deputation" is described as an assignment of an employee of one department or cadre to another department or cadre.
The necessity for sending on deputation arises in "public interest" to meet the exigencies of "public service".
The concept of deputation is based upon consent and voluntary decision of the employer to lend the services of his employee, corresponding acceptance of such service by the borrowing employer and the consent of the employee to go on deputation.
A deputation subsists so long as the parties to this tripartite arrangement do not abrogate it.
However, if any one of the parties repudiate the agreement, the other two have no legally enforcible right to insist upon continuance of the deputation.
Even in the cases where deputationists continue for a pretty long period and options for their "absorption" in the borrowing department were taken, yet their repatriation to the parent department was upheld by the Apex Court in Rattilal B Soni v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1990 SC 1132 after holding that "the appellants being on deputation, they could be repatriated to their parent cadre at any time and they do not get any right to be absorbed on the deputation post."
"Deputation" per se being a contractually made ad hoc arrangement, seldom confers any right upon a deputationist, either for completion of the term of deputation or regularisation of such stop-gap arrangement.
The judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the College in this regard squarely answer the controversy.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, has placed reliance upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Dr. Bhagat Singh v. Vice Chancellor, Punjabi University, Patiala, 1981(2) SLR 329, to contend that when a deputationist is sent with a prescribed term of deputation, the government is not competent to curtail the fixed period of appointment.
We, however, do not find any such general principle of law laid down by the Full Bench.
That was a case of appointment of a Vice Chancellor of the University which was a statutory appointment with 3 years of tenure prescribed in the statute itself.
The curtailment of statutory tenure by an executive order of the State Government was not approved by the Full Bench.
Thus, the aforementioned judgment is totally distinguishable and is not attracted to the facts and circumstances of this case.
We, accordingly, hold that the petitioners being deputationists have no legal and/or vested right to continue on deputation with the College even for the period stipulated in the orders taking them on deputation.
14.
Coming to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that they were taken on deputation under the orders passed by the Chairman of the Board of Governors whereas no such approval had been taken while repatriating them, therefore, the orders Annexures P-5 to P-7 lack competence.
He further pointed out that the Chairman, in fact, had already got issued the order Annexure P-11, in their favour directing the College to allow them to continue on deputation.
It is true that the petitioners, as mentioned in the orders Annexure P-1, P-3 and P-4, were taken on deputation under the directions of the Chairman of the Board of Governors.
It is, however, not their case that their deputation was ever approved by the Board of Governors.
It is also true that the orders repatriating them were issued by the Principal of the College after getting the same approved from the Principal Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab only and no approval of the Chairman of the Board of Governors was obtained.
15.
The question, however, arises as to whether it is a fit case to invoke the discretionary writ jurisdiction by this Court and to quash the repatriation orders merely on the ground that the same have been issued without the approval of the Chairman of the Board of Governors.
As noticed earlier, an employee is sent on deputation normally in the "exigencies of service" and in "public interest".
What we find from the record is that the petitioners managed their deputation under the dictate of the Minister-in-Charge who, without even considering the requirements of the College, suitability of the petitioners, their eligibility to hold the respective posts, thrusted them upon the College.
Since the deputation appears to have been made merely to "accommodate" the petitioners, obviously the posts were never circulated even for the sake of formality to find out as to whether there were other better qualified, eligible and suitable employees willing to man these posts or not.
Apparently, the petitioners manipulated their deputation for reasons other than the "exitencies of service" and "public interest".
The decision to send them on deputation to the college lacks objectivity.
On the other hand, the Principal of the College, as well as the Principal Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab have seemingly acted in the larger interest of the institution.
They having found that petitioner No. 1 is mere Graduate Engineer, therefore, ineligible to teach M.Tech.
programmes; petitioner No. 2 managed back door entry against a lower post, but drawing salary of a higher post and petitioner No. 3 who is a Lecturer (Senior Scale) has usurped an administrative post of Deputy Registrar for which she is totally ineligible.
It is apparent that "institutional interest" was kept as the paramount consideration by these authorities while directing repatriation of the petitioners.
The bona fides of the College Principal and some of the functionaries of the Technical Education Department are writ large from the fact that in the absence of any grant-in-aid from the State Government, the College is running through financial crisis and they will be able to reduce the financial liability of the College to the tune of Rs. 11 lacs per annum by getting rid of these deputationists.
We are, therefore, not inclined to interfere in the orders Annexure P-5 to P-7 even if they suffer from the alleged procedural irregularities.
16.
However, the Bye-laws and the Rules framed by the Society which lay down the method and manner in which appointments in the College can be made, reveal a totally different story.
The Society (which runs the College) has framed its own rules to govern its affairs.
Rule 12 provides powers and functions of the Board and Clause (ix) thereof reads as follows :-  "to create teaching, administrative, technical, ministerial and other posts under the College and to make appointments thereto for the efficient management of the affairs of the College and to regulate their recruitment and conditions of service and control the staff."
The Society has also framed its Rules (General) in relation to appointments against different posts in the College.
Rule 2.1 thereof reads as under :-  "All posts in the College shall normally be filled by direct recruitment by advertisement but the Board shall have the powers to decide that a particular post is filled by negotiations or by promotion from amongst the members of the staff of the College."
The Chairman of the Board has nowhere been authorised to make appointments including appointments even on ad hoc/contract basis.
Regarding appointment of "Teachers" (which includes Assistant Professors/Lecturers), Rule 3.4 mandates that "all appointments of teachers of the College shall be strictly on merit."
Rule 35 provides that qualifications for the teaching posts shall be prescribed by the Board.
Rule 3.8 (a) too has a bearing on the issue involved in this case and reads as follows :-  "The post shall be advertised with such qualifications as has been prescribed by the Board.
In addition to this, the Principal may invite suggestions and recommendations from such persons, institutions, agencies as he deems proper."
We are, thus, satisfied that the Chairman of the Board has no authority to make appointments in the College including by way of deputation and it is the Board of Governors alone who could do so.
Moreover, no delegation of power in favour of the Chairman of the Board has been shown or placed on record.
17.
The fact worth mentioning is that it is not the case of the petitioners themselves that the Chairman of the Board of Governors was competent to appoint them in the College on deputation.
As we have already held, it is the Board of Governors only who is the competent authority.
Obviously, the petitioners were never taken on deputation by the competent authority.
They appear to have stage-managed their back door entry by putting (pulling ?)
the right strings and have been rightly shown the doors in the same fashion.
They, being mere deputationists, have no right either in law or in equity to continue on the posts in the College.
18.
Further, it is quite unprecedented that an employee working on a higher post opts to go on deputation against a lower post, of course, without incurring any financial loss to himself, but causing an extra financial liability to the College.
It is equally unknown that an employee of a private institute has been taken on deputation in the College which is run by a society established by the government and which till recently was receiving grant-in-aid from the State Government.
It is beyond one's comprehension that a mere Graduate in Engineering is picked up to teach Post-Graduate classes of the same stream.
19.
For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
It will, however, be open for the Board of Governors and/or any other competent authority to objectively consider the requirement, if any, for taking deputationsists to the College and to consider the petitioners as well, however, subject to their eligibility, suitability and also keeping in view the observations made hereinabove.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.