MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of directions to the respondents for reimbursement of the medical bills presented by the petitioner on account of expenses incurred by him on the kidney transplantation of his son Narinder Kumar.
Another prayer made is for quashing Order dated 2932001, Annexure P-11 by which representation of the petitioner has been rejected by the respondents.
2.
Narinder Kumar son of the petitioner has been suffering from Chronic Renal Failure and he was referred by the Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Karnal to PGIMS, Rohtak on 23101997.
The PGIMS, Rohtak further referred Narinder Kumar to PGIMS, Chandigarh on 28.10.1997.
It is established on record by a certificate dated 29041998 issued by PGIMS, Chandigarh (Annexure P-3) that the petitioner's son is suffering from the disease of Chronic Renal Failure which is one of the diseases listed in the list of Haryana Government as one of the chronic diseases.
However, being dis- satisfied with the treatment and apprehending danger to his life, the petitioner took his son Narinder Kumar to the specialist hospital known as Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar which is declared by the State of Punjab as an institution of State importance.
However, the hospital is not on the panel of the recognised hospitals of the Haryana Government.
On account of urgency and reasonable apprehension of danger to the life of the son of the petitioner, he had to be treated at a specialist hospital like Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar.
He was admitted in the hospital on 14061999 and kidney transplantation surgery was performed on him on 20.06.1999 which is amply proved by Certificate Annexure P-4.
Narinder Kumar is taking the follow up treatment from the General Hospital, Karnal.
The petitioner submitted the medical bills, Annexures P-5 and P-6 on 2882000 to the respondents and the same were recommended to be reimbursed firstly by the Sub-Divisional Engineer and then by the Executive Engineer on 11092000 and 18102000 (Annexures P-7 and P- 8).
The bills with regard to the expenses incurred on the follow up action of life saving treatment from General Hospital, Karnal was also submitted in February, 2000 (Annexure P-1).
The respondents, however, declined the reimbursement vide Order dated 29032001 in respect of the expenditure incurred at Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar.
3.
The stand of the respondents in the written statement is that there are instructions dated 26031993 (Annexure R-2) issued by it which impose the maximum limit of Rs. 6,000/- per year if any expenditure is incurred on a patient for getting the treatment from a private hospital.
It has also been pleaded that on account of instructions dated 19111986 only those expenses are reimbursible which are incurred while taking treatment from recognised specialist institutions subject to approval of various authorities.
A list of various institutions has been attached as Annexure R-1.
It has also been pointed out that the limit of Rs. 6,000/- imposed by instructions dated 2091993 (Annexure R-2) was relaxed vide instructions dated 28.5.2003 and even they were made retrospective vide instructions dated 1412004 on the fulfilment of two conditions, namely, 90% of the charges were to be reimbursed provided the treatment has been availed from the Government hospital/recognised hospital and the disease should be one of the 10 chronic diseases shown in the list of Haryana Government.
4.
Mr. AS Virk, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the question raised in the present petition is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in the cse of Nand Kishore v. State of Haryana, 2001(1) SCT 1040 (P&H), C.W.P.
No. 6933 of 2000, decided on 31102000.
According to the learned counsel, in that case also the reimbursement was ordered because the petitioner was suffering from Chronic Renal Failure which is a chronic disease as per item No. 5 specified by the Haryana Government in its instructions.
In that case, the treatment was obtained from the same hospital where the son of the petitioner was treated, namely, Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar.
The State Government has taken similar stand before this Court but despite that the petition was allowed.
Mr. Virk further states that the order passed in Nand Kishore's case (supra) has been accepted by the respondent-State inasmuch as, the amount or reimbursement ordered by this Court has actually been paid to the petitioner.
5.
Mr. NS Bhinder, learned State counsel has, however, argued that in view of the instructions of the State Government, Annexures R-I and R-II and the latest instructions issued on 28052003 and 14012004, no benefit to the petitioner could be given as the treatment availed by him is from a hospital which is not recognised by the Haryana Government.
According to the learned counsel, unless that condition is fulfilled by the petitioner, the medical expenses cannot be reimbursed.
However, he does not dispute that the petitioner is an employee of the respondent-State and is entitled to some medical reimbursement as per the government rules.
It has also not been disputed that his son is suffering from Chronic Renal Failure and his kidney was transplanted in Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar which is an institute of state importance as declared by the Punjab State.
It has also not been disputed that the petitioner had got approval for medical reimbursement with regard to the follow up treatment being given by the General Hospital, Karnal.
The Chronic Renal Failure is a deadly disease which requires immediate attention and care.
It appears that the petitioner waited for about two years from 1997 to 1999 when he was tossed around from one hospital to another which forced him to approach a specialist hospital like Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar.
There cannot be anything precious than the life of a human being and the patience shown by the petitioner for about two years demonstrate that he had taken even the risk and eventually was forced to go to a specialist hospital where the petitioner's son remained admitted before kidney transplantation on 14061999 and the kidney transplantation was carried on 2061999.
Therefore, on the admitted facts, it cannot be disputed that to save the life of his son, he had to rush to a specialist hospital.
This Court in Nand Kishore's case (supra) has held that the uniform policy of providing Rs. 6,000/- per year as out-door patient to the employee or his dependent is arbitrary.
The petitioner is spending huge amount which the State is bound to reimburse.
I do not find any distinguishing feature between the judgment of this Court in Nand Kishore's case (supra) and the present case warranting any deviation in the aforementioned view.
Therefore, the writ petition deserves to be accepted in the same terms.
6.
In view of the above, the present petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to reimburse the amount incurred by the petitioner for his son's treatment obtained from Ram Saran Das Kishori Lal Charitable Trust Hospital, Amritsar and follow up treatment taken from the General Hospital, Karnal or from any other hospital from time to time.
The medical reimbursement shall be allowed to the petitioner on the rates which are applicable to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi or Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Chandigarh.
If the bills submitted by the petitioner are found to be less than the rates applicable to AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMS, Chandigarh, then in that eventuality, the petitioner shall get the actual amount of the bills.
7.
The needful shall be done within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this Order.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs which is determined at Rs. 10,000/-.
The imposition of costs has become necessary as the respondents have failed to follow the judgment of this Court in Nand Kishore's case (supra) as well as in many other cases.
Petition allowed.