Surya Kant, J. (Oral) - Pargat Singh (since deceased)l whose legal heirs have been brought on record vide order dated May 27, 2002, was working as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways.
He moved an application under Section 15(2) of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act'), before the prescribed authority under the Act for the release of his full wages, which according to him, were not being paid on account of certain deductions made as a result of stoppage of some of his annual increments.
As a consequential relief, the respondent also challenged the orders vide which his increments were withheld by the disciplinary authority.
After putting appearance, the petitioner-State brought on record that the annual increments of the respondent were stopped by way of four different orders, one dated June 18, 1969, two dated January 16, 1981 and the last dated September 08, 1981.
The learned prescribed authority while deciding issue No. 1 which related to the validity of the deductions made from the wages, held that these orders were passed after giving show cause notice to the respondent and the same were passed as measure to impose "minor punishments," therefore, there was no legal necessity to hold a regular enquiry before passing the order.
The prescribed authority even after holding that the orders were passed after observing relevant rules came to the conclusion that three out of the four orders, namely, one dated June 18, 1969 and the two dated January 16, 1981 were totally non-speaking orders.
The fourth order dated September 08, 1981 was, however, held to be a speaking order.
Based upon the aforesaid findings, the learned prescribed authority set aside the three non-speaking orders.
As a necessary corollary thereof, the prescribed authority held the respondent entitled for payment of full wages including arrears for a period of 12 months preceding the date of the filing of the petition which were withheld as a result of the three non-speaking orders.
The respondent was also held entitled for the restoration of wages withheld on the basis of the three illegal orders and a direction to pay the same was also issued.
2.
The petitioner preferred an appeal before the learned District Judge being the Appellate Authority under Section 17 of the Act, which was, however, dismissed vide the impugned order dated September 29, 1986 on the premise that the three non-speaking orders passed to withhold the annual increments of the respondent, had no existence in the eyes of law being non-speaking orders and the deductions could not have been made pursuant thereto.
The plea of limitation raised against the challenge qua these orders putforth by the petitioner was also repelled and it was held that no period of limitation could run qua such orders, particularly when the respondent had claimed wages for a period of 12 months only preceding the filing of the application under the Act.
3.
Aggrieved by the order dated September 08, 1981 passed by the prescribed authority and dated September 29, 1986 passed by the Appellate Authority, the State of Punjab has approached this Court through this Civil Revision Petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
4.
I have heard Mrs. Rupinder Wasu, learned Addl.
AG Punjab, for the petitioner and Mr. Puneet Jindal, learned counsel for the respondent and have perused the record.
5.
Mrs. Wasu has, inter alia, contended that while considering the claim of an employee/workman regarding non-payment of wages under Section 15 of the Act, the prescribed authority is not competent to look into the legality of the orders pased by the disciplinary authority.
According to Mrs. Wasu, the nature of proceedings under Section 15 of the Act is somewhat similar to the execution proceedings for which pre-existing right to claim wages is a sine- qua-non.
The prescribed authority can direct the release of wages which have been withheld in an illegal manner and not when the same are withheld in a lawful manner.
In this regard, she placed reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Baldev Singh, Conductor, 1998(9) Supreme Court Cases 325 : 1999(1) SCT 536 (SC).
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Jindal, learned counsel for the respondent has contended that in view of the judgment of the Apex Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1990(6) SLR 73 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC), an order of stoppage of increments with cumulative effect amounts to an order of major punishment under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, which have since been repealed by the 1970 Rules, and in the present case, the orders withholding the increments of the respondent/employee with cumulative effect having been passed merely by issuing a show cause notice instead of following the procedure prescribed for imposing a major punishment under the Statutory Rules, the orders in question were null and void and the same could be challenged in collateral proceedings instituted by the respondent for the release of full wages under Section 15 of the Act.
According to Mr. Jindal, three out of the four orders of punishment have been set aside by the authorities below as the same were undisputedly non-speaking.
Thus, on the basis of patently illegal orders, the respondent could not have been denied the payment of wages.
In support of his contention, he has placed reliance upon judgments of this Court in Ram Dass Chaudhry, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon v. State of Punjab and another, 1968 S.L.R.
792; and Digamber Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1995(1) Recent Service Judgments 695.
Mr. Jindal has further placed reliance on a judgment of the Apex Court in Umesh Chandra Misra v. Union of India and others, 1994 Supp.
(2) Supreme Court Cases 210 : 1993(1) SCT 265 (SC), wherein even after holding that the Payment of Wages Authority could not have gone into the question of legality of the orders regarding denial of subsistence allowance to an employee at the rate prescribed under the Rules, it declined to interfere in the matter when the facts were not in dispute.
Mrs. Wasu, however, contended that as per the findings recorded by the prescribed authority, regular enquiry was held against the respondent/employee before passing the orders of stoppage of increments with cumulative effect though three out of the four such orders were set aside being non-speaking orders.
7.
In the case of Baldev Singh (supra), their Lordships while dealing with a similar case and after taking notice of the fact that the order of punishment pased by the disciplinary authority was set aside by the Prescribed Authority under the Act, held as under :-  "Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the authority constituted under the Payment of Wages Act has no jurisdiction to interfere with the orders passed under the disciplinary proceedings.
We find that the argument of the learned counsel is well founded and the order passed by the authority under the Payment of Wages Act was without jurisdiction."
In view of the above laid down principles of law, there is no escape but to hold that the authority under the Payment of Wages Act, while exercising its powers under Section 15 of the Act, is not competent to look into the legality of the orders passed by the disciplinary authority in exercise of its quasi- judicial powers.
It is true that when an order of punishment does not disclose the application of mind by the disciplinary authority or does not spell out the reasons for rejecting the defence taken by a delinquent employee, it would be illegal per-se.
However, the forum to seek declaration regarding legality of such an order has to be the one recognised by law.
Having held that the prescribed authority under the Act, could not have looked into the legality of orders of punishment, in my view, the impugned orders dated August 17, 1985, passed by the prescribed authority and dated September 29, 1986 passed by the Appellate Authority cannot sustain.
8.
Accordingly, this Civil Revision is allowed and the orders dated August 17, 1985 and September 29, 1986 are set aside.
It will, however, be open for the legal heirs of the respondent/employee to impugn the orders vide which the annual increments of the respondent were stopped allegedly in an illegal manner before an appropriate forum.
Needless to say that in the event of such a declaration having been obtained by them, they shall also be entitled for the consequential relief of payment of full wages, which the respondent-State deducted/withheld in relation to the respondent-employee.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.