MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents to allow the petitioner to appear in 10+2 examination in the subjects of English (301), Hindi (302), Maths (041) and Physics (042) for the purposes of improving his earlier score alongwith the subject of Chemistry (043).
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner has appeared in 10+2 examination for the Senior School Certificate Examination held in March, 2003 from the Holy Child Public School, Rewari (Haryana).
The aforementioned school is affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education (for brevity, CBSE).
He took the exam in the subjects of English, Maths, Physics, Physical Education, Hindi and Chemistry.
He was declared successful in all the subjects except Chemistry which was treated by the respondent-Board as an additional subject.
The petitioner filed an admission form to take examination in March, 2004 for the improvement of his performance in the subjects of English, Hindi, Maths, Physics and Chemistry.
However, his request has been declined vide Order dated 912004 (Annexure P-2) on the ground that he was eligible for either improvement in English, Hindi, Maths and Physics or in the additional subject of Chemistry but not simultaneously.
Later on the petitioner gave in writing that he has decided only to appear in the subject of Chemistry and none else.
He was accordingly permitted to appear in the subject of Chemistry.
The request made by the petitioner has been placed on record as Annexure R-2 by the respondents in their written statement.
3.
Feeling aggrieved by the Order dated 912004, the petitioner approached this Court with a prayer that he is entitled to be considered eligible for taking the examination in English, Hindi, Maths and Physics alongwith subject of Chemistry.
When this petition came up for consideration before a Division Bench of this Court on 2722004, he was permitted to take the examination provisionally by issuance of an interim order.
The aforementioned order reads as under :-  "In relation to the applicant's prayer being allowed to appear in the examinations commencing from 132004, Shri Harsh Aggarwal submitted that he does not satisfy the conditions of eligibility.
However, keeping in view the fact that written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 is yet to be filed and disposal of the writ petition is likely to take some time, we deem it proper to direct that the applicant shall be allowed to provisionally appear in the examination commencing from 132004.
The authorities of the Central Board of Secondary Education at Chandigarh and Holy Child Public School, Rewari are directed to ensure that the applicant is able to take examination on 132004 and on all subsequent dates whenever he is scheduled to appear in the particular paper."
4.
Accordingly, the petitioner has appeared in all the five subjects including Chemistry.
5.
In the written statement, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have taken the stand that according to the scheme of studies, it is impermissible to allow a candidate to appear for improvement of his performance in all subjects alongwith additional subjects simultaneously.
A copy of the rule has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
It has further been asserted that the petitioner has concealed material facts from this Court inasmuch as the undertaking given by the petitioner that he would appear only in the subject of Chemistry was not disclosed.
6.
Mr. JS Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that according to Rule 6 (Annexure R-1) on which reliance has been placed by the respondent-Board, the candidate is debarred from appearing for improvement of his performance alongwith additional subject in which he has not appeared in the previous order.
In other words, the submission is that no change of subject is permissible and the rule bars such a candidate from taking the exam again.
According to the learned counsel, the examination taken by the petitioner in the subject of Chemistry as well as one ordered by the Division Bench of this Court on 2722004, is in accordance with the rules and therefore, he is entitled to the declaration of the result of that examination.
He has also referred to the averments made in Para 11 of the writ petition and argued that no fact was concealed from this Court.
7.
Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, learned counsel for the Board has vehemently argued that a cojoint reading of Rules 5 and 6 make it evident that a candidate would not be permitted to appear for improvement of his performance alongwith the additional subject simultaneously.
According to the learned counsel, if a candidate is permitted to appear simultaneously in the subjects for improvement of performance as well as the additional subject, then, the whole scheme of studies framed by the Board would be disrupted.
He has also referred to Bye-Law 43 of the examination Bye-laws issued by the Board.
8.
Mr. SK Sharma has supported the arguments of Mr. Harsh Aggarwal.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that this petition deserves to be allowed.
It would be appropriate to make a reference to Rules 5 and 6 on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the parties alongwith vernacular version which reads as under :-  "5.
Candidates appearing at Second Chance Compartment Examination to be held in March/April will not be eligible for improvement of his/her performance in any other subject alongwith the compartment subject.
6.
Candidates cannot appear for improvement & Additional subject together in which he/she has not appeared in the previous year."
10.
A perusal of Rule 6 makes it abundantly clear, especially when the rule is read in vernacular, that a candidate who has not appeared in an additional subject in the preceding year, cannot be permitted to appear alongwith his examination for improvement of his performance in the succeeding year.
It is patent from the language of the rule that candidate is not permitted to change his additional subject in the succeeding year.
However, it is not possible to read the rule to mean that a candidate cannot appear for the improvement of his performance alongwith additional subject which he has taken in the preceding year.
Therefore, the petitioner is fully entitled to take examination of all the subjects which infact he has taken either on the order passed by the Board or in pursuance to the interim order issued by this Court.
11.
Once it is held that the petitioner has taken examination in accordance with the rules, then no exception can be taken, therefore, writ petition is allowed.
The Board is directed to declare the result of the petitioner in respect of all the subjects as early as possible so as to enable the petitioner to attend the counselling which is being held on 2972004.
A copy of this order be given to the learned counsel for parties under the signatures of Court Secretary.
Petition allowed.