Rajive Bhalla, J - By way of the present writ petition, filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays that the order, whereby his services, as a Junior Engineer have been terminated, be quashed.
2.
A brief narrative of facts, leading to the filing of the present writ petition, would be appropriate.
3.
The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet dated 161984 (Annexure P- 4).
Thereafter, pursuant to an inquiry, the Inquiry Officer submitted his report, dated 4121985, Annexure P-8.
On a perusal of the said report, the punishing authority served a show cause notice upon the petitioner on 2061986, Annexure P-10.
The petitioner filed a detailed reply, dated 1871986, Annexure P-11.
4.
The punishing authority thereafter, vide order dated 1131987, Annexure P-15 accepted the inquiry report and ordered the termination of the services of the petitioner.
5.
The sole contention, raised by counsel for the petitioner, is to the effect that the objections, submitted by him, to the inquiry report, in response to the show cause notice, have not been considered.
The punishing authority, while exercising powers in disciplinary proceedings, is a quasi judicial authority and is, therefore, required to deal with the objections/the defence raised and arrive at a conclusion for or against the delinquent employee.
In exercise of the jurisdiction as a punishing authority, the said authority was required to set down reasons and also indicate briefly the process of reasoning that compelled the said authority to arrive at a conclusion for or against the delinquent employee.
Failure to do so would render the order violative of the principles of natural justice.
In support of the aforementioned contention, reliance is placed upon two judgments of this Court reported as RK Goel v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 577 and KB Rai v. State of Punjab, 1996(1) SCT 639.
6.
Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that the powers exercised by the punishing authority, under the Punjab Civil Services Rules, are purely administrative in nature and, therefore, it cannot be expected to return a finding like a Court of law and rebut each point, raised by the petitioner.
The administrative authority cannot be expected to function as a court of law and return findings on each and every point, raised by the delinquent employee and, therefore, the orders of punishment are legal and valid and not liable to be quashed.
7.
I have heard the counsel for the parties, perused the pleadings, as also the judgments, relied upon by counsel for the petitioner.
8.
It is no doubt true that an authority, exercising the powers of a punishing authority, is a quasi judicial authority.
It is also true that the said authority is not bound to examine the matter, as would be expected of a court of law.
However, the very fact that a show cause notice was issued and objections were invited, would, as a natural consequence, impose a duty upon the authority concerned to deal with the contentions raised/defence put-forth in a quasi judicial manner.
The punishing authority would be required to set out the reasons, which compelled it to take a decision for or against the delinquent employee.
The punishing authority is required to pass a "speaking order".
The said word inhers, in itself, an obligation upon the punishing authority to assign reasons.
The delinquent-employee, in the system of our jurisprudence, is expected to be made aware of the reasons that compelled the authority to reject his reply and terminate his services.
In my opinion, any other interpretation of the powers of the punishing authority would nullify the requirement of serving a show cause notice.
In case, the punishing authority functions like a purely administrative authority and is not bound to provide reasons, the entire scheme of the Civil Services Rules, which requires the holding of an inquiry, submission of the inquiry report, the service of a show cause notice would be rendered meaningless.
The entire process is to culminate into an order of punishing authority, which has to consider the charge-sheet, the replies, the evidence, led before the Inquiry Officer, the inquiry report and the show-cause notice and thereafter arrive at a conclusion for or against the delinquent employee.
Thus, the argument, raised by counsel for the respondents that the punishing authority merely passed an administrative order is, in my opinion, incorrect.
Reliance placed upon the aforementioned judgments of this Court, by the counsel for the petitioner to contend that the punishing authority is required to pass a speaking order and also provide reasons for inflicting punishment is, in my opinion well founded.
9.
After the submission of the inquiry report, the punishing authority served a show-cause notice upon the petitioner, dated 2061986, Annexure P-10, proposing to impose a punishment of termination of his services, as also to impose a recovery of Rs. 2,11,26970.
In response to the said show-cause notice, the petitioner filed a reply.
Vide order, Annexure R-15, annexed with the written statement, the Chief Engineer, Punjab PWD (B&R) Branch, Patiala, after an alleged due consideration, imposed a punishment of termination of services and also ordered recovery of Rs. 2,11,26970.
10.
A perusal of the said order reveals that the only reasons recorded are that the reply, filed by the petitioner, dated 1871986, "..... is found unsatisfactory......".
No reasons, whatsoever, as to why the explanation was unsatisfactory and what compelled the punishing authority to arrive at the aforementioned conclusion, have been assigned in the order of punishment, Annexure R-15.
The order is devoid of any process of reasoning, however brief.
The order is non-speaking, for the failure of the punishing authority to assign any reasons.
11.
A further examination of the said order reveals that apart from a narrative of facts, contained in three paragraphs, preceding the satisfaction, recorded by the punishing authority, there is no reference, whatsoever, to the facts of the case, the defence, set-forth by the petitioner, the conclusion, arrived at by the punishing authority, the contentions, raised by the petitioner in reply to the show-cause notice and, therefore, it is apparent that apart from being a non-speaking order, the order does not indicate any application of mind by the punishing authority.
The punishing authority is not required to write a detailed judgment.
However, as the order of punishment visits a delinquent employee with serious civil consequences, the punishing authority is required to assign reasons howsoever minimal and indicate the process of reasoning howsoever brief to enable the delinquent employee to impugn the said order in appeal, revision and thereafter before a court of law.
The absence of any process of reasoning would seriously jeopardize the right of a delinquent employee in appeal, revision or while impugning the said order before a court of law.
12.
As stated above, the impugned order, Annexure R-15, dated 1131987, communicated to the petitioner through telegram, dated 1731987, Annexure P- 13, being non-speaking, for failure to assign any reasons, whatsoever, I have no option but to quash the same.
13.
In view of what has been discussed above, the order of punishment Annexure R-15 and the order, Annexure P-13, are quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated with all consequential benefits, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
However, it is made clear that this order shall not be taken to be my opinion on the merits of the controversy.
The respondents would be at liberty to proceed, in accordance with law from the stage they received reply to the show-cause notice.
In essence, if the respondents so desire and if permissible in law, they may proceed from the stage of the receipt of the reply to the said show cause notice and pass a fresh speaking order, in accordance with law.
Consequently, the present writ petition is allowed, in the terms, indicated above, with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.