MM Kumar, J - This is defendants appeal filed under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity, `the Code') against the judgment of reversal dated 2152003 passed by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur.
The Additional District Judge has decreed the suit by holding that the plaintiff-respondent is entitled to a declaration that the order dated 491996 passed by the defendant-appellants accepting her resignation w.e.f.
2.1.1999 is illegal and relief has been granted to the plaintiff-respondent that she would be entitled for counting her service from 9.2.1979 to 491996 for the purposes of pension.
Her earlier service rendered as Military Officer in Military Nursing Service w.e.f.
5101968 to 1621977 has also been allowed to be qualifying service for the purposes of pension.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that Mrs. Sharda Devi plaintiff-respondent filed Civil Suit No. 274/97 on 7.4.1997 seeking declaration that the order dated 491996 passed by respondent No. 1 is illegal and unlawful.
It was further claimed that the plaintiff-respondent was entitled to all service benefits including pay and allowances till the date of passing of the order dated 491996 along with compound interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
The plaintiff-respondent served as a Second Lieutenant-cum-Nursing Officer in Military Nursing Service w.e.f.
5101968 to 1621977.
Thereafter she was appointed as Nursing Officer in Military Nursing Service (Local) w.e.f.
9.2.1979.
She submitted an application stating that her telegraphic request dated 511989 may be considered as a notice required to be given under paragraph 5 of the Army Instructions of 1977.
She also requested that earned leave credit may be adjusted in deciding her leave.
It is appropriate to mention that before filing the instant suit, she filed another suit for damages against Shri KP Saxena, the then Colonel-cum-Commanding Officer of 172 Military Hospital alleging that he had become vindictive and started harassing her.
She apprehended risk to her life and proceeded on 55 days leave upto 111989.
She applied for extraordinary leave which was denied to her and the Commanding Officer - defendant-appellant 5 declined her leave and declared her as deserter.
It was further alleged that she applied for pre-arrest bail from this Court which was granted.
Her house was broken into by the defendant-appellants 4 and 5 i.e. Station Commander and Commanding Officer and they sealed all her household articles.
A civil suit was also filed seeking declaration that the order of military authorities declaring her deserter was bad and the suit was decreed.
Even the appeal has also been dismissed.
3.
It is further appropriate to mention that the plaintiff-respondent filed another civil suit for mandatory injunction directing the defendant-appellants to accept her resignation and to clear her accounts.
During the pendency of the suit, the resignation of the plaintiff-respondent was accepted vide order dated 491996 and the same was made effective w.e.f.
211989.
As a consequence, the suit having been rendered infructuous was withdrawn by her.
It is the aforementioned order which has been made subject-matter of challenge in Civil Suit No. 274 of 1997 from which the instant second appeal has arisen.
4.
The defendant-appellants raised some preliminary objections alleging that the suit was not maintainable or it is hit by the principle of res judicata, time barred and no notice under Section 80 of the Code has been issued.
The assertion of the plaintiff-respondent that she served as Second Lieutenant was controverted stating that there was no rank of Second Lieutenant in Military Nursing Services.
They further submitted that she was released from military service and was appointed to Military Nursing Services w.e.f.
9.2.1979 where she served till 111989.
It was alleged that she did not join duty despite repeated reminders.
The story of defamation asserted by the plaintiff- respondent is stated to be false.
The declaration of deserter given against the plaintiff-respondent is sought to be justified stating that on the expiry of earned leave, she failed to rejoin the duties as required under the Rules and that there is no provision for granting extraordinary leave.
The claim for pay made by the plaintiff-respondent for the period she did not serve, the defendant-appellants, have stoutly denied and it is claimed that the order accepting her resignation is legal and valid.
5.
On the basis of pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to declaration and permanent injunction prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether suit is barred by principle of res judicata ?
OPP 3.
Whether present suit is not maintainable according to the provisions of Section 2 of sub-section (II) of the Code of Civil Procedure ?
OPD 4.
Whether suit of the plaintiff is within limitation ?
OPP 5.
Whether notice served under section 80 CPC was not legal and valid ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
6.
On issue No. 1, the Civil Judge held that the plaintiff-respondent was not entitled to any service benefit for the period she did not work with the defendant-appellants.
He further held that since she has submitted the resignation which had never been withdrawn nor she joined service thereafter, no benefit of service could be given to her.
The delay in accepting the resignation has been brushed aside describing it as `little late.'
Issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the plaintiff-respondent as nothing was shown that the suit filed by her was barred by res judicata.
The findings on issue Nos. 3 and 5 have also gone in favour of the plaintiff-respondent as the defendant- appellants failed to point out any defect in notice served under Section 80 of the Code nor any final adjudication of any Court of competent jurisdiction regarding the controversy raised in the suit was placed before the Court.
The suit was held to be within limitation under issue No. 4 and accordingly on the basis of findings on issue No. 1, the suit was dismissed.
7.
On appeal, the learned Additional District Judge held that from the evidence on record it is proved that the plaintiff-respondent has served as Nursing Officer from 5101968 to 1621977 and thereafter she served as Nursing Officer in the Military Nursing Service (Local) w.e.f.
9121979 under the supervision of Mr. KP Saxena, Commanding Officer, C/O 56 A.P.O.
It has also been found that the basic reason for proceeding on 55 days leave upto 111989 was the mental and physical harassment caused to the plaintiff- respondent by Mr. KP Saxena which resulted into filing of two civil suits mentioned above.
The learned Additional District Judge referred to this aspect in paragraph 12 of the judgment.
It has also been noticed that the suit for damages filed by the plaintiff-respondent against Mr. KP Saxena was decreed for a sum of Rs. 7 lacs, as damages for defamation caused to her.
The impugned order dated 491996 Ex. P1 accepting her resignation w.e.f.
511989 has to be examined in the light of the findings recorded by the learned Additional District Judge.
8.
The learned Additional District Judge affirmed the findings on all the issues but reversed the findings of the Civil Judge on issue No. 1.
It has been found as a fact that no explanation has been furnished as to why the service rendered by the plaintiff-respondent from 5101968 to 1621977 in the Military Nursing Service (Regular) was not considered as qualifying service for pensionary benefits.
It has further been held that the defendant- appellants acted illegally by accepting the resignation of the plaintiff- respondent on 491996 w.e.f.
211989 and a declaration was given that the plaintiff-respondent is deemed to have relinquished charge from military service w.e.f.
491996 and not w.e.f.
211989.
It has further been held that the plaintiff-respondent is presumed to be in service uptill 491996.
It is on the basis of these findings that issue No. 1 was decided in favour of the plaintiff-respondent and the findings recorded by the Civil Judge thereon were reversed.
In the concluding paragraph, the learned Additional District Judge issued the following directions to the defendant-appellants :-  "...the respondents are directed to consider the case of the appellant for pension keeping in view all the aforesaid facts, that she has qualified proper period of service of 10 years as prescribed under the rules.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the appellant for pensionary benefits, within three months from the receipt of this judgment and decree.
However, the appellant shall not be entitled to any salary or other benefit for the period for which she did not actually work.
Whereas, all other reliefs claimed by the plaintiff regarding interest, etc. are hereby dismissed.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts of this case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Decree sheet be prepared.
Lower Court record be sent back and appeal file be consigned to the Record-room."
9.
Mr. Kamal Sehgal, learned counsel for the defendant-appellants has argued that the Additional District Judge has recorded findings by travelling beyond the issues.
He has further pointed out that the plaintiff-respondent has been granted relief which she did not even pray for.
He has pointed out that there is no prayer for grant of pension to the plaintiff-respondent but the same has been decreed in her favour.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel, I am of the considered view that this appeal is ill-advised and the same is liable to be dismissed.
The facts and circumstances in which the plaintiff-respondent has to tender her resignation speaks volumes, especially when it is remembered that the suit for damages filed by her against Shri KP Saxena has been declared directing Shri Saxena to pay Rs. 7 lacs as damages for ruining the reputation of the plaintiff- respondent.
Such a resignation cannot be considered voluntary resignation resulting into the consequences of forfeiture of service.
It has to be taken as involuntary resignation which was tendered by the plaintiff-respondent in order to avoid any mental and physical harassment at the hands of defendant- appellant No. 5, namely, Shri KP Saxena.
The menace harassing female employees at work-places has been on increase and the Supreme Court in the cases of Vishaka and others v. State of Rajasthan and others, 1997(4) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 187 : 1997(6) SCC 241 and Apparel Export Promotion Council v. AK Chopra, 1999(1) SCC 759 : 1999(1) SCT 642 (SC) has taken a serious view of these tendencies.
In Visaka's case (supra) comprehensive guidelines and norms have been laid down for due observance at all work places and other institutes until a codified law is enacted in this regard.
Accordingly, the harassment caused to the plaintiff- respondent is liable to be condemned and the impugned order dated 491996 Ex. P2 has to be viewed in that light.
Therefore, the learned Additional District Judge has not committed any impropriety or irregularity by declaring that the plaintiff-respondent is deemed to be in service till 491996.
It has also been held that she is entitled to all the benefits of service towards pension etc.
However, her claim with regard to salary and interest has been declined.
The aforementioned findings of the learned Additional District Judge are liable to be upheld and the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
11.
The argument of the learned counsel that the trial Court has travelled beyond the issues has failed to impress because in the prayer clause it has been specifically prayed that the plaintiff-respondent is entitled to all the service benefits including pay and allowances till the date of passing of order dated 491996 along with interest.
The prayer clause as discernible from the judgment reads as under :-  "Suit for declaration to the effect that the impugned order bearing No. : NL- 16794/DHAFMS/MNS dated 4.9.96 passed by the Raksha Mantralaya, Karayalaya Maha Nideshak, Sashastra Sena Chikitsa Sewa, `L' Block, New Delhi- 1, vide which the resignation of the plaintiff is accepted w.e.f.
2189, is illegal, unlawful, ultra vires, unconstitutional, against the principles of natural justice and rules, against the equity and fair play, cryptic and punitive in nature, non- speaking, capricious, malicious, therefore, null and void and not binding on the plaintiff and the plaintiff is entitled to all service benefits including pay and allowance till the date of passing the order i.e. Sept 96 with interest @ 18% compounded per annum OR in the alternative suit for mandatory injunction directing the defendants to make the payment of pay and allowances with interest @ 18% compounded per annum till the date of passing the impugned order."
12.
After reading the aforementioned prayer it can hardly be disputed that the plaintiff-respondent has specifically made a prayer for grant of all service benefits arising from the setting aside of the order dated 491996.
13.
The other argument that the learned Additional District Judge has travelled beyond the issues has also failed to impress me because the facts are on the record and no prejudice could be caused to the defendant-appellants for grant of pension which otherwise flow from the facts discernible from the records and prayer made.
Moreover, direction has been issued by the learned Additional District Judge to consider the case of the plaintiff-respondent for pension by keeping in view all the aforementioned facts declining her prayer for salary in respect of the period she has not worked and interest.
Even otherwise, the plaintiff-respondent has already been forced to come to the Court repeatedly and it would be unjust and unfair to force to go for another litigation for the claim of her pension.
Therefore, I do not find any substance in the argument raised by learned counsel for the defendant- appellants.
14.
For the reasons aforementioned, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
15.
In view of the fact that the appeal itself has been dismissed, no orders are required to be passed on the applications for condonation of delay filed under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
Appeal dismissed.