SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Army on 27101970.
He was transferred to Pension Establishment (Discharged from Service) on 1.7.1986.
He fulfilled the conditions under Item III(i) of the Table annexed to army Rule 13-A(3), having completed 15 years and 247 days of service.
This fact is noticed in the discharge certificate issued to him by Records Artillery, Nasik.
The petitioner claims pension under Rule 132 of the Pension Regulations.
The aforesaid Rule reads as under :-  "132.
Unless otherwise provided for, the minimum qualifying service for earning of Service Pension is 15 years."
2.
A perusal of the aforesaid Rule shows that the petitioner was clearly entitled to receive pension at the time when the order of discharge was passed.
The petitioner was, however, tried by a General Court Martial under Section 37(b) and 28(1) of the Army Act.
He was awarded 18 months rigorous imprisonment.
Copy of the charge-sheet, findings of the Court Martial, sentence and confirmation/promulgation are attached with the petition as Annexures P-1 to P-4 respectively.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted on two counts.
The first charge was under Section 37-B of the Army Act, of mutiny for having left alongwith some other Army Personnel the unit lines in commandeered vehicles in open defiance of their superior officers.
The second charge was under Section 38(1) of the Army Act "Deserting the Services" with regard to the same episode.
The allegation was that the petitioner alongwith certain other Army officials absented themselves from the camp location of 166 Mountain Regiment until apprehended by the Military Police at New Jalpaiguri Railway Station on 1161984.
The petitioner was found not guilty of the second charge of deserting the Army.
He was, however, ordered to suffer RI for 18 months on the first charge of mutiny.
A period of 424 days of unexpired portion of the sentence was remitted w.e.f.
6.2.86.
He was released from Military jail on 1221986.
Thereafter he continued to service in the Army till 3061986.
The petitioner made numerous representations to the respondents for the release of pensionary benefits.
He was informed by letter dated 2986 (Annexure P-6) that his claim for pension has been rejected, as the petitioner had been tried under Section 38(1) of the Army Act, and therefore, he has forfeited his entire service towards pension.
The petitioner has challenged the conviction awarded by the General Court Martial on the ground that there has been a breach of Rule 22 of the Army Rules.
The petitioner was never marched to the Commanding Officer on any charge.
No witness deposed in his presence, there was no chance for him to cross-examine any witness against him.
Even his statement or statements of any defence witnesses were not taken by the Officer Commanding.
It has been further stated that the Officer Commanding had acted on the instructions from higher authorities.
Therefore, the trial had not been conducted fairly.
According to the petitioner, the proceedings had been conducted in breach of Rule 23 of the Army Rules.
There had also been breach of Rule 180 of the Army Rules which provides that full opportunity must be afforded to the concerned Officer during the hearing.
It is further the case of the petitioner that the joint trial against the petitioner and other Army Officials is patently illegal as it violates Note 8 to the Section 38 of the Army Act.
The aforesaid Note reads as under :-  "Two or more persons cannot be tried jointly with committing the offence of desertion under this sub-section."
3.
Even otherwise, according to the petitioner, no offence had been committed under Section 37(b)AA of the Army Act as there was no evidence of any conspiracy.
Consequently, it is pleaded that the conviction for the offence of mutiny is not sustainable.
For the same reason, the petitioner cannot be denied the benefit of pension.
4.
The respondents have not filed the written statement controverting the pleas raised by the petitioner.
However, CM No. 2048 of 1988 was filed by the respondents for fixing the case at an earlier actual date on the ground that the writ petition has become infructuous.
It has been stated that by Pension Payment Order No. S/908/92, pension was granted to the petitioner w.e.f.
from 1.7.1986 for life.
Copy of the aforesaid Pension Payment Order is attached with the application as Annexure A-1.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that although pension has been stated to have been released to the petitioner, yet none has been received by the petitioner.
6.
I have considred the entire matter, I am of the considered opinion that the writ petition of the petitioner has to be allowed on merits.
A similar controversy arose before this Court in 1992(1) SCT 693 (P&H) : CWP No. 1649 of 1988 (No. 1256394 WEX-Gunner (Operator) Ajaib Singh v. Union of India and another).
In the aforesaid case, this Court, after taking into consideration all the factual as well as legal positions, rendered a decision on 4121991 wherein it has been ordered as follows :-  "Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I am of the opinion that it was eminently a case where the authorities should have passed appropriate orders expeditiously.
Since they failed to do so in spite of the fact that the petitioner had waited for almost two years before approaching this Court, I am constrained to hold that the petitioner's trial is vitiated on account of the non-compliance with the provisions of rule 180 and that the period of imprisonment cannot now be treated as not-qualifiying for pension.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner had completed 15 years of qualifying service and is entitled to the grant of pension.
The appropriate amount of pension alongwith arrears shall be released to the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs."
The aforesaid ratio of the judgment is fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to ensure that the pension reaches the petitioner within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
This direction is necessary to respondent No. 2 as it has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner that although the respondents have released the pension, but the same is deliberately being withheld by the competent authority in the area in which the petitioner is residing.
No costs.
8.
Copy of this order be given dasti to the learned counsel for the petitioner as also the learned counsel for the respondents, under the signatures of Reader of this Court, for onward transmission to the authorities for necessary action and compliance.
Petition allowed.