SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The Petitioner and respondent No. 4 are employees of the Haryana Police and Housing Corporation (hereinafter referred to as "the Corporation").
The petitioner was selected and appointed on the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) on 21.1.1999 and joined the post on 221999.
A Joint Tentative Seniority List of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) and Assistant Draftsman (Public Health) (Annexure P-5) was circulated on 852000.
In the seniority list, respondent No. 4 was shown at Sr. No. 4 and he was designated as Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
One Narinder Singh was at Sr. No. 2 and designated as Assistant Draftsman (Public Health).
The name of the petitioner appeared at Sr. No. 3 as Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
This seniority list also shows that respondent No. 4 was appointed on 1.2.1999 whereas Narinder Singh and the petitioner were appointed on 221999.
The tentative seniority list also shows that respondent No. 4 possesses the qualification of Diploma in Architectural Asstt.
Narinder Singh possesses Diploma in ITI of Draftsman.
The petitioner is matric with Diploma in Draftsman.
The petitioner submitted Objections (Annexure P-6) to the aforesaid Tentative Seniority List, on 1552000.
She pointed out that respondent No. 4 does not possess the requisite qualification for the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
He was, therefore, not eligible to be appointed on the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) as he did not possess the qualifications which were advertised in the newspaper.
It was also stated that respondent No. 4 had been working on 89 days basis in the Architect Wing of the Corporation.
He continued to work in that Section.
Even after the appointment of the petitioner, he had never worked as Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
The petitioner had also challenged the placement of Narinder Singh at Sr. No. 2 of Tentative Seniority List on the ground that she had joined on the post on 221999 in the fore-noon whereas Narinder Singh had joined on the post in the after-noon.
The Seniority List has been finalised, according to the petitioner, recently, although no formal order has been passed.
Respondent No. 4 has been further promoted on the post of Head Draftsman by order dated 1752004 (Annexure P-9).
2.
The petitioner has, therefore, filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari or Quo Warranto for deletion of the name of respondent No. 4 from the Seniority List of Assistant Draftsman (Civil and Public Health), now designated as Draftsman (Civil & Public Health) and for quashing the order dated 1952004 (Annexure P-9) promoting respondent No. 4 to the post of Head Draftsman.
The petitioner also prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the official respondents to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Head Draftsman from the date respondent No. 4 is promoted as such.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the official respondents acted arbitrarily in appointing respondent No. 4 on the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil), even though respondent No. 4 did not possess the necessary qualifications.
Learned counsel claims violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel laid great deal of emphasis on the recommendation letter dated 2022004 (Annexure P-8) wherein the name of the petitioner was recommended to be considered for promotion as Head Draftsman by the Sub Divisional Officer (D/B).
Learned counsel has vehemently argued that the respondents have illegally denied the promotion to the petitioner by promoting respondent No. 4.
Learned counsel has reiterated over and over again that respondent No. 4 did not possess the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement dated 141998 (Annexure P-1).
According to the learned counsel, Diploma in Architectural Asstt.
cannot be equated with Diploma from ITI in Draftsman.
5.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The petitioner is seeking the issuance of a very technical writ i.e.
Quo Warranto.
The writ in the nature of Quo Warranto would be issued by the courts if there is a clear infringement of the qualifications prescribed in the statutory service rules in making the appointment which is challenged.
A writ of Quo Warranto affords a judicial enquiry in which any person holding a public office is called upon to show by what right he holds the office.
6.
Respondent No. 4 has been promoted to the post of Head Draftsman in view of the qualifications laid down under the applicable rules.
Even, according to the pleading of the petitioner, the post of Divisional Head Draftsman (Civil) is to be filled by promotion from the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil), having five years experience.
Respondent No. 4 has been shown at Sr. No. 1 of the Seniority List of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
The petitioner is shown junior to respondent No. 4 at Sr. No. 3.
In our opinion, the petitioner cannot complain of any infraction of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The Tentative Seniority List of Assistant Draftsman was issued on 852000.
The petitioner has not clearly stated in the present petition as to when the seniority list was finalised.
She has merely stated that the seniority list has been recently finalised.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that respondent No. 4 is senior to the petitioner.
The official respondents in their wisdom, have considered that respondent No. 4 possesses the requisite qualifications.
In such circumstances, it would not be possible to hold that any injustice has been done to the petitioner.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on three judgments of the Supreme Court in support of his submissions which may now be noticed.
8.
In the case of Subhash Chand Jain v. Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking and others, 1979(1) SLR (SC) 306, it has been held that when a qualification has been prescribed for a post, that cannot be obliterated by posting those who do not have that qualification as against those who have that qualification.
In that case, among the various categories of posts in the hierarchy under the DESU, there were two posts designated as Steno-Typist and Junior Stenographer.
They were different in the nature of their duties, different in the salary scales and naturally different in their status.
Steno-typists form the basic cadre from which promotion was to be given as Junior Stenographers.
At some intermediate stage in the history of this service (around 1973), distinctions in regard to salary scales got blurred and Steno-typists and Stenographers were given the same scales of salary.
This confusion led to a demand from Steno-typists that they should also be allowed to be posted as Junior Stenographers.
On this misconception, a number of Steny-typists were posted as Junior Stenographers.
Subsequently, there was an award of the Industrial Tribunal and on the basis of which, it was provided that the candidate must pass the trade test with a speed of 100 words per minute in Shorthand as an eligibility qualification for becoming Junior Stenographers.
Steno-typists as well as Stenographers were asked to appear in the test.
However, the Steno- typists who had already been functioning as Junior Stenographers without passing the trade test, insisted that regardless of such additional qualification, they are entitled to hold the posts of Junior Stenographers.
The petitioner in that case was a Steno-typist who had appeared in the trade test and had claimed that if he passes the test, he must be entitled to be a Junior Stenographer over the heads of the Steno-typists who are occupying the post of Junior Stenographers, without passing the test.
It was in such circumstances, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "7.
We see no difficulty in resolving the conflict and we discern a plain discrimination in the petitioner being denied the claim that he puts forward that if he passes the trade test which is the qualification for Junior Stenographers post, he should be posted in displacement of Steno-typists who have not passed the trade test but are still functioning as Junior Stenographers.
It is well established law that qualifications for a particular post can be a rational differentia within the meaning of Article 16.
It is equally clear that when a qualification has been prescribed for a post, that cannot be obliterated by posting those who do not have that qualification as against those who have that qualification.
It is within the powers of DESU to prescribe relevant qualifications and the prescription of Stenographic ability of 100 words per minute is a relevant qualification."
9.
In our opinion, the aforesaid ratio of law is wholly inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The petitioner and respondent No. 4 were both holding the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
The promotion to the post is from the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
The respondent-department has not made any distinction between the Assistant Draftsman (Civil) working in the Architectural Wing or in the Building and Road Wing of the Corporation.
Respondent No. 4 was not working in the feeder cadre of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) at any point of time.
He is senior to respondent No. 4.
Therefore, the observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case would not be applicable to the case put forward by the petitioner.
10.
In the case of Union of India and another v. Yogendra Singh, 1996(2) SCT 216 (SC) : 1996(1) SLR (SC) 132, it has been held as follows :-  "5.
At the time the applications were invited for the posts in question the educational qualifications, already prescribed on 2451990, were B.Sc.
(Chemistry) plus diploma of Health Inspector from a recognised institute.
The employment notice set out these to be the educational qualifications.
The respondent did not possess these educational qualifications.
No candidate who does not possess the currently prescribed qualifications, but who may possess the educational qualifications prescribed earlier, can be said to qualify or have any vested right to appointment even against some earlier unfilled vacancy.
Every candidate who aspires to fill any vacancy must possess the educational qualifications that are then prescribed."
The aforesaid observations were made by the Supreme Court with regard to the claim made by a candidate belonging to the reserved category for being appointed on the basis of the earlier qualifications contained in a Memorandum issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs on 2291964 on the subject of reservation of vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the essential services.
It was observed by the Supreme Court that the aforesaid Circular has no application to the requirement of educational qualifications.
It only applies to eligibility for the purpose of carrying forward of reserve vacancies.
Since the respondent did not possess the requisite qualifications on 2451990, it was held that he could not be appointed.
Such is not the case of respondent No. 4.
Respondent No. 4 was fully eligible to be considered and promoted.
11.
In the case of The District Collector and Chairman, Vizianagaram (Social Welfare Residential School Society), Vizianagaram and another v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi, 1990(4) SLR (SC) 237, the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "6.
It must further be realised by all concerned that when an advertisement mentions a particular qualification and an appointment is made in disregard the same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post because they did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.
It amounts to a fraud on public to appoint person with inferior qualifications in such circumstances unless it is clearly stated that the qualifications are relaxable.
No court should be a party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.
We are afraid that the Tribunal lost sight of this fact."
12.
Again these observations are of no assistance to the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4, as the petitioner, was fully qualified to be promoted.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.