SS Saron, J - The petitioner, who is working as a constable in the Haryana Police, has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order dated 2452002 (Annexure P-3) ordering initiation of regular departmental inquiry against him for issuing a press statement in the Tribune dated 2352002 without prior approval of the competent authority, and also for quashing the charge-sheet dated 2752002 (Annexure P-6) whereby the petitioner is alleged to have got published a news item in the press without permission of any higher officer and as such violated the provisions of rule 1444 of the Punjab Police Service Rules, 1934 as applicable to Haryana (for short "1934 Rules") and thereby has also committed carelessness and indiscipline.
In the alternative, it is prayed that departmental proceedings during the pendency of criminal proceedings arising out of case F.I.R. No. 380 dated 2452002 registered at Police Station City, Panipat for offences under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code and section 3 of the Police (Incitement of Disaffection) Act, 1922 (for short "1922 Act") and section 4 of the Police Force (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966 (for short "1966 Act") may be stayed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Police Constable in the year 1992.
While the petitioner was posted at Chandni Bagh Police Station, Panipat, a criminal case i.e. case F.I.R. No. 380 dated 2452002 (Annexure P-1) for offences under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him as also against one Satbir Chahal on the allegations that he got published a news item in the newspaper "Dainik Tribune" dated 2452002 which news item, it was alleged, tantamounts to inciting and instigating the members of the police force.
A copy of the news item dated 2452002 has been placed on record as Annexure P-2.
On the same day, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Panipat (respondent No. 3) in terms of his order dated 2452002 (Annexure P- 3) ordered the initiation of a regular departmental inquiry against the petitioner for issuing a press statement by the petitioner in the newspaper without prior approval of the competent authority which was said to be against the provisions of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules.
It is mentioned in the order Annexure P-3 that the act of the official is a grave misconduct and indiscipline on his part being a member of the disciplined force.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Panipat (respondent No. 4) was appointed as Inquiry Officer to hold a regular departmental inquiry on day to day basis.
The charge-sheet/brief of allegations dated 2752002 (Annexure P-6) was served on the petitioner by the Deputy superintendent of Police, (City), Panipat (respondent No. 4) along with list of documents and list of witnesses.
The petitioner filed his reply dated 2852002 (Annexure P-4) to the charge-sheet Annexure P-6.
The petitioner also submitted an application dated 31122002 (Annexure P-5) in response to letter dated 2122002 in the departmental inquiry, regarding list of witnesses in defence and in response to first notice in the departmental inquiry No. 171-5A dated 29122002, wherein it is mentioned that the petitioner wants to produce the witnesses including His Excellency the Governor of Haryana; Chief Minister, Haryana; Chaudhary Bansi Lal, ex-Chief Minister Haryana; Home Secretary Haryana; Director General/Inspector General of Police Haryana; Registrar, Firm and Societies Haryana and other witnesses.
The petitioner also gave a brief description for summoning the witnesses.
It is stated that the basic ground for assailing the order dated 2452002 (Annexure P-3) and charge-sheet dated 2752002 (Annexure P-6) is that there is no violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules and in the alternative, it is stated that the charges in the departmental inquiry are based on the same allegations as in the criminal case which is pending in the Court and the defence of the petitioner would be leaked in case the departmental proceedings are not stayed.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and reply on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 was filed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Panipat (respondent No. 3) in which it is stated that an F.I.R. has been registered against the petitioner for offences under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code and section 3 of 1922 Act and section 4 of 1966 Act.
The petitioner has also violated the provisions of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules and therefore, departmental proceedings have been initiated against him.
It is also stated that in the criminal proceedings which are pending before the Court and the departmental proceedings pending before the Inquiry Officer, the allegations are different and evidence in both the proceedings is also different.
It is thus, submitted in the reply that departmental proceedings as well as criminal proceedings can run simultaneously.
It is also stated that there is no complicated question of law involved and, therefore, both the proceedings can continue simultaneously.
It is also stated that the approach and objective in the criminal and the departmental proceedings is altogether distinct and different.
It is, therefore, prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
4.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, City Panipat (respondent No. 4) filed separate reply in which he, more or less adopted the stand taken in the reply filed by respondents 1 to 3.
5.
Mr. Sanjiv Gupta, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that order Annexure P-3 ordering initiation of departmental proceedings against the petitioner as also the charge sheet Annexure P-6 are liable to be quashed as there is no violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules by the petitioner.
It is further contended that even if it is assumed that there has been any violation of such rule, the same is liable to be applied to a public servant who acts in his capacity as a Police Constable and in any case, it is contended, the departmental proceedings are liable to be stayed as the defence of the petitioner would be disclosed in respect of the allegations attributed to him which would materially affect the criminal proceedings.
In response to these contentions, Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana appearing for respondents 1 to 3 and Mr. Madan Pal, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 4 have contended that the departmental proceedings are not liable to be quashed as the same relate to violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules and in any case, the conclusion, if any, in the said proceedings is to be arrived at only after the evidence has been led by the parties.
It was thus, urged that departmental proceedings are being conducted in accordance with law and are not liable to be quashed at this stage.
In respect of alternative prayer of the petitioner, it is contended that criminal case has been registered for the offences made out under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code and section 3 of 1922 Act and section 4 of the 1966 Act.
Besides there is no bar to continuation of departmental proceedings despite the pendency of criminal proceedings and, therefore, the writ petition merits dismissal.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions made by the parties.
It is not in dispute that allegation attributed to the petitioner in the departmental proceedings is that he has violated the provisions of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, rule 1444 of 1934 Rules deserves to be reproduced which reads as under :-  "1444.
Communication of official information to the press.
- It is desirable that the services of the newspaper press should be utilized for security publicity in regard to police regulations and orders affecting the public, and for disseminating information through which public assistance may be allayed.
The authority and discretion to communicate official information with these objects is confined, however, solely to Superintendents of Police personally.
In the exercise of this authority, moreover, Superintendents are restricted to matters of exclusively local significance, and they are forbidden from giving publicity to any information which affects directly or indirectly questions of general policy.
Police officers subordinate to the Superintendent of Police of a district are absolutely prohibited from communicating official information of any sort on their own responsibility to representatives of the press."
A reading of the above rule shows that services of the newspaper press are to be utilised for securing publicity in regard to police regulations and orders affecting the public, and for disseminating information through which public assistance may be enlisted in the detection of crime and the arrest of criminals, or public anxiety may be allayed.
Besides, the authority and discretion to communicate with the press is confined to the Superintendents of Police personally and in exercise of this authority, even the Superintendents are restricted to matters of exclusively local significance and they are forbidden from giving publicity to any information which affects directly or indirectly the questions of general policy.
The Police Officers subordinate to the Superintendent of Police of a district are absolutely prohibited from communicating official information of any sort on their own responsibility to representatives of the press.
The allegations attributed to the petitioner are that he got published a news item (Annexure P-2) that the Government should abandon the attitude of obstinacy.
The said news item is shown to have been issued on the statement of Police Karamchari Sangh.
It is further stated in the news item that the Government was responsible for confinement of the police officials.
This news item, it is alleged, has been got published by the petitioner without permission from any higher officer and he thereby violated the provisions of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules.
This act of the petitioner, it is stated, tantamounted to carelessness and indiscipline on his part.
In the circumstances, where the departmental proceedings are initiated in accordance with law and from the application dated 31122002 (Annexure P-5), it is also the case of the petitioner that he has submitted list of witnesses of whom he wants to summon, we find no reason whatsoever to stall the proceedings mid-way or interfere with the same.
7.
The question, whether there has indeed been violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules is the subject matter of departmental inquiry.
There is no reason whatsoever made out by the petitioner which would warrant interference by this Court.
It is the admitted position on record that regular departmental inquiry is under-way and an inquiry officer has also been appointed in terms of order Annexure P-3 and charge sheet Annexure P-6 has also been served to the petitioner.
Therefore, at this point of time, it would be wholly inappropriate to interfere with the departmental inquiry being conducted in accordance with law especially when, nothing has been shown for interfering with the same.
It would, however, be open to the petitioner to challenge the departmental action in accordance with law in case the inquiry report or the proceedings are found against him.
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has also contended that in fact, the Police Karamchari Sangh is a body recognised by the State of Haryana as is evident from recognition order dated 25111997 which has been circulated by the Director General of Police, Haryana vide his memo dated 3121997 (Annexure P-7).
Therefore, it is sought to be contended that the Police Karamchari Sangh which is a recognised body, would in any case be entitled to have the freedom of speech within the permitted degree.
After considering this contention, as also the contention that the alleged violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules can only apply to a public servant who acts in his capacity as Police Constable, we are of the view that the same are liable to be considered by the inquiry officer and the disciplinary authority in accordance with law.
Where the inquiry is proceeding in accordance with law, it would be inappropriate to intervene at this stage.
9.
As regards the alternative prayer of the petitioner for staying the departmental proceedings during the pendency of the criminal proceedings, it is appropriate to mention that the respondents in their written statements have stated that criminal proceedings against the petitioner, in pursuance to F.I.R. 380 dated 2452002 (Annexure P-1) have been initiated for the offences having been committed under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code and section 3 of 1922 Act and section 4 of 1966 Act whereas the departmental proceedings have been initiated for violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules.
Therefore, there is no similarity in the departmental action and the criminal proceedings which would warrant interference by this Court.
10.
The contention of learned counsel appearing for the petitioner however, is that continuation of departmental proceedings would amount to disclosing defence of the petitioner which would prejudice his right in the criminal case.
We have considered this contention also.
It is well settled that criminal proceedings and the departmental action can go side by side.
In Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd and another, AIR 1999 SC 1416 : 1999(2) SCT 660 (SC) it was held that there is a consensus of judicial opinion on basic principle that proceedings in a criminal case and the departmental proceedings can go on simultaneously except, where the departmental proceedings and criminal proceedings are based on the same set of facts and the evidence in both proceedings is common.
The basis for this proposition is that proceedings in a criminal case and the departmental proceedings operate in distinct and different jurisdictional areas.
In departmental proceedings, the facts operating in the mind of the Disciplinary Authority may be many, such as enforcement of discipline or to investigate the level of integrity of the delinquent or the other staff.
Besides, the standard of proof required in departmental proceedings is also different than that required in a criminal case.
While in the departmental proceedings, the standard of proof is one of preponderance of the probabilities whereas in the criminal case, the charge has to be proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt.
It was observed by the Supreme Court as follows :  The conclusions which are deducible from various decisions of this Court referred to above are ;  (i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case against the delinquent employee is of a grave nature which involves complicated questions of law and fact, it would be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal case.
(iii) Whether the nature of charge in a criminal case is grave and whether complicated questions of fact and law are involved in that case, will depend upon the nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis of evidence and material collected against him during investigation or as reflected in the charge sheet.
(iv) The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above cannot be considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceedings but due regard has to be given to the fact that the departmental proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to conclude them at an early date, so that if the employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and in case he is found guilty, administration may get rid of him at the earliest."
Applying the above test to the case in hand, it is appropriate to notice that the nature of allegations against the petitioner in the two proceedings is different inasmuch as in the departmental action, the allegation is that of violation of rules.
Besides the petitioner is a member of police force which is a disciplined force where the police personnels are expected to maintain discipline and not to resort to such actions which would undermine the authority of the police.
Besides, as observed in Capt.
M Paul Anthony's case (supra) that in departmental proceedings the factors operating in the mind of the Disciplinary Authority may be many including that of enforcement of discipline, these observations in the case is hand aptly apply in the case of the petitioner.
11.
Having regard to the fact that in criminal proceedings the allegations attributed to the petitioner are that he has committed offences under sections 124-A/153-A of the Indian Penal Code besides section 3 of 1922 Act and section 4 of 1966 Act, whereas in the departmental action, the charge attributed to the petitioner is that of violation of rule 1444 of 1934 Rules, we find no reason to stay the departmental action pending criminal proceedings against the petitioner.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is without any merit and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.