Surya Kant, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 5659 of 1987 and Civil Writ Petition No. 589 of 1988.
The facts have been extracted from CWP No. 589 of 1988.
2.
The Petitioner has approached this Court under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari and mandamus for quashing the selection and consequential appointment to the posts of Vaidyas made by order dated June 4, 1987 (Annexure P-3) and to declare the procedure adopted by the Departmental Selection Committee illegal, arbitrary and unconstitutional, as also a direction to Respondents No. 1 to 3 to consider and select the petitioner for the post of Vaidya.
3.
The petitioner passed BAMS (Ayurvedacharya) examination from Punjabi University Patiala in the first division.
An advertisement was issued by the Directorate of Ayurveda, Punjab, Chandigarh wherein 14 posts of Vaidyas were advertised on September 7, 1986.
The petitioner as well as another 500 odd candidates applied in response to the advertisement and they were interviewed on different dates between November 22, 1986 to November 25, 1986.
The Departmental Selection Committee was headed by the Director, Health Services, Punjab, who has been impleaded in his official capacity as respondent No. 3 whereas some of the members of the selection committee have been impleaded in person as respondents No. 4 to 7.
According to the Petitioner, the interview was a mere farce as no questions were asked by the members of the selection committee; that no criteria was laid down by the selection committee for allocation of marks of the candidates; that the selection was based upon 100% marks in interview without any weightage given to the academic qualifications and that 21 candidates were selected against 14 advertised posts and all of them have been given appointment in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
Though no written statement is available on the record of this case, however, Shri KK Goel, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab states as at the Bar that the written statement was actually filed and this fact has not been disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner also who has, in fact, supplied a copy of the written statement, which is being taken on record.
5.
During the course of arguments, Shri Goel took a preliminary objection that the selected candidates, who were given appointment way back in the year 1987 vide order Annexure P-3, have not been impleaded in the array of respondents and that this Court, in the absence of those candidates, may not pass any order adverse to their interest.
Dr. Sachdeva, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that since the main selection is marred by various patent illegalities, there is no bar for the court to look into the selection and in any case to examine the limited aspect of making any case to examine the limited aspect of making appointment beyond the advertised posts.
Learned counsel further argued that in any case official respondents themselves have taken a stand in paragraph 21 of the written statement suggesting the petitioner to make a representation for the redressal of her grievances.
He has, therefore, alternatively prayed that in case this Court does not entertain the writ petition on account of non-impleadment of the selected candidates, then he may be permitted to withdraw the writ petition with liberty to the petitioner to make a representation to the authorities for redressal of her grievance, as suggested by the respondents themselves.
6.
I am not inclined to accept first contention of Dr. Sachdeva that in the absence of the candidates who were selected and appointed way back in the year 1987, this Court can go into the question of legality of their selection or appointments, rather the Writ Petition can be dismissed on this very ground.
However, in the light of the stand taken by the respondents in paragraph 21 of their written statement and the prayer now made by Dr. Sachdeva, this writ petition is permitted to be withdrawn with liberty, however, to the petitioner to make representation to the official respondents within a period of one month from today.
If any such representation is made by the petitioner, the authorities shall consider and examine the same on merits within next three months.
However, it is clarified that this direction may not be construed as an expression of any opinion by this Court either with regard to the merit of the petitioner or on the legality of the selection and appointment of the candidates made in the year 1987.
With the above observations, the writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn with liberty aforesaid.
Petition dismissed.