SS Saron, J - The present petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of certiorari, mandamus or any other suitable writ or direction for quashing the order by which the petitioner was invalided out of military service.
The Division Bench at the time of issuing notice of motion on 711991 passed the following order:-  "In view of the petitioner's own admission dated 27489 contained in Annexure P-6, no case for interference is made out.
Moreover, the order was passed on 3181989 (Annexure P-8) and the petitioner has come to this court on 21121990.
In such a belated petition, we decline to interfere with order Annexure P-8.
It was then argued that if the petitioner was to be discharged on account of physical invalidity/disability, it was a fit case for grant of pension under Rule 48(a) of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961.
Notice of motion on this matter alone for 2521991."
In terms of the above order, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has restricted his claim only to the disability element for the grant of pension under Rule 48(a) of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961 only.
2.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Short Service Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army in 1967.
He was granted permanent regular commission in the year 1972 in which he was subjected to appear before a Medical Board, which declared him to be medically fit.
Before induction into the service firstly as a Short Service Commissioned Officer and thereafter as Regular Commissioner Officer, the petitioner was screened thoroughly and found not to be suffering from any physical disability.
The petitioner was honoured with President's Commission on 23.6.1968.
The petitioner was one of the most experienced officer of his Corps (initially in the Punjab Regiment and thereafter in the Pioneer Corps).
The petitioner passed all promotion examinations which are available in the Army and he also qualified various army Courses.
He had sufficient experience of commanding independent army units and also has war/operational service to his credit.
He claims to be having exemplary character.
It is this ability of the petitioner that resulted in his deployment by the authorities repeatedly at high altitude and extreme cold field areas.
The details of his cold field areas postings are as follows :-  (a) 7th July, 1968 to 12th September, 1978 Sikkim.
(b) 6th July, 1971 to 26th July, 1973 Ladakh.
(c) 2nd October, 1976 to 12th September, 1978 Sikkim.
(d) 13th June, 1981 to 15 August, 1981 Sugar Sector.
(e) 20th December, 1982 to 12th October, 1984 Sikkim (f) 17th October, 1986 to 23rd January, 1987 NEFA 3.
It is in January 1984 that for the first time the petitioner experienced pain in his neck.
During this period, he was discharging his duties at high altitude area.
As a consequence of the complaint made by him, he was given treatment in Advance Dressing Station Level at the place of his posting itself.
The petitioner then suffered the same pain again in the beginning of 1987.
At this juncture he was posted in the extreme cold field areas in the region of NEFA On 2311987, he was hospitalised due to the pain in his neck.
This was diagnosed as Orthopedics ailment classified as Mild Cervical Spondylosis.
The petitioner was subjected to a Medical Board on 621987 at the 181, Military Hospital.
The copy of the proceedings of the Medical Board conducted on 621987 has been appended as Annexure P-1.
Thereafter the petitionr was subjected to various Medical Boards.
He has attached the medical conditions, physical profile record of the Board which was held on 3071987 as Annexure P-2.
This was followed by another Medical Board.
The medical conditions physical profile record of the Medical Board held on 19121987 is attached as Annexure P-3 and that of the next Medical Board held on 611989 as Annexure P-4.
Inspite of these reports his Commanding Officer deputed him on duties requiring extreme stress.
He was repeatedly hospitalised.
He has placed on record the Discharge Slip dated 2831989 issued by the Command Hospital Air Force Bangalore as Annexure P-5 recommending for his being invalided out of service in category A5 2 and declaring him fit for discharge.
The petitioner was issued a show cause notice dated 2741989 (Annexure P-6) informing that he is being invalided out of service on account of Cervical Spondylosis.
The petitioner was informed that he may file petition against finding of the Medical Board within 15 days of the receipt of show cause notice.
The petitioner was issued discharge slip Annexure P-7 indicating his date of discharge as 2741989.
The formal order of discharge dated 2871989 (Annexure P-8) was issued on 3181989.
The petitioner was then informed vide impugned letter dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) that it has been decided that disability viz. ID-Cervical Spondylosis on account of which he was invalided out of service should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
The petitioner filed a representation dated 2171990 (Annexure P-12) against the injustice meted out to him and it was held that the disability and his being invalided out of service was neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
Hearing no response from the respondents, he filed the present petition which as already noticed above, is limited to his claim for disability pension.
4.
Notice was issued in the case and the respondents filed their reply.
5.
The case of the respondent is that the petitioner's disability was not considered to be related to military services and he was invalided out of service and consequently disallowed the disability pension.
It was, therefore, contended that the invaliding disability was considered to be a constitutional disease and it was opined that service factors have not played a role in its onset or aggravation.
It is stated that the petitioner was on study leave for two years prior to the onset of invaliding disease and the onset of the disease was immediately after joining from study leave.
The petitioner was informed vide letter dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) and if he was not satisfied he could file appeal before the Appellate Authority under the Army Rules but the petitioner has straight away filed the present petition.
The other factual aspects of the petitioner's service particulars are admitted.
However, it is stated that the petitioner was selected as Short Service Commission on 23.6.1968 and not in 1967.
Besides, the petitioner was granted permanent regular commission on 2311973 and not in 1972.
Regarding medical fitness the position is accepted to be factually correct and all candidates selected for commission in the Army are subjected to a medical examination and only medically fit candidates are accepted for Commission in the Armed forces.
It is admitted that the petitioner was hospitalised on 2311987 and placed in low medical category w.e.f.
621987.
The petitioner was frequently admitted for the disease during the next two years.
He was on study leave from 12101984 to 12101986.
The onset of ID was after joining from leave and that in the opinion of the medical authorities ID is not service related as the petitioner was on study leave for two years prior to onset of ID.
It is also stated that the petitioner had accepted the show cause notice dated 2741989 (Annexure P-6) by making an endorsement that he accepts the findings and decision of the Invalidment Medical Board and that he would not appeal.
6.
The proceedings of the invaliding Medical Board were procedurally and technically correct and in order.
However, it is accepted that on the discharge of the petitioner from the hospital on 2741989, he was not to be put on any military duty till the final approval of Invaliding Medical Board proceedings, which was rightly stated in his discharge slip.
However, the Medical Board proceedings and the connected medical documents were not supposed to be handed over to the petitioner.
It is stated that the show cause notice was issued to the Officer and were considered to be unfit for/invalided out of service as per Rule 15-A of the Army Rule 1954.
In pursuance of which the show cause notice is to specify the nature of the disease or disability that the Officer was suffering and the findings of the Medical Board.
This show cause notice was served and was accepted by the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, it is contended that the petition should be dismissed.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the records of the case.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that he is entitled to the disability element for the grant of pension in accordance with Rule 48(a) of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961 and that his mere sending the acceptance of the show cause notice is in-consequential and cannot deprive him of his statutory rights.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents contends that merely because the petitioner suffered the disease of Cervical Spondylosis did not mean that the same was attributable to military services which has been found by the Government of India vide its letter dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) that the disability on account of which the petitioner was invalided out of service should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
Besides, he had made a reference to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and anr. v. Baljit Singh, 1997(1) SCT 386 (SC) : 1997(1) SLR 98.
He has further referred to : "An A-Z Guide to Everyday Ailments, Their Symptoms, Causes and Treatment, Family Medical Adviser," published by the Reader's Digest Association, London, to contend that Cold climate condition is not one of the causes for cervical spondylosis and that it is caused due to increasing age which causes irreversible degeneration of the joints of the spine and certain other factors such as having the head raised too high in bed.
10.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of the parties, the provisions of Regulations 48(a) of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961 - Part I, Chapter II, may be noticed which read as under :-  "48(a) Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability element may be granted to an officer who is invalided out of service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service in non-battle causality cases and is assessed at 20 percent or more.
(b) The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in Appendix II."
The persual of the above regulation shows that unless otherwise specifically provided disability pension consists of service element and disability element may be granted to an officer who is invalided out of service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military services in non-battle casualty cases and is assessed at 20 per cent.
The question whether the disability is attributable or aggravated by Military service is to be determined under the rules in Appendix II.
Appendix II provides the Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982.
Rule 4 of Appendix II reads as under :-  "Invaliding from service is a necessary condition for grant of disability pension.
An individual who, at the time of his release under the Release Regulations, is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalidated from service.
JCO/OR and equivalents in other services who are placed permanently in a medical category other than `A' and are discharged because no alternative employment suitable to their low medical category can be provided, as well as those who having been retained in alternative employment but are discharged before the completion of their engagement will be deemed to have been invalidated out of service."
The above rule enjoins that the invaliding from service is a necessary condition for grant of disability pension and that an individual, who at the time of his release under the Release Regulations was in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalidated from service.
Rule 5 of Appendix II provides that the approach to the question of entitlement to casualty pensionary awards and evaluation of disabilities are to be based on the presumptions indicated therein.
Rule 5 of Appendix II reads as under :- "The approach to the question of entitlement to casualty pensionary awards and evaluation of disabilities shall be based on the following presumptions :- PRIOR TO AND DURING SERVICE (a) A member is presumed to have been in sound physical and mental condition upon entering service except as to physical disabilities noted or recorded at the time of entrance.
(b) In the event of his subsequently being discharged from service on medical grounds any deterioration in his health which has taken place is due to service."
Rule 6 of Appendix II enjoins that disablement shall be accepted as due to military service provided it is certified by appropriate medical authority in the manner indicated therein.
Rule 7 of Appendix II envisages that where there is no note in contemporary official records of a material facts on which the claim is based, other reliable corroborative evidence of that fact may be accepted.
Rule 8 of Appendix II, enjoins attributability/aggravation shall be conceded if casual connection between disablement and military service is certified by appropriate medical authority.
Rules 6, 7 and 8 of Appendix II read as under :- "6.
Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to military service provided, it is certified by appropriate medical authority that -  (a) the disablement is due to a wound, injury or disease which (i) is attributable to military service, or (ii) existed before or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
This will also include the precipitating/hastening of the onset of a disability.
(b) the death was due to or hastened by - (i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to military service; or (ii) the aggravation by military service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during military service.
7.
Where there is no note in contemporary official records of a material fact on which the claim is based, other reliable corroborative evidence of that fact may be accepted.
8.
Attributability/aggravation shall be conceded if casual contention between death/disablement and military service is certified by appropriate medical authority."
In the light of the material placed on record it may be noticed that in the proceedings of the Medical Board which are appended as Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, it has been recommended that the petitioner is not to be posted to hilly terrain and extreme cold climate areas.
The principal disability of the petitioner was diagnosed as Cervical Spondylosis and the date and place of origin was depicted as January 1984 at high altitude.
The opinion of Lt. Col. K.K.
Goel Classified Specialist (Surgery) of 181 MH, as recorded in the proceedings of the Medical Board dated 321887 is as follows :-  "This serving officer was admitted to this hosp with C/O pain in neck radiating to Rt shoulder and Rt upper limb aggravated in cold weather since 1984.
He has been managed on conservative lines with anti-inflammatory drugs, Inj Neuroblen, local heat treatment and physiotherapy.
He has shown considerable improvement.
At present minimal pain in neck.
O/E - Average built and nourished, Afebrile.
Cervical Spine.
Tenderness at C5, C6 spines.
Flexion lateral flexion to Rt are painful and are restricted to last 5-100.
No neurological deficit in limbs.
X-ray cervical spine AP.
2789 LAT 28.11.86 Shows spondyletic changes C5, C6, C7, IV disc space normal.
In view of the above Recommended to be placed in med cat SIHI A3 (T-24) PIEI (Spine).
Not to be posted to hilly terrain and extreme cold climate area."
Part II of the Medical Board proceedings is the opinion of Board, which reads as under :- "OPINION OF THE BOARD 1.
Was the disability contracted in service ?
Yes.
2.
Was it contracted in circumstances over which he had no control ?
Yes.
................  3.
Is it directly attributable to conditions of service ?
No 4.
If so by what specific condition ?
NA 5.
If not directly attributable to service was it aggravated thereby and if so by what specific condition?
Yes due to physical stress and strain of service.
6.
Medical Category recommended.
SIMI A3 (T-24) PIEI (Spine) 7.
Period for which the above medical category is recommended.
(T-24) 8.
What is the category likely to be :- (a) Six months from the date of the Board.
(b) Finally.
To be decided later on.
9.
Any specific restriction regarding employment.
Not to be posted to hilly terrain and cold climate area.
10.
Further treatment/investigation required.
11.
Period of leave recommended (if any) NA 12.
Next board due on 24 July 87.
13.
Instructions given to the individual by the president of the Board.
You are placed in med classification SIMI A3(T-24) PIEI subject to approval of high auth."
12.
The petitioner during the discharge of his official duties as Training Officer at the Pioneer Corps Training Centre, was required to undergo the next Medical Board on 2471987.
The petitioner was again subjected to a Medical Board on 3071987 at the Command Hospital (Air Force) Bangalore.
Copy of the proceedings of the Medical Board held on 3071987 is not available with the petitioner.
However, he has produced on record the Medical Conditions Physical Profile Record, which was handed over to him on the day of holding the Medical Board on 3071987, and is appended as Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
In column 10, under the heading Instructions to the Officer, it has been indicated as follow :-  "You are continued to SIHI A3(U)(T-24+24) PIEI subject to the approval of higher authorities.
Advised :- To avoid Pillow, exposure to cold and sudden jerky movements."
In column 11 with regard to restrictions on employability it was indicated :-  "Sedentary duties anywhere except Hilly terrain and area of extreme cold."
Perusal of the above advise also indicates that the petitioner was to avoid to exposure to cold and hilly terrain.
It was also mentioned that this superseded the previous Medical Board dated 621987.
Besides the next Medical Board of the petitioner was indicated to be due on 1511988.
As per aforesaid two Medical Boards, conducted in respect of the ailment suffered by the petitioner he was advised not to be posted in hilly terrain and extreme cold climate area.
However, the petitioner was continued to be engaged for the duties of training officer, which are reported to be strenuous in nature.
13.
The petitioner was against subject to Medical Board on 19121987.
The petitionr has appended the Medical Conditions Physical Profile Record as Annexure P-3 to the petition.
In columns No. 10 and 11, it was recorded as follows :-  "10.
Instructions to the Officer :- You are placed in medical category SIHIAS (U) PIEI subject to the approval of higher authorities.
Advised :- (i) To use Cervical Collar.
(ii) Isometric exercise of the neck.
11.
Restriction on employability :- Fit and sedentary duties anywhere except at hilly terrain and extreme cold areas."
As per the observations in column 11, it is again provided that the petitioner was fit for sedentary duties anywhere except at hilly terrain and extreme cold areas.
It is also recorded that this superseded the previous Medical Board dated 16111987.
The next Medical Board in respect of the petitioner as per Annexure P-3 was indicated to be due on 19121989.
However, the same was conducted on 611989 and the proceedings of the same have been placed on record as Annexure P-4.
As per the proceedings of the said Medical Board, the opinion of the  "OPINION OF THE BOARD PART - 2" 1.
Was the disability contracted in service ?
Yes.
2.
Was it contracted in circumstances over which he had no control ?
Yes.
3.
Is it directly attributable to conditions of service ?
No 4.
If so, by what specific condition ?
NA 5.
If not directly attributable to service was it aggravated thereby and if so by what specific condition?
Yes due to stress and strain of military service.
6.
Medical Category recommended.
SI HI A3 (T-24) PIEI  7.
Period for which the above medical category is recommended.
Permanent.
8.
What is the category likely to be :- To be decided by the next Medical Board.
(a) Six months from the date of the Board.
(b) Family (sic.
- Finally) 9.
Any specific restriction regarding employment.
(i) Fit for sedentary duties only (ii) Unfit for duties requiring severe stress and not fit for posting to high altitude.
10.
Further treatment/investigation regarding.
11.
Period of leave recommended (if any) 12.
Next board due on 06 Jan, 91 13.
Instructions given to the individual by the president of the Board.
You are placed in Med Cat SIHI A3(24) PIEI.
Subject to approval of higher authorities.
(ii) Avoid exposure to cold and extremes of movements of cervical spine.
(iii) Excused PT, Parade and games."
A perusal of the above recordings by the Medical Board shows that the disease in respect of the petitioner was aggravated due to stress and strain of military service although it was not directly attributable to military service.
Besides, the disability was contracted during service.
The petitioner was advised to avoid exposure to cold and extreme movement of cervical spine.
The Medical Board held on 611989 (Annexure P-4) declared the petitioner unfit for duties requiring severe stress beside it was provided as not fit for posting to high altitude.
Despite this position, it is the case of the petitioner that the Commanding Officer continued to engage the petitioner by posting him for Training Officers and declined to even consider the recommendations of the Medical Board.
It is also his case that the petitioner was repeatedly hospitalised for reasons of pain emanating out of the ailment of Cervical Spondylosis.
It was aggravated by the duties which the petitioner was discharging.
The petitioner has given the details of his hospitalisation during the year 1989 at various points of time.
Ultimately the petitioner was issued a discharge slip on 2831989 (Annexure P-5).
He was to be invalided out of service in medical Category A5 2 and was declared fit for discharge.
The petitioner was then admitted on 2541989 to the Command Hospital (Air Force) Bangalore.
No medical investigation was conducted and on 2641989 the petitioner was allowed to relax and ease his pain emanating out of his disability.
No Orthopedics Specialist is stated to have visited or examined the petitioner during his hospitalisation for the said period.
The petitioner was, however, discharged on 2741989 and no physical examination of the petitioner was conducted by any Doctor.
He was handed over a communication dated 2741989 - (Annexure P-6) which is a show cause notice regarding being invalided out of service.
The petitioner was informed that he was being invalided from service on account of Cervical Spondylosis and that this was subject to approval of higher Medical Authorities.
The petitioner was also informed that he may prefer a petition against the findings of the Medical Board within 15 days of receipt of the show cause notice, if so desired.
It was further indicated that in case the petitioner decided not to prefer petition against all the findings of the Commanding Board, he was to state in this regard thereof in the proforma given.
14.
On the said Show Cause Notice, the petitioner recorded that he was in receipt of the show cause notice issued to him by Commandant of Command Hospital Air Force, Bangalore, and that he accepted the findings and decision of the above Invalidment Medical Board and he was not to appeal to higher authorities against the findings and decision of the above Invalidment Medical Board within the stipulated period.
He also recorded that he was aware that in the event of his failure to be put up proper appeal/petition within the stipulated period, the medical and other administrative authorities would be left with no choice except to process his invalidating medical board proceedings as a Non Appeal Case which was not then required to be referred to Central Government for its consideration as per 424(c)(iii) of RMS AP - 1962.
The petitioner was issued discharge slip Annexure P-7 in April 1989 indicating the date of discharge as 2741989.
The diagnoses were indicated as Cervical Spondylosis old 713(b)V67.
It was also indicated that the invalid Medical Board was held on 2741989 and that the Officer is discharged to unit and to wait for approval of invaliding Medical Board proceedings in the unit.
Beside he was not to resume any military duty.
The Commanding Officer, however, of the Pioneer Corps Training Centre found the recommendations of the Medical Board contained in discharge slip to be frivolous as he was clearly of the opinion that the petitioner could effectively discharge all military duties irrespective of the stress and strain involved.
He, therefore, directed the petitioner to continue to discharge active Military duties against the post of Training Officer in disregard to the recommendations of the Medical Board.
This opinion entertained by the Commanding Officer was also communicated to the Army Headquarter at New Delhi - respondent No. 2.
It is then on 3181989 - (Annexure P-8) the Commanding Officer, Pioneer Corps Training Centre, served on the petitioner orders of the Army Headquarter, removing him from service.
The said letter indicated that the petitioner was declared permanently unfit for any form of military service by a Medical Board held on 2741989 and that the competent authority had accepted the Invaliding Medical Board proceedings on 3061989.
It is also the case of the petitioner that from 2741989 till 3181989 he regularly and efficiently discharged all duties as Training Officer in the Pioneer Corps Training Centre, which fact was specifically conveyed by the Commanding Officer of the Centre of the Army Headquarter respondent No. 2.
The letter dated 3181989 (Annexure P-8/A) issued by the Commanding Pioneer Corps, Prashikshan Kender, Pioneer Corps Training Centre, Bangalore, also indicates that the petitioner at the time of his discharge was performing the duties as Training Officer till 3181989 being found able to do so.
It is the case of the petitioner that in view of his being invalided from military service, he was informed by the President, Medical Board, Command Hospital, (AIR FORCE), Bangalore, respondent No. 3 on 2741989 that he had duly recommended the claim of the petitioner for disability pension to the extent of disability suffered by him, vide intimation submitted to the Controller, Defence Accounts (Pensions), Allahabad - respondent No. 4.
The aforesaid recommendations was however, not accepted by respondent No. 4.
Consequently, the petitioner was issued a communication by the respondent No. 1 - Union of India dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) regarding his claim for disability pension.
It was indicated therein that it has been decided that the disability in respect of the petitioner viz-ID-Cervial Spondylosis, on account of which the petitioner was invalided out of service was to be regarded as neither attributable nor aggravated by his military service.
15.
The petitioner then submitted a representation dated 23171990 (Annexure P-12) highlighting his grievances to which there has been no response from the authorities.
It is in these circumstances, the petitioner claims disability pension.
16.
As already noticed the petitioner has placed material on record inasmuch as reports of four Medical Boards Annexure P-1 and P-4, a reference to which has been made above, which primarily indicate that the petitioner was suffering from Cervical Spondylosis and had served in high altitude areas and that it was due to physical stress and strain of the services that he suffered the disease which though was not directly attributable to conditions of service.
Beside it is also to be noticed that the petitioner was on more than one occasion advised by the medical authorities not to serve in high altitude and extreme cold areas.
Therefore, in these facts and circumstances, it is evident that though the disability is not directly attributable to conditions of service, however, it has been aggravated due to stress and strains of military service.
The decision of the Government dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) does not record any reasons for holding that the petitioner was invalided out of service which should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
The absence of reasons vitiates the decision reached at.
Giving of reasons in support of an order is now an accepted facet of the principles of natural justice.
According to this a party has a right to know not only the result of the decision but also the reasons in support of it.
This has been found to be a salutory rule.
Besides, for judicial review to be effective reasons are necessary.
The recording of reasons introduces clarity and excludes arbitrariness and even satisfies the party concerned against whom the order is passed.
Therefore, in my view, the failure to record reasons vitiates the decision.
17.
Even otherwise, the non-recording of reasons shows that there has been failure to consider the material on record.
In recording the conclusions the Union of India respondent No. 1 in its communication dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) has stated that the invalidation out of service should be regarded as neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
However, the Medical Board Proceedings and opinion of the Board records that the disability was aggravated due to physical stres and strain of service.
Therefore, material documents which were required to be taken into account which amongst others include the proceedings of Medical Board and are placed on record as Annexures P-1 to P-4, it appears have not been taken into account.
It is admitted case that the petitioner did not suffer this disease before joining service.
Besides Rule 8(a) of Appendix II to the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961, specifically enjoins that the attributability/aggravation shall be conceded if casual connection between death/disablement and military service is certified by appropriate medical authority.
This in my view has been duly certified by the Medical Board Proceedings conducted from time to time, reference to which has been made above.
Medical authorities have in terms of the proceedings of the various Medical Boards certified that the disease was due to physical stress and strain of the service.
Therefore, there is a connection between the disablement and the military service and what Rule 8 of Appendix II requires is "casual connection".
In these circumstances also, the rejection of the disability element of pension to the petitioner in terms of the order dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) passed by respondent No. 1 is not sustainable.
The same is a mere mechanical order that records that it has been decided that the disability viz. ID Cervical Spondylosis on account of which the petitioner was invalided out of service should be regarded as neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service.
The same as already noticed above is bereft of any reasons.
18.
The contention of the respondents that the disease was suffered during the period the petitioner was on study leave is not plausible as admittedly in view of the reports of the medical authroities, there is a connection between the aggravation of the disease and the military service and what is required in fact is just a "casual connection".
Besides the disability of the disease being suffered on account of cold climate and condition also cannot be ruled out in view of the fact that the medical authorities had repeatedly recommended to avoid postings at high altitude and extreme cold field areas.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that cold climate condition is not one of the causes for the disease cannot be accepted as had this been so the medical authorities would not have recommended for not assigning the petitioner duties at the high altitude and cold climate condition area.
It may not be one of the causes of the disease but it definitely appears to have atleast some casual connection with military services rendered by the petitioner.
The judgment in the case of Union of India v. Baljit Singh (supra) is based on Rule 173 of the Pension Regulation for Army 1961.
Rule 173 of the Pension Regulation for the Army 1961 reads as under :-  "173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability pension consisting of service element and disability element may be granted to an individual who is invalided out of service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service in non-battle casualty and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable or to aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rule in Appendix II."
19.
The perusal of the above rule shows that unless and otherwise specifically provided a disability pension consisting of service element and disability element may be granted to an individual who is in invalided out of service on account of disability which is attributable or aggravated by military service in non-battle casualty and is assessed at 20 per cent.
However, the question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service is to be determined in accordance with the Rules in Appendix II, reference to which has already been made above.
In Union of India v. Baljit Singh (supra), also it was observed that it is to be seen that under Rule 173 disability pension would be computed only when disability had occurred due to a wound, injury or disease which is attributable to military service or existed befoe or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated during military service.
If these conditions are satisfied, necessarily the incumbment is entitled to disability pension.
This, it was observed is made amply clear from Clauses A and B of paragraph 7 which contemplates that in respect of a disease, the Rules enumerated thereunder require to be observed.
Therefore, taking into account the facts and circumstances in the case in hand the non-recording of reasns, the failure to take into account the relevant documents and the casual connectin between the disability and the military service, the petitioner, in my view, would be entitled to disability element of pension.
20.
Another contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents is that the petitioner was issued show cause notice dated 2741989 (Annexure P- 6) in which he was informed that he was being invalided from service on account of Cervical Spondylosis.
In the said show cause notice it was indicated that the petitioner may prefer a petition against the finding of the Medical Board within 15 days of the receipt of show cause notice, if he so desired.
The learned counsel for the respondents has drawn pointed attention to the note recorded by the petitioner that he was in receipt of the show cause notice issued to him by the Commandant of the Command Hospital (Air Force) Bangalore, and he accepts the decision of the Invalidment Medical Board.
Besides he would not be appealing to higher authorities against the findings and the decisions of the above invalidment Medical Board.
The learned counsel for the respondents contends that since the petitioner had accepted his invalidment and decision of the invalidment Medical Board, he is not entitled to disability pension.
I have considered this argument of the learned counsel for the respondents also.
In my view the petitioner has no cause to be aggrieved against his being invalided out of military service.
His grievance is against the non-grant of disability pension on account of his being invalided out of service on account of Cervical Spondylosis which should be regarded as attributable and aggravated by his military service.
The petitioner in this regard was informed in terms of the impugned decision dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9).
As such the mere recording of the findings by the Medical Board for the purposes of discharge of the petitioner is absolutely inconsequential.
In fact in terms of the order dated 711991 passed by this Court, as referred to above, the petitioner does not even challenge his discharge from military service.
The grievance of the petitioner is not against the findings of the Medical Board but are against his disability being not regarded as attributable to or aggravated by his military service.
Therefore, this contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is without substance.
21.
In the case of Ex JC-77167 Naib Subedar (Pharm) Mamraj v. Union of India and others - C.W.P.
No. 2302 of 1997 decided by a Division Bench of this Court on 1091997.
In somewhat similar circumstances, where the disability was found to have resulted from the rigour of duty in military service and restrictions were imposed against the petitioner in the said case not to be posted at high altitude and extreme climate this Court allowed the claim of petitioner in accordance with military rules.
The Division Bench relied upon an earlier decision of this Court in the case of Ajit Singh Sandal v. Union of India and others, CWP No. 14313 of 1996, decided on 2871997 wherein after detailed discussion and relying upon other cases, this Court held as under :-  "This contention of the respondents need not detain us any longer in view of the fact that different Division Benches of this Court had the occasion to consider this argument and found the stand of the respondents without merit.
In the case of Jarnail Singh v. Union of India and other, 1997(3) SCT 484 (SC) : C.W.P.
No. 10170 of 1996, decided on 1131997, the Bench observed as under :- "The expression "attributable to or aggravated by military service" must be read ejusdem generis with rule 2 in Appendix II and opening line of regulation 173.
It must be read in conjunction with the scheme of these provisions and has to be given purposeful meaning."
xx xx xx "We may elucidate the above principle by giving a very simple examine (sic.
example) that if a person on casual leave and subject to this Act goes to canteen to buy things or takes his children for treatment to hospital and on the way meets with an accident, may be arising out of his negligence or contributory negligence, suffers injuries causing permanent disability, in our view, would be entitled to claim the benefit under Rule 173.
Similarly a person who joins army is not found to be sufferings from any disease, but subsequently suffers from any disease which renders him liable for being invalidated out of army on such ill-health, such a disease would be attributable and/or aggravated by military service and could entitle him to take benefit of these regulations."
22.
Keeping in view the material on record and the recommendations of the Military Board, the mere recording in the order dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) that the disability should be regarded as neither attributable nor aggravated by military service is without any basis or substance.
23.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is allowed to the extent that the order dated 12.3.1990 (Annexure P-9) is quashed and the respondents are directed to calculate and grant disability pension to the petitioner within a period of four months from the date of receipt of the certified copy of the order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.