Swatanter Kumar, J - Four petitioners have approached this Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for issuance of appointment letters on the post of Soil Conservation Officer against which the selected candidates have not joined.
According to the petitioners they are being ignored by the respondents for appointment to these posts in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner.
2.
The necessary facts are that on 1591997 respondent No. 3 invited applications for 34 posts of Soil Conservation Officer (Male) with a clean stipulation stated therein that number of posts can be increased which may be available upto 3131998.
The advertisement also contended a specific stipulation that 14 posts will be filled up from degree holders while remaining posts will be available to the diploma holders.
The petitioners being qualified and eligible applied in the general category.
The petitioners were subject to screening test, which was held on 2821999, the result thereof was published on 30112001; candidates were interviewed on 5/7122001, final result of the selected candidates was published on 22.12.2001 and names were recommended to respondent No. 2 for issuance of appointment letters.
On the basis of the recommendations received, the respondents issued letters of appointment to 39 candidates on 242002 for all the posts which became available as on 3131998.
3.
The petitioners were next in order of merit.
According to the petitioners, four candidates did not join as a result of which the petitioners became entitled to be appointed to the said posts.
They submitted various representations right from 252002 till recently, but of no avail.
The petitioners also relied upon the instructions of the Government dated 2231957 wherein it was stated that all posts falling vacant within six months from the date of receipt of the list of the selected candidates should be filled up from the waiting list and these instructions were referred to by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Virender Singh Hooda and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(2) SCT 652 (SC) : 1999(3) SCC 696.
4.
Upon notice, respondents filed written statement wherein they have stated that 39 applicants were issued appointment letters and in fact five posts remained vacant.
The Chief Conservator of Soils, Punjab, had sought permission of the Government to fill up the vacant posts, but there was a ban on recruitment issued by the Government on 1052002.
Consequently, the petitioners could not be issued letters of appointment.
They have no cause of action and their writ should be dismissed.
5.
From the above it is clear that there is hardly any controversy with regard to the facts giving rise to the present petition.
The only question that arises for consideration before us is whether the respondents were justified in denying appointment to the petitioner on the pretext of imposition of ban on recruitment or not?
6.
The advertisement which was issued to fill up the posts in question clearly stipulated an assurance of posts being increased as well as that the posts would be filled up in the ratio of 60:40 between degree holders and diploma holders.
The relevant part of the advertisement reads as under :-  "8.
Chief Conservator/Soil/Director Agriculture, Punjab :- i) Soil Conservation Officer (Male), Posts : 34 (can be increased).
12 posts  for S.C./S.T., 1 for BC and 4 for ESM Pay Scale : 2200-4000."
7.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board had recommended the cases of the selected candidates for appointment to the said post vide letter dated 20.12.2001 in furtherance to which order of appointment was issued by the Chief Conservator of Soil, Punjab, on 242002.
Thereafter, letters of appointment were issued to the selected candidates.
It is not even in dispute before us that five posts were to be filled up for which the department had written to the Government to grant sanction.
It is also not in dispute that four selected candidates had Roll Nos. 120, 775, 138 and 663 had not joined.
In terms of Clause 11 of the letter of appointment, the applicants were to join within 30 days of the issuance of the order i.e. 242002.
Four applicants having failed to join within the stipulated time, gives a definite cause of action in favour of the petitioners.
They being on the waiting list of the selected candidates and immediately lower in merit to the four candidates, who failed to join by stipulated date, not only gives a legitimate expectancy to the petitioners for seeking employment, but a legal right of consideration for appointment.
It will be appropriate at this stage to refer to the reply filed on behalf of the State.
In reply to para No. 11, the stand taken by the State is as under :-  "Admitted to the extent that appointments letters were issued to 39 candidates but five candidates, four B.Sc.
Agriculture categories did not join and Punjab Govt. have not given the sanction to fill up these 5 posts.
Rest of the para is admitted."
8.
The circular of the State which, according to the respondents, created a ban of fresh recruitment, was issued on 1052002.
But for the ban, obviously the respondents would have offered appointment to the petitioners.
The language of the said letter Annexure R/-II to the written statement clearly shows that the ban was to be applicable to the posts which were lying vacant.
Further the letters stated that "in all cases where they have not yet been acted upon."
This was reference made to the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission and/or Subordinate Services Selection Board.
In the present case, the recommendations had already been made in 2001 and in fact the letters of appointment issued to the selected candidates on 242002.
Till 252002, in any case, these posts could not be treated as vacant posts.
The posts which could be affected by the circular were the vacant posts and not the posts for which appointments has already been issued and candidates required to join the posts.
The intention of the ban was not to frustrate a due selection which had culminated into issuance of letter of appointment.
9.
Furthermore, the instructions issued by the State itself require that the vacancies arising within six months from the date of receipt of the selected candidates, should be filled up by the candidates and selected on the waiting list.
This was duly approved by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of Virender Singh (supra) wherein the State was directed to appoint the appellants in appropriate posts as the vacancies had arisen within a period of six months.
Their Lordships also held that the executive instructions in consonance with the rules can also be enforced.
Their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat State Dy.
Executive Engineers' Association v. The State of Gujarat and others, 1994(3) SCT 325 (SC) : 1994(2) SLR 711 enunciated the principle that a waiting list cannot provide as a source of employment indefinitely or operate as infinite stock for appointments.
This could give a leverage to the Government to deprive the candidates to become eligible in the meanwhile.
But, at the same time, their Lordships clearly held that a candidate in the waiting list in order of merit has a right to claim, that he may be joined if one or other selected candidate does not join.
This has to be within a reasonable period.
The list is to operate under rules or within reasonable period where no specific period is provided.
Thereafter no right can accrue to the wait-list candidates.
One year may be a reasonable period and thereafter it cannot provide source of appointment.
10.
Reliance was also placed upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Prem Parkash v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 183 to contend that the selected candidates when are available from the previous list, such list should be exhausted if the rules permit.
11.
In view of the above, we are of the considered view that approach of the respondent-authority in denying consideration to the petitioners is nothing but arbitrary.
Neither the circular of the Government has been correctly appreciated nor correctly applied to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The very purpose of providing a waiting list shall stand frustrated and would be in apparent conflict with the instructions issued by the State and particularly the contents of the advertisement dated 1591997.
The petitioners have been continuously requesting the respondents to grant them appointments, but of no consequence.
There is no delay or laches attributable to the petitioners.
12.
In view of our above discussion, we allow this writ and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners and issue them letters of appointment for the post of Soil Conservation Officer in accordance with rules expeditiously.
In the fact and circumstances of the present case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.