SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the prayer is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to grant to the petitioner the scale of pay of the Post of Accounts Officer with effect from April 24, 1978.
2.
On 2021978 a proposal was put forth by the then Deputy Secretary, Local Government, for the creation of a post of the status of Accounts Officer to be designated as Administrative Officer (hereinafter referred to as "the Ad.O") for the Local Government Directorate.
It was to be a Class II Gazetted Post.
The proposal was approved by the concerned Minister on 231978.
On 2441978 orders were issued creating the post of Ad.O, a Class II Gazetted Post in the pay scale of the Rs. 400-1100 equivalent to the post of Accounts Officer.
The petitioner was promoted and appointed against the post of Ad.O on 2441978 in the pay scale of Rs. 400-1100.
The promotion was notified in the Punjab Government Gazette with the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission in the Punjab Government Gazette (extraordinary) dated 20121978.
According to the petitioner, in the proposal for the creation of the post of Ad.O, the pay scale of Rs. 400-1100 was inadvertently mentioned instead of Rs. 400-1250, as the pay scale of the post of Accounts Officer had been revised to Rs. 400- 1250 by an order of the Governor of Punjab, dated 2241977.
On 1.6.1979 the petitioner made a request in writing for correction of the pay scale.
The matter was referred to the Finance Department which on 1241979 advised as under :-  "A.D. are advised to maintain the status quo for the present.
Final view of this matter will be taken after the Pay Commission Report, if necessary."
3.
The 2nd Pay Commission's report was received in May 1979.
However, the anomaly in the pay scale of the Ad.O and the Accounts Officer persisted in the report.
The revised pay scale of the Ad.O was Rs. 825-1700 and that of the Accounts Officers was Rs. 1200-1850.
The petitioner made a representation to the Chairman, Implementation Committee, 2nd Pay Commission praying for parity of pay scales of the posts of Ad.O and Accounts Officer.
The Implementation Committee held a meeting on 10.8.1979.
According to the petitioner, it becomes apparent from the extract of the Report of the Implementation Committee that the post of Ad.O had been equated with the post of Accounts Officer.
But inadvertently, the scale of the post of Ad.O was shown as Rs. 400-1100 instead of Rs. 400-1250.
The Implementation Committee decided to refer the case to the Finance Department for correction of the pay scale.
The matter was put up before the Finance Department on 3101979, which on 21.12.1979 advised as under :-  "A.D. are advised to await the Implementation of the recommendations of the Pay Commission."
4.
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 1711980 decided to implement the recommendation of the 2nd Pay Commission in respect of Class I and Class II Officers of the State Government.
Since the post of Ad.O was a Class II Gazetted Post, the Local Government Department, Punjab again put up the case before the Finance Department for correction in the pay scale and bringing it at par with that of an Account Officer.
The Finance Department again by its order dated 1441998 advised as under :-  "F.D.
reiterates their earlier advice conveyed vide U.O No. 6275-2 FR, dated the 21st December, 1979."
5.
The petitioner thereafter made a detailed representation on 3051980 for the removal of anomaly in the pay scale of Ad.O vis-a-vis the Accounts Officer.
The representation of the petitioner was not decided.
Thereafter the Local Government Department referred the case of grant of selection grade to the petitioner to the Finance Department which again passed the following order :-  "As a matter of policy, it has been decided to have such cases for consideration by the Third Punjab Pay Commission, the appointment of which has already been announced."
6.
In view of the above, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
7.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
The respondents have raised the preliminary objection that the disputes such as the one raised in the present writ petition, are to be referred to the Third Pay Commission which was already been constituted.
A prayer was made that the writ petition is, therefore, liable to be dismissed an infructous.
The plea put forth by the petitioner with regard to the equation of the post of Ad.O with Accounts Officer has not been denied.
In fact in paragraph 2 of the written statement, it is categorically stated that proposal for the creation of the post of Ad.O in the office of respondent No. 1 in the pay scale of Rs. 400-1100 equivalent to an Accounts Officer (who would be a Class II Gazetted Officer) was approved by the then Minister for Finance and Local Government on 231978.
Thereafter the factual position as narrated by the petitioner which has been noticed above has been accepted to be correct.
In paragraph 4 of the written statement, it has been submitted that the petitioner has sent the representation dated 6.1.1979 setting out his case as noticed earlier.
Thereafter, it is stated that the request of the petitioner was re-examined in detail by the Department.
On re-examination of his case, it was found that at the time of creation of the post of Ad.O, equivalent to that of Accounts Officer, whose grade was mentioned as Rs. 400-1100 for which the Finance Department conveyed their concurrence to the proposal of the department.
Inadvertently, this department was not aware of the correct pay scale of the Accounts Officer which stood revised in April, 1977 from Rs. 400-1100 to Rs. 400-1250 as per copy of the letter at Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
The reference was made to the Finance Department to correct the pay scale.
However, the Finance Department as noticed earlier did not agree to the proposal.
The Implementation Committee had again recommended that the anomaly pointed out by the petitioner be rectified.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper book.
9.
Mr. Gupta, learned Sr.
Counsel has submitted that at the time of the creation of the post, it was decided as a matter of policy that the post of Ad.O would be equivalent to the Accounts Officer and it would be a Gazetted Class II Post.
This proposal was accepted by the Finance Department in toto.
According to Mr. Gupta, it is also a matter of record that the pay scale of the post of Accounts Officer had been revised to Rs. 400-1250 at the time when the post of Administrative Officer was created which was intended to be equivalent to the post of Accounts Officer.
The respondents in the written statement had admitted the entire claim.
It is submitted that it would be too harsh on the petitioner if the matter is now sent to the Pay Commission for re-examination.
He further submitted that the decision of the Finance Department is wholly arbitrary, bereft of any reasons, and therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
10.
Mr. HS Sran, learned Addl.AG, Punjab submits that the matter has to be referred to the Pay Commission since the 3rd Pay Commission had already been constituted by the time the writ petition was filed.
He further submits that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches alone.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel relies on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Veterinary Association v. Union of India and others, (1984) 3 SCC (J) 1.
Learned counsel has relied on the observations made by the Supreme Court in paragraph 4 of the judgment.
11.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
The facts and circumstances narrated by the petitioner have been entirely admitted by respondents in the written statement.
Although a preliminary objection has been raised to the effect that the matter has to be referred to the Pay Commission, on a query being made by the Court, Mr. Sran has stated that at present there is no Pay Commission.
The 3rd Pay Commission had already submitted its report.
In view of the above, the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Veterinary Association (supra) would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The Supreme Court was dealing with a matter where in the counter affidavit, the department had justified the existing pay scale which had been challenged and at the same time had pleaded that the matter should be allowed to be examined by the 4th Pay Commission.
In those circumstances, the Supreme Court did not adjudicate on the merits of the controversy raised, although prima facie grievance of the petitioner was held to be genuine.
In the present case, the claim of the petitioner has been admitted.
The arguments which are sought to be raised by the counsel for the respondents are contrary to the pleadings of the respondents in the written statement and cannot be taken note of.
Furthermore, merely because the petitioner has now retired from service would not preclude this Court for granting the necessary relief to the petitioner.
12.
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the petitioner was entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 400-1250 from the date he was appointed as Ad.O i.e. 2441978.
The respondents are directed to fix the pay of the petitioner and to pay the arrears of salary and to re-fix the retiral benefits on the basis of the re-fixed salary.
Let the needful be done within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.