Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - The prayer made in the present application is for fixing the case at an early actual date on the ground that the same is a covered case by the reported judgment in the case of Dalip Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) SCT 385 (P&H) (DB) : 1999(1) RSJ 722.
On a notice of the aforesaid application Shri RD Sharma, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has appeared.
2.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents.
I deem it appropriate to take the main case on the board of this court and decide the same by the following order.
3.
The present writ petition has been filed by Surjeet Singh and Udai Veer Singh petitioners for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders dated September 17, 2001 which have been appended as Annexure P/3 and Annexure P/4 respectively, with the present petition.
Vide the aforesaid orders and claim made by the petitioners for regularisation of their services under the instructions of the State Government has been declined on the ground that in fact one of the conditions for regularisation of their services, as per the aforesaid instructions was not fulfilled and, therefore, their services were not entitled to be regularised.
4.
The petitioners have stated that petitioner No. 1 Surjeet Singh is serving the department since December 17, 1992 and petitioner No. 2 Udai Veer Singh is serving the department since November 2, 1992.
On June 1, 1994 the services of Surjeet Singh petitioner No. 1 and Udai Veer Singh petitioner No. 2 were terminated through a verbal order.
Both the petitioners raised separate industrial disputes which were adjudicated upon by the Labour Court-cum- Industrial Tribunal, Hisar.
Vide order dated July 16, 1997 (appended as Annexure P/1), the learned Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Hisar held that the termination of Surjeet Singh petitioner No. 1 was illegal and bad and, therefore, he was ordered to be reinstated will full back wages and continuity of service along with all other service benefits.
Similarly vide award dated July 16, 1998 (appended as Annexure P/2) the termination of service of Udai Veer Singh petitioner No. 2 was also declared illegal and unjustified and he was directed to be reinstated with continuity of service but only with 25 percent back wages.
5.
I have heard Shri S.D.
Bhatti, learned counsel for the petitioners as well as Shri RD Sharma, learned Assistant Advocate General, appearing for the State of Haryana.
6.
Shri Bhatti has submitted that in fact as per the awards, Annexures P/1 and P/2, both the petitioners were ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service and, therefore, the petitioners are in fact deemed to be in service right from the day they had joined the department.
Sh. Bhatti further submits that while passing the orders Annexures P/3 and P/4 the Executive Engineer respondent No. 3 has not taken into consideration the effect of the aforesaid awards and, therefore, the orders Annexures P/3 and P/4 are absolutely illegal on the face of it.
To support his submissions Shri Bhatti has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this court in Dalip Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) SCT 385 (P&H) : 1999(1) RSJ 722 and reiterates that in fact since the Labour Court had directed the continuity of service to be maintained in the cases of both the petitioners, therefore, the intervening period was also to be treated on duty and could not be excluded while computing the total period of service of the petitioners.
He further submits that if the aforesaid period is taken into consideration and the petitioners are deemed to be in continuous service, then the case of the petitioners is fully covered under the policy.
7.
On the other hand Shri RD Sharma, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents has submitted that the orders Annexures P/3 and P/4 are perfectly legal and valid and since the petitioners had not actually served the department when they were out of service, therefore, the declaration of continuity of service awarded by the Labour Court cannot be taken to mean that their case was covered by the policy.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and I find that the petition deserves to succeed.
9.
It is not disputed that in view of the respective awards given in favour of the petitioners vide orders Annexures P/1 and P/2, the petitioners were directed to be reinstated in service with continuity thereof and the natural consequences of the aforesaid directions are as if the petitioners had continuously served throughout without their being any break because of the illegal termination.
In these circumstances, the case of the petitioners is fully covered by the instructions issued by the Government.
Thus, I quash orders Annexures P/3 and P/4 and direct the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioners for regularisation from the date they were due and eligible for regularisation.
While considering the case of the petitioners for regularisation, the respondents shall take into consideration the awards of the Labour Court as noticed by me above.
No costs.
Order accordingly.