JS Khehar, J - The petitioner was issued a charge sheet dated 1462000.
The primary charge against the petitioner was that he, along with the assistance of about 15-20 persons, entered the premises of the Food Corporation of India at Kaithal and man-handled Vijay Kumar Batra, Assistant Grade III (D).
It was further alleged that all these persons also assaulted S/Shri Mohinder Singh Bhatti, Tejpal Singh, Prem Chand Sharma, Mohinder Singh, Surinder Mona, Bhan Singh Gupta and Dharam Pal.
Out of the above named pesons Bhan Singh Gupta was holding thte post of Assistant Grade II (Accounts) while Dharam Pal was holding the post of Watchman, and the others were holding the post of Assistant Grade III (D).
2.
It is pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner tthat on account of the same accusation Criminal case No. 319/1/99 was instituted against the petitioner on 961999.
The said case was based on FIR No. 36 dated 2711999 recorded under Sections 186, 332 and 353 of the Indian Penal Code at Police Station City Kaithal.
The Court, while proceeding with the aforesaid case, recorded the statements of Jai Kishan (PW-1), Bhan Singh (PW- 2), Mohinder Singh (PW-3), Tej Pal (PW-4), Vijay Kumar (PW-5) Mohinder Singh (PW-6), and PC Sharma (PW-7).
It would be pertinent to mention that out of the above mentioned witnesses examined by the Magistrate; Vijay Kumar Batra, Mohinder Singh Bhatti, Tejpal Singh, Mohinder Singh and Bhan Singh Gupta were cited as witnesses, in the list of witnesses appended to the charge sheet issued to tthe petitioner.
The Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kaithal, by his order dated 18122000, acquitted the petitioner after having arrived at the conclusion that nothing incriminating had come into evidence against the accused.
It would also be pertinent to mention that in paragraph-6 of the Judgment rendered by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kaithal, it has been specifically noticed that the witnesses produced on behalf of the prosecution expressly stated that they knew nothing about the incident and that they could not identify the accused present in Court.
3.
The question to be decided in the instant case is whether the departmental proceedings can be initiated against the petitioner on allegations, which are to be proved by the same witnesses, who deposed before the Magistrate, during the course of a criminal proceeding initiated against him ?
4.
In so far as the legal issue is concerned, the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decision rendered in Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd, 1999(2) S.C.T.
660.
Pointed attention of this Court has been invited to the facts disclosed in paragraph 12 and conclusion drawn in paragraphs 31 and 32 in the aforesaid judgment.
Learned counsel for the petitioner emphatically states that since facts and evidence in both the proceedings namely the departmental proceedings as well as criminal case were the same after the petitioner has been acquitted in the criminal proceedings initiated against him, it is now not open to the department to initiate departmental proceedings against him.
5.
In order to controvert the aforesaid, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon the decision rendered by Apex Court in Nelson Motis v. Union of India and another, 1993(1) SCT 133 (SC) : 1992(5) S.L.R.
394.
In so far as the decision referred to by the learned counsel for the respondents is concerned, the same was specifically noticed by the Apex Court in Capt.
M Paul Anthony (supra).
After examining the scope and ambit of the legal proposition in hand the Apex Court held as under :-  "Since the facts and the evidence in both the proceedings, namely, the departmental proceedings and the criminal case were the same without there being any iota of difference, the distinction, which is usually drawn as between the departmental proceedings and the criminal case on the basis of approach and burden of proof, would not be applicable to the instant case."
It is, therefore, clear that an exception has been carved out, from the general rule.
Under the exception carved out, if the criminal charge and the charge sheet issued departmentally are based on the same facts and have to be proved by the same witnesses, acquittal in the criminal proceeding will by itself put an end to and nullify the departmental proceeding.
In a sense, the departmental enquiry in such a case will effectively abate.
6.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, since we have arrived at a conclusion that the charges against the petitioner and the criminal proceedings initiated against him as well as in the departmental proceedings are the same.
And further that those witnesses who had alleged that the petitioner had assaulted them have been examined during the course of criminal proceedings and had denied the very incident, it would be absolutely unjust and unfair to require the petitioner to be subjected to departmental proceedings.
Although seven witness out of those who had been allegedly man-handled/assaulted on 1411999 have been cited in the list of witnesses appended to the charge sheet issued to him; only live of them were examined during the course of the criminal trial.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, can it be assumed that all the witnesses have been duly examined and that there can be no further evidence in the departmental enquiry to implicate the petitioner ?
On first blush the answer to the aforesaid query seems to be in the negative; but, when examined closely the answer would be otherwise.
In this behalf it would be pertinent to mention that the charge pertains to a single incident which occurred on 1411999.
Five of the seven persons who were allegedly man-handled/assaulted have already made a statement on oath during the course of the criminal proceedings initiated against the petitioner that they knew nothing of the incident and could not identiy the accused the petitioner herein).
Even if the remaining two witnesses depose against the petitioner during the departmental enquiry their statements would be of no consequence in view of the statements made by five witnesses before the criminal court.
We are, therefore, of the firm belief that the continuation of the departmental proceedings would be an effort in futility.
We, accordingly, accept the prayer 1462000.
Allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.