VK Bali, J (Oral) - By this order, I propose to dispose of two connected Civil Writ Petition bearing Nos. 1949 of 1983 and 3248 of 1989, as almost common questions of law and fact are involved in both these writ petitions.
The bare minimum facts that need a necessary mention have, however, been extracted from Writ Petition No. 1949 of 1983, titled as Government of Haryana v. Dr. Narinder Kumar Goel and another.
The Government of Haryana, through present petition filed by it, calls in question order, Annexure P-2, dated 17.8.1982 passed by learned District Judge under Section 11 of the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act of 1926') setting aside the order passed by the Registrar, Trade Unions, declining to register the Haryana State Medical Officers Class II Association as a Trade Union.
Clause (h) of Section 2 of the Act of 1926 defines Trade Union as follows :-  " "Trade Union" means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the relations between workmen and employees or between workmen and workmen or between employees and employers or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business, and includes any federation of two or more Trade Unions."
2.
Learned District Judge while setting aside the order of the Registrar of Trade Unions, relied upon a judgment of Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa and others, AIR 1978 Supreme Court 548, relevant extract whereof reads thus :-  "We have adduced enough reasons in the various portions of this judgment to regard hospitals, research institutions and training centres as valuable material services to the community, qualifying for coming within Section 2(j).
We must plainly state that vis-a-vis hospitals, Safdarjung, (1971) ISCR 177, 38 FJR 246, was wrong and Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, (1960) 2 SCR 866, 17 FJR 423 was right."
3.
Mr. Vashisht, learned DAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the petitioner-State of Haryana, contends that judgment of Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board's case (supra) was not at all relevant as only the definition of `industry' as contained in Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, was the subject matter of decision by the Supreme Court.
4.
I have heard learned DAG, Haryana, and examined the records of the case as also impugned order, Annexure P-2, passed by the learned District Judge.
On a specific question as to existence of any section under the Act of 1926 placing any impediment in the way of Medical Officers Class-II to form Association under the aforesaid Act, counsel is unable to point out any.
Assuming, judgment of Supreme Court is not applicable to the facts of the case, the impugned order can be set aside only on the ground that under the Act of 1926, officers holding civil posts and in particular, Doctors cannot form themselves into a trade union.
As mentioned above, nothing at all has been pointed out to the Court on that behalf.
In absence of any embargo in the Act aforesaid, it is not understandable as to how Haryana State Medical Officers Class-II Association cannot be enlisted as a Trade Union under the Act of 1926.
It may be desirable not to permit persons rendering essential services to the community to form themselves to be a Trade Union but for that, there has to be some provision and, which, has to be made by the Legislature.
5.
In CWP No. 3248 of 1989, the Clerical staff of Public Health Department had sought their Association to be registered as a Trade Union.
The contention raised above that may pertain to the case of Doctors is not available at all in this case and, therefore, insofar as, this case is concerned, no contention at all has been raised on behalf of the petitioner- State.
6.
In view of the discussion made above, both these petitions are dismissed, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.