VK Bali, J (Oral) - Jagtar Singh petitioner herein through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the State of Punjab through Labour Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh, first respondent herein to refer the industrial dispute with regard to termination of his services for adjudication by the concern Labour Court.
For seeking the writ in the nature, as referred to above, inasmuch as it is essential to challenge order, Annexure P-4, declining reference, same has also been questioned.
Order, Annexure P-4 declining reference reads thus :-  "Regarding industrial dispute demand dated 16.8.1992 I have been asked to invite your attention to demand dated 16.8.1992 and make clear that the demand mentioned therein is not fit for judicial determination because your case could not be verified (Pushti)".
2.
It is pertinent to mention here that despite the fact that notice of motion was issued way back on 1651983, no reply has been filed till date.
Order dated 381983 would reveal that none appeared on behalf of the respondents 1 and 2 despite service.
3.
Mr. Sharma, learned Addl AG, Punjab, who appears on behalf of respondent No. 1 today, is unable to controvert the contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner that the Government cannot act a judge and deal with the merits of the case while dealing with the reference sought by the workman for determination of lis by the appropriate forum, be it Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal.
The decision on merits is always in the exclusive domain of the concerned Labour Court or the Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be.
Reference in this regard may be made to judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bombay Union of Journalists and ors. v. The State of Bombay and another, AIR 1964 SC 1617, which has since been followed in number of other cases till date.
4.
In view of the discussion made above, this petition is allowed.
Order, Annexure P-4, declining reference is set aside and respondent No. 1 is directed to deal with the application of the petitioner seeking reference of the lis to the concerned Labour Court in accordance with law.
Inasmuch as considerable period has already elapsed, the direction aforesaid be complied within six weeks from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.