Ashutosh Mohunta, J.- The present appeal has been filed against the concurrent judgments and decrees of both the Courts below, whereby the suit filed by the appellant was dismissed.
2.
Briefly, the facts of the case are that appellant Sarwan Singh was employed as a conductor on regular basis with the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Kapurthala.
He was employed as a conductor, in the year 1978.
On 1411983 he went on one day's sanctioned leave.
However, on the expiry of one day he did not re-join his duties, but sent an application for extension of leave.
The same was rejected.
The appellant went to join his duties in early March 1983 when he was informed by the Department concerned that his services stood terminated vide order dated 2221983.
It is against this order that the appellant filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2221983 be held to the illegal and that consequently it be held that his termination is bad.
3.
Both, the trial court as well as the first appellant Court, be relying upon Rule 42 of the Conditions of Appointment and Service Regulations, 1981 of Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (for short to be referred as P.R.T.C.
Rules) held that a person, who remains absent beyond the period of leave, shall lose his lien on the post which he is holding.
It was further held that such person shall be entitled to be kept in the waiting list as Badli worker.
As the appellant has not availed the remedy to ask the Transport Corporation that he be kept in the waiting list, therefore, the suit and subsequent appeal, both were dismissed.
4.
Mr. Mahajan, learned counsel for the appellant has contended that a perusal of rule 42(ii) of the PRTC Rules shows that the delinquent shall be given a chance to explain to the satisfaction of the competent authority as to why he could not joint his duty in time.
Rule 42 of the PRTC Rules is re- produced as under:  "Rule 42.
The exigencies of service shall be taken into consideration for entertaining any request of the grant of leave.
Leave cannot be granted as a matter of right.
The appointing authority shall have discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description at any time according to the exigencies of service.
If any permanent or temporary employee remains absent beyond the period of leave originally granted or subsequently extended, he shall lose his lien on his appointment unless he :  i) returns within 10 days after the expiry of leave, and ii) explains to the satisfaction of the competent authority his inability to return on the expiry of his leave.
In case the employee loses his lien on his appointment, he shall be entitled to be kept in the waiting list as a Badli worker."
A perusal of sub-rule (ii) clearly shows that the defaulter would be given a chance to explain to the satisfaction of the competent authority as to why he was unable to return for work on the expiry of the leave.
In the present case, no such notice as envisaged under rule 47(ii) of the PRTC Rules was given to the appellant.
5.
In the case of Jai Shanker v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 Supreme Court 492, it has been held that even where there are service regulations providing that there would be automatic termination of service for overstaying, still removal from service without giving opportunity to show cause would be illegal.
6.
Again in the case of M/s Scooters India Ltd v. M Mohammad Yaqub and another, 2001(1) SCT 212 (SC) : AIR 2001 Supreme Court 227 it has been held that automatic termination without affording an opportunity of hearing to an employee, who has overstayed the leave period, cannot be passed and the same would be illegal.
7.
Thus, keeping in view the above decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court it is held that the order of termination of service of the appellant dated 2221983 was wholly illegal and the same is set aside.
Consequently, I allow this appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Kapurthala dated 3051987 and the judgment and the decree of the District Judge, Kapurthala dated 259,1989.
8.
However, the appellant shall be entitled to claim back-wages for the last three years prior to the rendering of the present judgment with all other consequential benefits.
Appeal allowed.