Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of CWP Nos. 18304 of 2002, 18035 of 2002, 18036 of 2002 and 18037 of 2002 as the common questions of law and facts are involved in the aforesaid cases.
2.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are take from Civil Writ Petition No. 18034 of 2002.
The petitioners were working as lecturers in civil Engineering in various polytechnics in the State of Haryana.
In the month of June 1998, the Director, Technical Education, Haryana respondent No. 2 had advertised 25 posts of lecturers.
Petitioners No. 1 to 15 applied for the said post and were interviewed, selected and ultimately appointed as lecturers in Civil Engineering.
They joined as such in the month of July 1998.
There case is that they are working on the aforesaid post since then.
Similarly in the month of January 1999, some other posts of lecturers in Civil Engineering were again advertised and in the process of selection petitioners No. 16 to 19 applied, got selected and were appointed.
Their case is that they are also continuing on the aforesaid post since then.
3.
The case of the petitioners is that they were appointed on contract basis in a fixed salary.
They made a grievance for the fixed salary being granted to them on the ground that their responsibilities were similar as that of the regular lectures and further that there was no justification to appoint them for a specific term, therefore, they approached this Court through a Civil Writ Petition.
The aforesaid civil writ petition along with some other writ petitions was ultimately allowed by the Division Bench of this Court vide order dated January 11, 1999.
The main judgment was passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 6147 of 1998 where the condition regarding contractual appointment incorporated in the appointment letter of the petitioners was declared unconstitutional and accordingly struck down.
The stipulation with regard to paying consolidated salary to the petitioners was also declared ultra vires to Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners were held entitled to regular pay scale.
The relevant portion of the operative part of the judgment dated January 11, 1999 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 6147 of 1998 is reproduced as follows :  "The petitioner will be given salary in the regular pay scale after their re- appointment on contractual basis, as was being given to them upon their initial appointments on ad hoc basis with all consequential relief/benefits.
However, the services of the petitioners can be terminated/discontinued on the ground of unsuitability or unsatisfactory performance.
The respondents can also dispense with the services of the petitioners in accordance with the Rule of last come first go if the sanctioned posts are abolished or regularly selected persons join service."
4.
The petitioners point out that the Special Leave Petition filed by the State of Haryana against the aforesaid judgment was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
5.
Petitioners No. 1 to 15 specifically state that they are continuing on their posts since July 1998 whereas petitioner No. 16 to 19 are continuing in service since March 1999.
Vide order dated October 28, 2002 the State Government of Haryana abolished 17 posts of lecturers in Civil Engineering.
The aforesaid decision of the Government was conveyed to Directorate of Technical Education Haryana, Chandigarh and on that basic ultimately the order dated November 11, 2002 was passed by the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana, Chandigarh whereby the services of the petitioners were terminated.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated November 11, 2002 has been appended as Annexure P2 with the present petition.
6.
The petitioners are aggrieved against the aforesaid order and have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
7.
We have heard Shri RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioners at some considerable length, and with his assistance have also gone through the record.
8.
Shri RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioners submits that in fact under the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (for short `the Act') it is duty of the All India Council for Technical Education (hereinafter referred to as the Council) to maintain standard of technical education in the country.
Section 10 of the Act details out the powers and functions of the Council.
As per clause (1) Section 10 of the Act, the Council has the powers to "lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examinations".
9.
Shri Malik has pointed out that the petitioners are posted in four polytechnics in the State of Haryana, and the intake capacity of the students for Civil Engineering Diploma Course has been increased from session 2001-02 to Session 2002-03.
Whereas for the year 2001-02 the Government polytechnic Ambala City had an intake capacity of 40 students the year 2002-03 the intake capacity has been increased to 60; for Government Polytechnic Nilokheri the intake capacity for 2001-02 was 40 and has been increased to 60 for the year 2002-03; for Government Polytechnic, Jhajjar the intake capacity for the earlier year was 40 and for the subsequent year has been increased to 45; and for Government Polytechnic, Sirsa the intake capacity has been increased from 40 to 45.
On that basis Shri Malik maintains that the total intake capacity of the four polytechnics had been increased from 160 students to 210 students and, therefore, on that basis as per the norms laid down by the Council, the State Government of Haryana could not have reduced/abolished the post of lecturers in Civil Engineering.
10.
Shri Malik maintains that in fact the action of the State Government and consequential termination of the petitioners amounts flouting the norms laid down by the Council and, therefore, the action of respondents No. 1 and 2 being in violation of the norms laid down by the Council was not legally sustainable.
11.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by Shri Malik but find ourselves unable to agree with the same.
12.
The norms laid down by the Council are in the nature of the guidelines to the various technical institutions.
Nothing has been pointed out before us on behalf of the petitioners that the aforesaid norms were mandatory in nature inasmuch as it has not been shown that any defaulting institution or the State Government not following the aforesaid norms was liable to some penalty or other action.
In this view of the matter, the norms laid down by the aforesaid Council were not legally enforceable especially at the behest of the petitioners who were merely contractual employees.
13.
Faced with this, Shri Malik has relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Bharathidasan University v. All India Council for Technical Education, 2001(4) SCT 704 and a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Mata Sudarshan Tilak Raj Dhawan Educational Trust, Panchkula v. State of Haryana, 2002(2) SCT 673 to support his arguments and to stress that in fact norms issued by the All India Council for Technical Education were mandatory in nature and were liable to be enforced.
We have gone through the aforesaid two judgments but in our view the aforesaid two judgments do not support the contention raised by Shri Malik.
The facts of the aforesaid two cases were totally different, inasmuch as, in the aforesaid two cases the norms laid down by the Council were with regard to intake capacity of seats for the courses/programmes.
However, the aforesaid two cases have no application to the facts of the present case which deals with the termination of services of the contractual employees.
14.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Vide order dated January 11, 1999 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 6147 of 1998 (reproduced above), this Court itself had granted a liberty to the respondents to dispense the service of the petitioners in accordance with the Rule of last come first go if the sanctioned posts were to be abolished or regularly selected persons were to join the services.
Now since the respondents have chosen to abolish the posts, therefore, the petitioners cannot be heard to make any grievance against the aforesaid abolition of posts.
It is not the case of the petitioners that the persons junior to them have been retained in service.
Finding no merit in the various contentions raised by the petitioners, we dismiss the writ petitions.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.