SS Saron, J - This petition has been filed by petitioner Bidhi Chand for quashing order dated 472000 (Annexure P-6/A) whereby he has been removed from service of the Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred as the Nigam).
Besides, for quashing letter dated 21101997 issued on 9121997 (Annexure P-8) whereby it has been informed to various authorities that Pratham/Madhiam of Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Allahabad, is not recognized equivalent to matriculation in Haryana and it is equivalent to matriculation in Hindi only.
The petitioner has also sought a direction to allow him to continue in the service of the respondent Nigam.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Meter Reader in the Nigam vide appointment letter dated 3091993 (Annexure P-1).
He passed Pratham examination from the Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag, before joining the service.
The petitioner has appended the certificate and the mark sheet issued by Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag as Annexures P-2 and P-3 respectively.
During his service the official respondents issued a show cause notice dated 12.11.1999 (Annexure P-4) to the effect that the qualification possessed by him is not equivalent to matriculation.
The said show cause notice indicates that a complaint had been received against the petitioner in which it was alleged that he was not matriculate and did not possess the requisite qualification for the post of a Meter Reader.
It is on the receipt of this complaint that the certificate which was submitted by the petitioner at the time of first entry into service was collected and it was observed that the same related to Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan Prayaag.
This certificate was sent to the Secretary (Recruitment Cell) of the Nigam and he intimated that the qualification acquired by the petitioner was not equivalent to Matric standard of Haryana Education in view of Director Secondary Education (Haryana) Chandigarh, memo dated 9121997 (Annexure P-8).
The petitioner submitted his detailed reply to the show cause notice.
A copy of the same has been placed on record as Annexure P-5.
The petitioner in his reply to the show cause notice also relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case of Krishan Kumar Rao v. Haryana Warehousing Corporation, 1994(4) SCT 158 (P&H) : 1996(1) R.S.J.
563.
3.
The petitioner contends that he joined the service of Haryana State Electricity Board now Nigam after resigning from his earlier employment with ISGEC, Yamunanagar, where he worked from 1.1.1981 to 9101993.
The acceptance of resignation on 9101993 has been placed on record as Annexure P-9.
Besides, he submits that he has the requisite qualifications and he has till the date he was removed from service had worked for almost seven years.
In these circumstances, the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioner in pursuance of order 472000 Annexure P-6/A is impugned being illegal, arbitrary, unjust and without jurisdiction besides being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In response to notice issued to the respondents, official respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed their written statement.
The material fact is admitted that the petitioner was appointed as Meter Reader.
However, it is highlighted that he was appointed on the understanding that he actually possesses the qualification of matriculation or its equivalent examination from Haryana Education Board or any other education Board or University recognized by the State Government of Haryana.
Besides he must have passed Hindi upto Matric standard.
The issuance of certificate and mark-sheet Annexures P-2 and P-3 by the Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag has not been denied.
It is also submitted that the show cause notice Annexure P-4 was issued on receipt of a complaint which was followed by a notice served by the learned counsel for the complainant Om Parkash son of Radhe Ram.
5.
During the pendency of the writ petition, Civil Miscellaneous No. 16819 of 2001 was filed by the said complainant Om Parkash for impleading him as respondent No. 4 in the petition on the ground that Om Parkash son of Sant Ram, the father of petitioner Bidhi Chand had filed an affidavit to the effect that he never filed any complaint against the petitioner.
The petitioner has placed on record an affidavit darted 872000 (Annexure P-10) deposed by his father Om Parkash son of Sh. Sant Ram that he never made any complaint to the Nigam regarding the qualifications of the petitioner.
Therefore, the complainant Om Parkash son of Radhe Ram sought his impleadment.
He has stated that Bidhi Chand petitioner did not possess requisite qualification of Matric and he was thus not entitled to be appointed as Meter Reader.
His application has been allowed.
6.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length.
It is contended by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that the petitioner at the time of his entry into service had not misrepresented nor made concealment of any fact with regard to the qualifications that he possessed.
In support of his case he has relied upon the judgment in the case of Krishan Kumar Rao v. Haryana Warehousing Corporation, 1995(1) RSJ 563 and Smt. Santosh Yadav v. State of Haryana and Others, 1996(3) SCT.
615 : 1996(3) RSJ 210 (SC) to contend that where no fraud or forgery had been committed on the part of the petitioner and he had continued in service for a period of almost seven years from the date of his appointment on 3091993 to the date of his termination from service on 472000, then he could not be thrown out of service even if the certificate submitted by him at the time of entry into service was not recognized.
7.
As against this, the learned counsel for the respondent-Nigam submitted that the certificate of Matriculation of the petitioner is not recognized by the Haryana State equivalent to matriculation and, therefore, he was not entitled to continue on the post merely on the basis of experience.
In support of his contention, he has relied upon the case titled State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dharam Bir, 1998(3) SCT 301 (SC) : 1998(3) RSJ 363 (SC).
8.
It is the admitted case between the parties that the petitioner has passed Pratham Pareeksha from Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag.
A perusal of the certificate dated 31.12.1990 Annexure P-2 shows that the petitioner had passed the said examination in the Second Division in the subjects of Hindi Literature, History, Geography, Science, Maths/Home science, Civics and English.
It is also indicated that Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag, was issuing the certificate in proof of the same.
A perusal of the mark-sheet Annexure P-3 gives the total marks, pass marks, marks obtained by the petitioner.
The said mark-sheet has also been issued by the Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Prayaag.
It is not in dispute that when the petitioner entered into service and was appointed as Meter Reader on 3091993, the said certificate and mark-sheet were submitted by him in proof of his having passed the matriculation examination.
It is obvious that the said certificates were accepted by the respondents and it is for this reason that he was appointed.
It is only on 12.11.1999 that the show cause notice Annexure P-4 was issued to him to the effect that the said certificates were not recognized as equivalent to matric standard of Haryana Education.
The said show cause notice was also issued on the basis of a complaint made by Om Parkash respondent No. 4.
9.
It is to be seen that from the date of joining of the petitioner i.e. from 7101993 till the date of issuance of the show cause notice on 12.11.1999 the petitioner had served for a period of more than six years.
By this time he must have gained sufficient experience.
Even otherwise the job of Meter Reader is not of much sensitive public importance, which would impel this Court to interfere with the appointment.
The petitioner has worked as Meter Reader till 472000 i.e. the date when his services were dispensed with in terms of the impugned order.
In fact he is working as such till date as the operation of the termination order was stayed by this Court on 1172000 at the time of preliminary hearing.
Therefore, with the passage of time the petitioner has gained sufficient experience to do the work of meter reading.
In this view of the matter, the ratio of the judgments in Krishan Kumar Rao's case and Smt. Santosh Yadav (supra) do apply.
In Krishan Kumar Rao's case, the learned Single Judge relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371 wherein it was held as under :-  "Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once appointments of petitioners were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
It can be said that three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the Management, in circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
The learned Single Judge in Krishna Kumar Rao's case in somewhat similar circumstances where the petitioner in the said case was employed as a godown keeper and was retrenched from service after enquiry on the ground that he did not have a valid matriculation certificate observed that at the time of entry into service he had not committed any fraud or forgery.
Therefore, he could not be thrown out of service on account of mere non-recognition of certificate by the Government.
In the case of Smt. Santosh Yadav (supra), again in somewhat similar circumstances the petitioner therein had challenged the action of the school authorities removing her from the post of Hindi Teacher on the ground that she had secured Teacher's Training from the Secondary Education Board, UP, Bareilly, which was not recognized by the Haryana Government and, therefore, she had to be relieved from her duties.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows :-  "It is not denied that the appellant was taken in service on the basis of the diploma/certificate she possessed, having obtained it from the Secondary Education Board, UP, Bareilly and that her six months terms were kept renewed for time to time, ignoring small gaps in between, as was the pattern.
Therefore, we fail to see that when she was acceptable in 1980 and her terms were kept renewed from time to time until 2251982, and onwards, whereafter she was confirmed in the year 1984, how could her services be terminated in the year 1990, when she had attained regularity in service.
It is significant to note that the letter dated 771981 was itself watered down on 2271981 (Annexure A) clarifying that the ban imposed on recruitment of persons who had obtained their diplomas/certificates from non-recognised institutions, would not apply to those who were working as teachers on stop- gap/ad hoc/six months' basis before the summer vacation of 1981.
Concededly, the appellant occupied that position as she was working on six-monthly basis immediately before the summer vacation of 1981.
Thus, on account of such relaxation being available for her and she having earned regularity in her service it was wholly wrong and arbitrary on the part of the Education Department and the School to have deprived her of the job.
Thus, the impugned order dated 27.3.1990 (Annexure H) relieving the appellant from her duties as Hindi teacher with immediate effect, is quashed putting her back to position with back wages and regularity of service, including other service benefits such as seniority, promotion, increments etc. as would have normally been due to her."
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, has placed strong reliance on the judgment in Dharam Bir's case (supra).
In the said case the opening line of the judgment record as follows :-  "No, mere experimental knowledge is no equivalent to a Degree in Engineering" is our positive answer to the negative argument that respondent, though not possessing the requisite qualification, be held to be validly holding the post of Principal, ITI, on the basis of his experience."
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the said case were thus considering the requisite qualification that was required for validily holding the post of Principal of ITI on the basis of experience.
It is in this context that their Lordships after referring to the various judgments allowed the appeal of the State and set aside the judgment of the MP Administrative Tribunal.
In the said case the statutory rules governing the service provided for certain qualifications for the post of Principal.
Their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that context held that "experience" gained by the respondent therein on account of his working on the post in question for over a decade cannot be equated with educational qualifications required to be possessed by a candidate as a condition of eligibility for promotion to higher posts.
It was thus held that the plea of experience must fail and that this would amount to relaxation of Rule relating to educational qualification.
10.
It is to be noticed that in the case in hand, we are dealing with the appointment of the petitioner to the post of Meter Reader.
The post of Meter Reader does not require the skill and expertise which may be required for the post of a Principal of ITI.
Had there been any fraud, misrepresentation or forgery committed on the part of the petitioner in getting the post, the matter would have been entirely different.
It is not the case of the respondents that any such act had been committed by the petitioner.
Besides, it may be noticed that the conclusion arrived at by the respondent is based solely on the letter dated 21101997 issued on 9121997 (Annexure P-8) in which the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, informed the Financial Commissioner & Secretary Haryana Government, the Superintending Engineer OP Circle Haryana State Electricity Board Jind, the Secretary Subordinate Service Selection Board Haryana, Secretary (Recruitment), Haryana State Electricity Board Panchkula, and the Director Department of Women and Child Development Haryana that Pratham/Madhiam of Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan, Allahabad, is not recognised equivalent to matric in Haryana and it is equivalent to matric in Hindi only.
The fact that Pratham/Madhiam of Hindi Sahitiya Sammelan Allahabad has been recognised to be equivalent to matric in Hindi only is of some significance.
The same evidently shows that it was recognised as equivalent to matric in Haryana though may be in Hindi only.
In any case, the present case the post of a Meter Reader is in question.
It would have been in the fitness of thins if the petitioner at the very threshold of consideration of his appointment would have been informed that he is not eligible for appointment in view of his having matriculation certificate from an institute which is not recognized as equivalent to matriculation in Haryana.
After having allowed the petitioner to be appointed and allowing him to continue in service for a period of about seven years till his services were dispensed with, it would in our view be wholly iniquitous to dispense with his services.
This is particularly so when the incumbent has been discharging his functions continuously now for a period of about nine years.
Besides, there are no statutory rules that have been violated.
The infraction, if any, is that of the appointment letter dated 2091993 (Annexure P-1), which is also in the circumstances of the case not that grave.
11.
Keeping in view the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the view that the writ petition is to succeed to the extent that the termination order dated 472000 Annexure P-6/A is quashed.
At the time of issuing notice of motion, the operation of the impugned order Annexure P-6/A had been stayed and resultantly it was ordered that the petitioner would continue in service.
Therefore, no further direction is necessary and the petitioner would continue in service.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.