NK Sud, J - The petitioner was a Senior Accountant in the Panchkula Urban Cooperative Bank Limited, Panchkula (for short `the Bank').
He has filed this petition with the grievance that he has been illegally dismissed from service vide order dated 2171998 (Annexure P-18).
2.
The petitioner was issued a charge-sheet on 1211995 (Annexure P-8) wherein the following three charges were brought against him :-  i) He had made a false declaration in respect of his date of birth at the time of his appointment.
It was declared as 24111964 against the correct date of 24.11.1968; ii) He had issued a credit advice of Rs. 21,000/- for a cheque deposited by one Dr. Karan J Kumar in his account without verifying the actual collection of the same.
This cheque had been returned unpaid while the said party had already drawn Rs. 20,000/- out of his account.
The bank was, therefore, likely to suffer a loss of Rs. 20,000/-; and iii) He had misplaced a file in respect of arbitration case of Shri VC Nagpal, a loanee of the bank, which was likely to cause monetary loss to the Bank of about Rs. 40,000/-.
3.
The petitioner filed a detailed explanation dated 2131995 (Annexure P-9) wherein he denied all the three charges.
The inquiry was entrusted to Mr. Harbinder Singh Handa, one of the Directors of the Bank.
He issued a notice to the petitioner in the newspaper to appear before him on 10101995.
However, the petitioner had already approached the Chairman requesting him that the Inquiry Officer be changed as the suspension of the petitioner had been ordered by the Board of Directors of which Mr. Harbinder Singh Handa was a member.
On the representation of the petitioner, the following order was passed by the Chairman :-  "As the loan file of Shri VC Nagpal has already been found in the bank premises so put up the whole matter in the next meeting of Staff Committee for consideration.
There is no need of enquiry at this stage."
Since the matter was to be put up before the Staff Committee in its next meeting for consideration and it had been ordered that there was no need of inquiry that stage, the petitioner did not appear before the Inquiry Officer on 10101995.
In spite of the above order of the Chairman, Shri Harbinder Singh Handa went ahead with the inquiry ex-parte on 10101995 and submitted a report dated 11101995 to the Chief Executive Officer vide annexure P-10.
According to him all the charges against the petitioner as per the charge sheet stood proved.
Thereafter, the Board of Directors, without supplying a copy of the inquiry report and without issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner, dismissed him from the service order dated 27101995 (Annexure P-11).
This order was passed in pursuance of the decision taken in the meeting of the Board of the Directors held on 27101995.
4.
Meanwhile, four members of the Board of Directors, who had not been served with the Agenda nor had any notice of this meeting, challenged the validity of the meeting held on 27101995 before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana.
Their application was dismissed by the Registrar.
The order of the Registrar was challenged in a revision petition filed before the Secretary, Cooperation, Government of Haryana.
The revision petition was allowed and the meeting held on 27101995 was held to be null and void.
5.
The respondent-Bank challenged the order of the Secretary before this Court in CWP 10239 of 1997.
While admitting the writ petition, the operation of the order of the Secretary was stayed.
However, the writ petition was ultimately dismissed on 1921998.
Thus, the order of the Secretary, Cooperation, Government of Haryana, holding the meeting held on 27101995 as null and void became final.
6.
Meanwhile, the petitioner had also filed a writ petition against the order of his dismissal dated 27101995 which was numbered as CWP 15601 of 1996.
7.
Since the meeting held on 27101995 had been held to be invalid, it followed that all the decisions taken therein including the decision whereby the petitioner was dismissed from service, also became null and void.
The petitioner, therefore, filed a representation dated 2721998 before the Bank for implementation of the judgment of this Court in CWP 10239 of 1997 and requested that he be allowed to join duty.
A copy of the judgment of this Court was enclosed with this representation.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Bank passed an order dated 231998 accepting the representation of the petitioner holding that he stood restored to his previous position.
The Chief Executive Officer also observed that "the disciplinary proceedings started against him are hereby dropped."
8.
The petitioner submitted his joining report on 231998 (Annexure P-14).
The petitioner was informed vide letter dated 231998 that his joining report shall be put up before the Board of Directors before he was actually allowed to join.
Since the petitioner was not reinstated, he made a representation to the Assistant Registrar, Naraingarh, vide application dated 2241998.
Although the Chief Executive Officer had already passed the order dropping the inquiry, the Assistant Registrar again went through the charge-sheet and the reply filed by the petitioner and vide his order dated 15.5.1998 held that none of the three charges brought against the petitioner had been proved.
Accordingly, he advised the Bank that the petitioner should be reinstated immediately and restored to his previous position.
9.
Meanwhile, the petitioner's writ petition against his order of dismissal also came up for hearing before this Court.
It was disposed of as infructuous vide order dated 2071998 as the meeting, in which resolution to dismiss the petitioner was passed, had already been held to be not lawfully convened.
10.
It is at this stage that the impugned order of dismissal dated 2171998 was passed by the Chief Executive Officer.
This order was based on the inquiry report dated 11101995 in which the following charges had been held to have been proved :-  "1.
Wrong declaration of date of birth at the time of appointment.
2.
Issuing of Credit Advice of Rs. 21,000/- concerning of Sh. Karan J Kumar presented in local clearing House dated 221093.
3.
Misbehave with the member of Board of Directors in its meeting held on 51294."
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that in view of the fact that the Chief Executive Officer had already passed the order dated 231998 dropping the inquiry against the petitioner, there was no justification in once again passing an order of dismissal on the basis of the exparte inquiry report dated 11101995.
This report, even otherwise, was without jurisdiction as the Chief Executive Officer had already passed an order on 9101995 on the petitioner's representation that "there was no need of enquiry at this stage."
He further states that the petitioner had been absolved of the charges by the Assistant Registrar as well as the Chief Executive Officer.
He explained that in so far as charge No. 1 is concerned, it does not survive any longer in view of the fact that the petitioner's date of birth had been ordered to be corrected as 24111964 by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Chandigarh vide her judgment dated 1111999 which has been affirmed by the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh vide his judgment dated 2291999.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgment and decree, the Central Board of Secondary Education has already issued a revised matriculation certificate to the petitioner wherein his date of birth has been mentioned as 24111964.
12.
As far as charge No. 2 is concerned, Mr. Patwalia stated that the matter was considered by the Board of Directors in its meeting dated 24.11.1993.
He has referred to the Agneda note of that meeting, which is placed on record as Annexure P-7, to show that the entire matter was being looked into only against Shri Nathi Singh, Peon of the Bank and not against him.
He referred to the actual decision taken by the Board of Directors in that meeting which was as under :-  "Agenda Decision To consider regarding payment of uncleared cheque No. 125501 of dated 20893 for Rs. 21000/- drawn on State Bank of India, Sector 7, Chandigarh in favour of Dr. Karan J Kumar SB A/c holder of Sector 7 Branch.
Chief Executive Officer is authorised to take legal advice of some legal expert as to whether any civil or criminal proceedings can be initiated against Sh. Karan J Kumar holder of SB A/c No. 2632 in Sector 7 Branch and in case possible So far action against Sh. Nathi Singh Peon for his negligence is concerned, action be taken under the Staff Service Regulations."
He further points out that even though Shri Nathi Singh had been found to be specifically guilty of this charge, no action has been taken against him.
The only point raised against the petitioner was that he had also signed the pay- in slip.
This, according to Mr. Patwalia, also could not be a groud to show that the charge was proved against him because the same slip was also signed by Shri Tarsem Lal, Assistant Executive Officer, against whom also no action had been taken.
13.
Referring to the third charge, Mr. Patwalia pointed out that in the impugned order it has been mentioned that the petitioner has mis-behaved with the members of the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 5.12.1994.
He states that no such charge had even been brought against the petitioner and thus it could not form a basis of his dismissal.
14.
Faced with the above factual position, Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the respondent-Bank conceded before this Court on 19.11.2001 that the matter ought to be re-examined by the Bank.
Accordingly, the Board of Directors was directed to reconsider the whole matter and pass a speaking order within three weeks.
The Board reconsidered the matter in its meeting held on 7122001 and has once against justified the dismissal of the petitioner on the basis of the three charges as mentioned in the impugned order.
15.
Mr. Malik has not been able to controvert the contention on behalf of the petitioner that the charge about mis-declaration of the date of birth no longer subsisted in view of the judgment and decree of the civil Court.
He has also not been able to controvert the factual position that no charge of any mis-behaviour had been brought against the petitioner in the charge-sheet issued to him.
His only contention is that the petitioner had never been absolved of charge No. 2 viz. issuing a credit advice of Rs. 21,000/- concerning Dr. Karan J Kumar presented in the Local Clearing House dated 22101993.
He also sought to justify the dismissal of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner had been appointed without proper procedure followed by his father who was the Manager.
This, according to him, was contrary to the Regulations of the Bank.
This made the appointment of the petitioner void ab initio and, therefore, the Board of Directors were justified in supporting his dismissal on this ground also in its latest meeting held on 7122001.
16.
Mr. Patwalia, on the other hand, refers to the averments of the petitioner made in para-4 of the writ petition where it has clearly been stated that the petitioner was selected by the Staff Selection Committee of the Bank.
He refers to the Regulations of the Bank in which it has been clearly provided that the Staff Selection Committee consists of Managing Director and Directors of the Bank.
This averment has not been specifically controverted in the written statement filed by the respondent-Bank.
The only averment made in the written statement is that the petitioner's father was the Manager of the Bank.
It is nowhere even suggested that he had appointed the petitioner or that he was a member of the Staff Selection Committee which had selected the petitioner.
17.
After hearing the counsel for the parties and having gone through the documents produced before me, I am of the considered view that the order, Annexure P-18, cannot be sustained.
It has been rightly pointed out on behalf of the petitioner that the order has to be examined only in the light of the charges which had been brought against him in the charge-sheet dated 1211995.
As far as charge Nos. 1 and 3 are concerned, these should not hold me for long.
Charge No. 1 no longer subsists in view of the judgment and decree of the civil court as already stated.
Charge No. 3, on the basis of which the petitioner has been dismissed, was not a charge brought against him in the charge sheet.
18.
As far as the contention of Mr. Malik that the petitioner had not been absolved of charge No. 2 is concerned, I am satisfied that no material has been brought on record to implicate the petitioner.
When this matter was discussed by the Board of Directors to fix the responsibility, the petitioner's name was not even mentioned.
If the Bank was of the view that the petitioner was also responsible for the issue of the credit advice, it should normally have considered his name also along with the name of Shri Nathi Singh who was ultimately held responsible for this charge.
It is interesting to note that no action has been taken against Nathi Singh who has been found to be responsible in respect of issue of the credit advice of Rs. 21,000/-, while the petitioner has been dismissed from service.
19.
I am in agreement with the counsel for the petitioner that the ex-parte enquiry proceedings held on 10101995 and the enquiry report dated 11101995 are not valid as the Chief Executive Officer had already passed an order on 9101995 on the representation of the petitioner that there was no need of enquiry at that stage.
The conduct of the Enquiry Officer to proceed with the enquiry despite this order is unfortunate.
The Enquiry Officer in his anxiety to condemn the petitioner went to the extent of holding him guilty of misbehaving with a member of the Board which was not even a charge mentioned in the charge sheet.
Thus, the order of dismissal based on this report cannot be sustained.
20.
Further, I fail to understand that when the Chief Executive Officer of the Bank has passed the order dated 231998 (Annexure P-13) ordering that the disciplinary proceedings started against the petitioner be dropped, how could the same charge-sheet and same inquiry report be taken into account for dismissing the petitioner thereafter.
No satisfactory explanation has been furnished before me except stating that the Chief Executive Officer was not competent to pass this order.
This argument cannot be accepted because if the order was without jurisdiction, it ought to have been got set aside or some remedial measures ought to have been taken which, admittedly, has not been done in the present case.
21.
The fresh decision taken by the Board of Directors in the meeting held on 7122001 in compliance with my order dated 1912001 is a clear indication of their bias against the petitioner.
A bare reading of this order shows that the matter has not been considered objectively.
The order of dismissal is sought to be supported on new grounds which were never raised in the charge- sheet or during the inquiry proceedings.
For example, the issue about the petitioner being appointed by his father was never raised at any stage during the inquiry proceedings.
Similarly, the issue about the mis-behaviour with the members of the Board of Directors in the meeting held on 5.12.1994 was never put to the petitioner in the charge-sheet.
It is wholly unfair to order dismissal of an employee on grounds which did not even form a part of the charge sheet issued to him.
The Board has not taken any notice of the judgments of the Civil Judge and the Additional Sessions Judge wherein the date of birth of the petitioner was ordered to be corrected to 24.11.1994.
It has not even referred to the order passed by the Chief Executive Officer dropping the disciplinary proceedings on 231998.
All these facts and circumstances led credence to the charge of the petitioner that he is being hounded by the Bank authorities who are bent upon dismissing him for one reason or the other.
22.
The conduct of Board of Directors as well as of the Inquiry Officer, in my view, deserves to be condemned.
I am left with a definite impression that they have dealt with the matter in a prejudicial and biased manner.
Their approach smacks of vindictiveness.
Dismissing an employee from service has serious repercussions of the career of a young man and should not have been deal with in this manner.
In view of the above, the impugned order, Annexure P-18, as also the fresh decision of the Board of Directors taken in its meeting on 7122001 cannot be sustained and are hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall stand restored to his original position will all consequential benefits which shall be paid to him within two months from today.
The writ petition is allowed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 10,000/-.
Petitio allowed.