Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner Sant Lal, who is working as a Chowkidar in the Forest Department of the State Government of Haryana has approached this Court through the present writ petition filed under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer made in the petition is for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise his services with effect from February 1, 1996.
A further claim has been made by the petitioner for all consequential benefits arising therefrom.
2.
The petitioner was appointed in the Forest Department on daily wage basis vide policy decisions dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996.
The State of Haryana had taken a decision to regularise the services of such daily wagers who had completed three years of service on January 1, 1996.
The copies of the aforesaid policy decisions dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996 have been appended as Annexures P-1 and P-2 with the present petition.
The petitioner has averred that his case was squarely covered by the aforesaid policy decisions, still the respondents were ignoring his claim arbitrarily.
Therefore, he approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 431 of 1998 claiming the regularisation of his services in the light of the aforesaid policy decisions.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated March 3, 1998 when the following order was passed :-  "The petitioner claims that he was appointed as a labourer on daily wages in the Forest Department.
He prayed for the issue of a writ of Mandmaus directing the respondents to regularise his services.
Mr. Bishnoi, learned Counsel for the respondents states that the petitioner's case has been considered in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated March 18, 1996.
He has been found to be eligible.
A request has been made by the department to the Government to sanction an additional post in the Group D service so that the petitioner's service can be regularised.
He undertakes that the needful shall be done within three months from today."
In pursuance to the directions aforesaid issued by the Division Bench of this Court, an order dated July 11, 1999 was passed by the Divisional Forest Officer-respondent No. 3 whereby the services of the petitioner were regularised from the aforesaid date.
Copy of the aforesaid order dated July 11, 1999 has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the petition.
3.
The petitioner felt that his due had not been granted to him since he was entitled to be regularised with effect from February 1, 1996 as per the aforesaid policy of the year 1996.
Accordingly, he filed a representation before respondent No. 3 on October 4, 1999 and requested that rather than July 12, 1999, he should be regularised with effect from February 1, 1996.
Since no action was taken upon the aforesaid representation, therefore, the petitioner has app[roached this Court through the present writ petition with the aforesaid claim.
4.
A notice of the writ petition was issued to the respondents.
They have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
The averments made in the written statement are that the petitioner "does not fulfil the requirement of regularisation as laid down by Haryana Government from time to time."
It has further been averred that at an earlier stage he had filed a demand notice before the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer but a compromise had been arrived at between him and Sh. Satbir Singh, the then Range Forest Officer on February 14, 1994 to the effect that management would take the petitioner back in service with continuity but without backwages.
It has been stated in the written statement that the aforesaid Satbir Singh, Range Forest Officer was neither competent nor authorised by any competent Authority to make the aforesaid compromise.
With regard to the passing of the orders Annexure P-4, the stand of the respondents is that the aforesaid order was passed in pursuance to the directions passed by a Division Bench of this court vide orders dated May 13, 1998 in the writ petition filed by the petitioner earlier.
5.
I have heard Sh. RK Mailik, the learned Counsel for the petitioner and Sh. Rajbir Sehrawat, DAG, Haryana appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record.
6.
I find that the claim made by the petitioner in the present writ petition is wholly justified and deserves to succeed.
7.
When the petitioner filed the earlier writ petition No. 431 of 1998 claiming regularisation in terms of the policy decisions Annexures P-1 and P-2, then a specific stand was taken by the respondents to the effect that though the petitioner was eligible for regularisation and also that his case had been considered in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated March 18, 1996 but since a post was not available, therefore, a request had been made by the department to the Government to sanction an additional post in the group `D' service so that his services could be regularised.
8.
It is not in dispute that in view of the specific stand taken by the respondents with regard to the eligibility and entitlement of the petitioner, the orders dated July 11, 1999 were passed by the Divisional Forest Officer- respondent No. 3.
The services of the petitioner were regularised in terms of the policy decisions Annexures P-1 and P-2.
However, rather than regularising the services of the petitioner with effect from February 1, 1996, the aforesaid policy is silent with regard to any retrospective benefit being given to the petitioner, therefore, the services of the petitioner would be deemed to have been regularised with effect from the day of the passing of the orders i.e. July 11, 1999.
9.
It is not in dispute that vide the policies Annexures P-1 and P-2, a one time benefit was granted to persons, who were in services as on January 31, 1996 and who had fulfilled the other remaining conditions laid down in the aforesaid policies.
Thus, under the aforesaid police either a person was eligible for regularisation on February 1, 1996 or was not eligible because of not falling within the policies.
I find that the specific stand taken by the respondents before this Court in the earlier Writ Petition No. 431 of 1998 filed by the petitioner was "that the petitioner's case has been considered in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated March 18, 1996.
He has been found to be eligible."
10.
Under these circumstances, it is too late in the day for the respondents to re-open the entire controversy which stands fully settled by the orders dated May 13, 1998 passed by the Division Bench.
The only claim, which now remains to be adjudicated is as to whether the services of the petitioner were to be regularised with effect from February 1, 1996 or from any subsequent date.
11.
I do not find any justification whatsoever for denying the claim of the petitioner for regularisation of his services with effect from February 1, 1996.
If the petitioner was eligible on the date namely January 1, 1996 under the aforesaid policies Annexures P-1 and P-2, there is absolutely no justification to fix any later date for regularising his services.
12.
Under these circumstances, I allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner with the effect from February 1, 1996.
The petitioner would also be entitled to all consequential benefits arising from such regularisation from the aforesaid date namely February 1, 1996.
The payment of arrears due to the petitioner on such regularisation with effect from February 1, 1996 shall also be now calculated by the respondents within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by them and shall be paid to the petitioner within one month thereafter.
No costs.
Petition allowed.