GS Singhvi, ACJ.
- This appeal is directed against order dated 251997 by which the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant for directing the respondents to grant him service pension w.e.f.
141956 with consequential benefits.
2.
The appellant was enrolled in the Indian Army on 491940.
He was discharged on 1581946.
After one year and about four months, he was re- enrolled in the Army.
He was finally discharged on 3131956.
After about 30 years, he submitted representation for grant of service pension.
On receipt of his representation, the officer-in-charge, ASC Records (MT), Aurangabad sent communication dated 20.2.1986 to the CDA (Pension, Allahabad to confirm whether the appellant was entitled to pension.
In paragraph 2 of the said communication, it was mentioned that the service documents of the representationist (appellant herein) had been destroyed being time expired and that he had been paid service gratuity of Rs. 350/- for both the spells and Rs. 12425 as war gratuity.
After about 11 months, the officer-in-charge, ASC Records informed the appellant vide letter dated 1311987 that his service documents had been destroyed and, therefore, it was not possible to look into his case and asked him to forward old correspondence and discharge book to enable the office to consider his case for grant of pension.
In reply, the appellant sent representation dated 2811987 mentioning therein that the old record including copy of discharge certificate had been burnt due to fire in his house, but, at the same time, he reiterated the claim for pension on the premise that he had rendered more than 15 years service.
After considering his representation, the officer-in-charge, ASC, Records (MT), Bangalore rejected the appellant's claim for pension vide letter dated 3171987 by recording the following reasons :-  "2.
Your service documents have been destroyed being time expired.
In the absence of the document it has not been practicable to find out your eligibility for service pension.
As regards it is seen that you had 15 years of service (in both spells) but in the absence of documents, were are unable to determine as to why you had not been sanctioned pension.
3.
Further it is seen that you had been paid service gratuity to the extent of Rs. 350/- for both the spells.
A doubt, therefore, raised how you accepted service gratuity when you were eligible for pension.
It appears that you had either break in service or non-qualifying service which debarred you in granting pension.
4.
Moreover, you have represented your case after 31 years of discharge for which no documents are available.
Even though we have referred your case to PAO (OR), number of times as directed by CDA(P) Allahabad, they are not in a position to help you as your IRLA has been destroyed by them being time expired.
5.
Since you have drawn service gratuity, no action to grant your pension at this belated stage, can be taken by this office."
3.
This did not satisfy the appellant, who submitted representation dated 2081987 claiming that he had not received service gravity.
This was controverted by the officer-in-charge.
Records, ASC, Records (MT), Bangalore vide letter dated 20111987.
He reiterated that Rs. 350/- had been paid to the appellant on account of service gratuity for both the spells and Rs. 12425 were paid on account of war gratuity and that his pension case cannot be taken up at such belated stage as was informed to him vide letter dated 3171987.
4.
After 3 years and 5 months of the second rejection of his claim for pension, the appellant filed writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with the prayer for directing the respondents to grant him pension w.e.f.
141956 with interest at the rate of 18% on the premise that by having completed 15 years and two months service, he had become entitled to get pension as of right in terms of Regulation 132 of the Army Pension Regulations, 1961 (for short, `the Regulations').
5.
The respondents opposed the writ petition and prayed for its dismissal on the ground of laches and also on the ground that the writ petitioner had been taking contradictory stands about the loss of service record.
They pointed out that in the petition dated 18101984 submitted by him for issuance of duplicate discharge certificate, the writ petitioner (now appellant) had claimed that the original record had been lost while travelling in the bus between Ladran and Samrala on 10101984, but in the representation dated 2811987, he had given out that the same was destroyed in the fire.
On merits, they averred that the writ petitioner was not entitled to pension because there was a break in the two spells of service and further that he had already received gratuity.
6.
After considering the rival pleadings and hearing counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by holding that it was delayed.
He further held that the writ petitioner was not entitled to pension because he had failed to comply with Condition No. 3 of Regulation 126 of the Regulations.
7.
Shri Bhim Sain Seghal assailed the order of the learned Single Judge by arguing that the reasons assigned by him for declining relief to the appellant are legally unsustainable.
He relied on Regulations 122, 124 and 132 of the Regulations and argued that the service rendered by the appellant in two spells had to be taken into consideration for the purpose of grant of pension irrespective of the intervening break of 5 months.
Learned Counsel heavily relied on the extracts of long roll (Annexure P1 with the writ petition) to show that the appellant had rendered more than 15 years and argued that his claim for pension could not have been rejected on the ground of non- availability of service record.
Shri Sehgal further argued that the delay in the submission of the representation cannot be made a ground for denying relief to the appellant because non-payment of pension gave him recurring cause of action.
In support of his arguments, learned Counsel relied on the judgment of this Court in Banta Singh v. Union of India and others, 1994(4) SCT 12 (P&H) (DB) : 1994(8) S.L.R.
77.
8.
We have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned Counsel, but have not felt persuaded to agree with him that the impugned order suffers from an error of law and calls for interference by the Appeal Bench.
9.
Regulation 122 of the Regulations declares that all services from the date of appointment or enrolment/transfer to the date of discharge shall qualify for pension or gratuity subject to the certain exceptions.
Regulation 124 provides for condonation of interruption of service.
Regulation 126 lays down the conditions subject to which former service can be counted for pension purposes.
Regulation 132 prescribes minimum colour service of 15 years for earning pension.
For the sake of convenience.
Regulations 122, 124 and 126 are produced below :-  "122.
All service from the date of appointment or enrolment/transfer for man's service to the date of discharge shall qualify for pension or gratuity with the exception of :-  (i) Any period of service on a temporary establishment which a special rate of pay is granted on undertaking that no pension is admissible.
(ii) Any period of service rendered before reaching the age of 17 years (16 years in case of these enrolled prior to the 20th September, 1945).
(iii) Any period of service rendered after the date on which the proceedings of the medical heard which found the proceedings of the medical board which found the individual unfit for military service were countersigned by the ADMS  (iv) Any period of unauthorised absence unless pay and allowances are admitted for the period of absence; unauthorised absence which took placed prior to the 2nd June, 1931 shall not be reckoned as service for pension, or gratuity even though pay and allowances have been admitted for the period after that date.
(v) Any period of absence as a prisoner of War, unless pay and allowances are admitted for the period of absence.
(vi) Any period of absence in Civil Custody before being sentenced to imprisonment or fine, unless the President, in a special case, issues orders reducing the period that shall not count.
(vii) Any period of imprisonment by sentence of a Civil Court or a count martial.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx  124.
Condonation of Interruption of Service.
- Upon such conditions as it may think fit to impose, a competent authority may condone interruptions of service in the case of person whose pension is a sanctioned by an authority subordinate to the President as under :-  (a) When proposed pension exceeds Rs. 25/- pm interruptions not exceeding a period of 12 months in all.
(b) When proposed pension is Rs. 25/- pm or less-all interruptions whatever their duration.
126 (a) Combatants and enrolled non-combatants who have former service to their credit may be allowed by a competent authority to reckon their former service pension and gratuity to the extent specified in the table below, subject to the fulfilment of the conditions stated in column 5 thereof and provided that they were not dismissed from their former service.
(b) The conditions 1, 2 and 3 referred to in column 5 of the table are as follows :-  1.
Condition No. 1 - At the time of re-employment/re-enrolment, the individual shall have declared his former service and cause of discharge therefrom and elected to count that service towards pension or gratuity.
The election once made shall be final.
2.
Condition No. 2.
- After re-employment/re-enrolment the individual shall have completed any consecutive period of three years service without two red ink entries or a court martial conviction.
In case of combatants re-enrolled as such and transferred to the reserve before completing three years colour service since re-enrolment, the period of three years for the purpose of this condition may be either wholly or partly with the reserve.
3.
Condition No. 3.
- The individual shall have refunded any gratuity other than war gratuity received in respect of his former service within a period of three years from the date of his re-employment/re-enrolment in not more than 36 monthly instalments from his pay.
The first instalment shall be payable within three months from the date of re-employment/re- enrolment.
(c) In individual cases, a competent authority may relax at its discretion conditions 2 and 3.
Further the Ministry of Defence vide its letter No. 78622/III/AG/PS4(a)/6970/D(Pensions) dated 5th August, 1968.
In the table referred to in Regulations 126 against S. No. 1 under column 5 insert the following :-  (c) If discharged from former service or war engagement terms under release regulations on reduction of Army or demobilisation Conditions 1 and 3."
A conjoint reading of the above quoted regulations shows that while two services and interruption in the service can be counted for pension, combatant and non-combatant are entitled to count their former service subject to the conditions specified in Regulation 126 including the one of depositing gratuity received in respect of the former service within a period of three year's from the date of re-employment/re-enrolment."
10.
The learned Single Judge referred to Regulation 126 of the Regulations and held as under :-  "Admittedly, the petitioner had been discharged from service on 141956.
It is also not disputed that he had not made any claim for the grant of pension prior to 521986, when he had submitted his representation.
A copy of the representation is on record as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
The matter was considered by the authorities.
Vide letter dated 1311987, the petitioner was informed that his "service documents have been destroyed being time expired...." Thus, the office is unable to "look into your case without service documents".
Consequently, the petitioner was asked to forward the "old discharge book to enable the office to consider" his case for granting pension.
The petitioner sent a reply vide letter dated 2811987.
A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P5 with the writ petition.
In this letter, the petitioner, inter alia stated that "unluckily, about 3-4 years back the old correspondence alongwith valuable things was burnt due to fire....".
So, on record was left with him and a copy of the discharge certificate for the service from 3121947 to 3131956 was also burnt.
On 3171987, the respondents informed the petitioner that "in the absence of documents we are unable to determine as to why you had not been sanctioned pension."
It was further pointed out that "you had been paid service gratuity to the extent of Rs. 350/- for both the spells.
A doubt, therefore, arises how you accepted service gratuity when you were eligible for pension.
It appears that you had either break in service or non-qualifying service which debarred you in granting pension."
Moreover, "you have represented your case after 31 years of discharge for which no documents have been made available."
Consequently, the claim was rejected.
The petitioner submitted yet another representation.
He also filed a civil suit.
The suit was dismissed on the ground that in view of the provision of Section 4 of the Pension Act, 1871, the Civil Court had no jurisdiction.
Thereafter, on 141991, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
Sequence of events clearly establishes/that the petitioner had taken no steps to claim pension for more than 30 years after his discharge from the Army on 3131956.
In the mean time, the respondents had destroyed the record.
That being so, even facts alleged by the petitioner could not be verified.
Still further, the Army authorities gave the petitioner a chance to produce the documents in his possession.
He could not produce any.
In fact, he took contradictory positions.
On one occasion he stated that the documents had been destroyed in a fire.
On another occasion, he stated that he had lost them while travelling.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the respondents were willing to consider the claim of the petitioner on merits inspite of the lapse of time.
However, they were unable to do so primarily on account of the reason that the documents had been destroyed.
The petitioner had also failed to extend them a helping hand as he did not produce the relevant documents.
In this situation, it is apparent that the respondents have not acted arbitrarily or unfairly in rejecting the petitioner's claim.
11.
The other reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge for declining relief to the appellant can be gathered from the following extracts of the order under appeal :-  "The perusal of condition No. 1 as reproduced above, indicates that the competent authority can allow two periods of service to be clubbed together if the individual elects to count his service towards pension or gratuity.
In other words, the individual has to make a choice as to whether he opts for the benefit towards pension or gratuity.
In the present case, there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner had exercised any option at the time of re-employment/re-enrolment that the period of service rendered by him from 491940 to 6.7.1947 should be counted towards pension or gratuity.
Factually, he had drawn the gratuity separately for both these spells.
Secondly, it was also to be established that he had completed three years service "without two red ink entries or a court martial conviction."
The petitioner has not even averred that there were no red ink entries or a court martial conviction on his record.
Still further, condition No. 3 makes it incumbent upon an individual that he would refund the gratuity within a period of three years' from the date of his re-enrolment in not more than 36 monthly instalments.
There is not even an averment in the writ petition that the petitioner had refunded any gratuity.
Thus, none of the three conditions as stipulated in Regulation 126 of the Act, are satisfied in the present case."
We entirely agree with the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge and hold that the appellant is not entitled to pension because he did not deposit the amount of gratuity received in respect of two spells of service.
12.
We are further of the view that the delay of more than 30 years coupled with the fact that the appellant had taken diametrically opposite stands on the issue of loss of service record and the fact that the official record had been destroyed being time barred, constituted a valid ground for denying relief to him.
13.
The judgment of Banta Singh's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the appellant in support of his claim for pension has no bearing on the case in hand because in that case, the Court was not called upon to interpret Regulations 122 to 126 of the Regulations and it did not held that a person is entitled to receive pension despite non-fulfilment of the conditions laid down in Regulation 126.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.