Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 2162000 (Annexure P/2 to the writ petition) vide which the respondents rejected the application of the petitioner dated 652000 for grant of six months maternity leave.
According to the petitioner the impugned order is arbitrary, discriminatory and is contrary to the practice adopted by the Government of State of Punjab in similar matters.
2.
Petitioner Chander Kanta is working as Assistant in the office of District Primary Education Officer, Panckhula, Haryana.
She adopted a child who was born on 452000 and after the adoption, on 652000, she applied for maternity leave for six months commencing from 652000 to 3.11.2000.
According to the petitioner, thereafter adoption deed was also executed and copy of the adoption deed has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/1.
The petitioner, though is employee of State of Haryana, but she relies upon Rule 8127 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume 1 Part-I, in furtherance to which the State of Punjab has issued instructions dated 1161998 under which three months of leave on adoption of a newly born child is permissible.
However, as already noticed, the request of the petitioner was declined vide order dated 2162000, giving rise to the present petition.
3.
Upon notice, the State of Haryana filed a detailed reply, wherein it has been stated that the maternity leave is not available on adoption of a child and the instructions dated 1161998 issued by the State of Punjab are not applicable to the employees of Government of Haryana as the Government of State of Haryana, till date, has not approved any such recommendations or instructions.
Rule 8127 only grants relief of maternity leave to a Government servant who gives birth to a child, miscarriage and abortion including the abortion induced.
As such, according to the respondents, this petition should be dismissed as the order dated 2162000 is in conformity with the relevant rules and the State has already asked the petitioner to apply for appropriate leave to avoid consequences of civil nature.
4.
In view of the above facts, it has been mainly contended on behalf of the petitioner that the 4th Pay Commission as well as the instructions issued by the State of Punjab in furtherance to Rule 8127 should be deemed to have been adopted by the State of Haryana and the Government of State of Haryana is obliged to implement such instructions to the benefit of the petitioner and the petitioner should be granted at least three months maternity leave.
5.
The facts in the present case are hardly in dispute.
The State Government has to, by a special act, adopt recommendations or issue a notification/circular like the one issued by the State of Punjab.
It is not disputed before us that none of the acts have so far been complied with by the State of Haryana.
On the contrary, the stand of the State is that it is a matter of policy and they are not obliged to fall in line with the circular issued by the Government of Punjab.
We are of the considered view that the State Government cannot be compelled to implement the recommendations of the Pay Commission without its appropriate adoption by the competent authority.
Similarly, the Court can also not compel the State to issue a circular, issued by another State, granting similar benefits of its employees particularly when the rules framed by the State do not grant such a relief specifically or even by necessary implication.
6.
As the rule stands, an employee of the State is entitled to maternity leave restricted to the situations stated therein i.e. giving birth to a child, abortion, miscarriage etc.
Adoption has not been specified as one of the grounds for grant of maternity leave.
This is a decision which squarely falls in the domain of the State authorities as it relates to matters of State Policy.
The State is free to frame policy as it considers necessary, for general welfare, and the scope of judicial review of such policy is a very limited one.
If the State has taken a specific decision not to grant a benefit to its employees, the Court normally will not compel the State to widen the scope of its policy unless it was a case of the exceptions carved out by judicial pronouncements or otherwise.
In this regard reference can be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of SP Shiv Prasad Pipal v. Union of India and others, 1998(2) SCT 376 (SC) : JT 1998(3) SC 216.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to bring to our notice any precedent of this Court or judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court where the State was directed to grant such benefit on the plea of discrimination or arbitrariness.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we find no merit in this writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.