RL Anand, J. (Oral) - The petitioners through this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India have given challenge to the selection proceedings conducted by respondent No. 4 on the basis of which the order Annexure P3 was passed promoting Sarvshri Nand Kishore and Pawan Kumar against the posts of Junior Store Officers from the post of Senior Store Keepers.
2.
Before proceeding further in the matter, I would like to state that during the pendency of this writ petition, petitioner Nos. 1 and 2, namely, Satish Uma Chand and Badri Nath Sharma have been promoted as Junior Store Officers w.e.f.
16th January, 2001, but they are still making a prayer before me that they should be considered for promotion from the date when their juniors were promoted.
3.
The case set up by the petitioners in short is that in the cadre of Senior Store Keepers they were always senior to respondent Nos. 7 and 8 and, therefore, they could not be ignored for the purpose of promotion by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
4.
On the contrary, the short defence of the respondent authorities is that the Selection Committee adopted the criteria of merit-cum-seniority by assessing the record of all the eligible candidates and, resultantly, Sarvshri Nand Kishore and Pawan Kumar Sharma were recommended by the Selection Committee.
On this recommendation, the order of promotion Annexure P3 was issued in favour of the respondents.
5.
I have heard Shri Rameshwar Sharma, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Shri Arun Nehra, Advocate, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Shri O.P. Sharda Advocate on behalf of the private respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The original record was produced before me.
The perusal of the same would reveal that on 24th January, 2000, the Departmental Promotion Committee was consisted of the Director (as Chairman), Dean (Member), Deputy Director (Admn) (Member), Prof. RN Kataria (Member), Prof AK Banerjee (Member) and Dr. D Behra (Liaison Officer/Member) as members of the Selection Committee.
Since two posts for normal zone were to be filled on the basis of merit-cum- seniority, the Selection Committee considered the record of eight eligible candidates, including the petitioners and the private respondents, the proceedings can be quoted in the following manner :  The records of the above officials have been carefully scrutinised and it is certified that there is no doubt about their integrity except that against Shri Satish Uma Chand, an internal investigation is done by MS Office against the shortage for some chemicals in the store.
"It is also certified that there is no CBI/Vigilance Inquiry pending or contemplated agasint any of the officials."
The matter is placed before the Departmental Promotion Committee for their consideration and recommendations.
The promotion will be effective from 131992 under the 2nd Cadre Review."
Following were the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee : "Since the method of promotion as per rules is merit-cum-seniority, the following store keepers are recommended for promotion w.e.f.
131992 to the post of Jr. Store Officer under the 2nd Cadre Review, in order of their merit : 1.
Mr. Nand Kishore.
2.
Mr. Pawan Kumar."
7.
The frontal argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners was that a favouritism has been done by the Departmental Promotion Committee while making the recommendations of Sarvshri Nand Kishoare and Pawan Kumar.
So much so, Shri Pawan Kumar was at the bottom of the list of eight candidates who was taken into consideration.
It was also submitted on behalf of the learned counsel for the petitioners that there is no rule under which the case of eight candidates was supposed to be considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
This has been done just to accommodate Shri Pawan Kumar who was at the bottom of the list of eight candidates.
8.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that the criteria for slection was merit-cm-seniority and not seniority-cum-merit.
In these circumstances, the Departmental Promotion Committee was supposed to assess the annual confidential reports of all the eligible persons.
Against the two posts, the names of eight persons have been considered.
Mr. Nehra further pointed out that so far as the service record of Shri Nand Kishoare is concerned, either it was Excellent or it was Very-Good.
During the last ten years he has obtained two "Excellent and remaining reports were "Very-Good".
Similarly, all the reports of Shri Pawan Kumar right from 1988-89 upto 1998-99 were "Very-Good".
So far as the annual confidential reports of the present petitioners are concerned, either it was Average or it was Good.
In these circumstances, the Departmental Promotion Committee rightly recommended the names of Sarvshir Nand Kishoare and Pawan Kumar.
it is a settled principle of law that this Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal over the assessment of the Departmental Promotion Committee which is an expert body.
Until and unless some arbitrariness or malafides are shown, this court will not exercise its jurisdiction to interfere with the recommendation of the Departmental Promotion Committee.
9.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.