Swatanter Kumar, J - This judgment would dispose of above mentioned seven writ petitions because the prayer of all the petitioners in these writ petitions is common as they claim minimum of the prescribed pay scale with allowances as applicable or payable to their counterparts working on regular basis in the same department.
However, the judgment is being written in CWP No. 17199 of 2000.
2.
The petitioners in all these petitions were appointed as Sweeper, Helpers, Helper Storeman, Peons, Washer Boys and Counter Clerks in various wings of the Transport Department of State of Haryana.
They were employed in different depots on daily wages during the period 1991 to 1995.
The petitioner have been working in the respective departments for a considerable period and claim that they have been discharging similar duties and functions as their counter-parts working as regular employees are discharging.
According to the petitioners they are working for 6/7 days in a week.
They possess higher or in any case similar qualifications, which are prescribed under the rules and/or are possessed by their counter parts of the regular cadre.
All these petitioners claim that they are entitled to the minimum of the pay scales prescribed by the Haryana Government for these posts, the prescribed scales being Rs. 2550-3200/- in relation to all other posts except the one where it is Rs. 3050-4350/-.
The petitioners served legal notices upon the respondents.
As the respondents did not accede to the request of the petitioners, they filed the present writ petitions.
3.
It is not necessary for us notice facts of each and every case because the facts are more or less similar in all cases except the post, the scale and the place of posting.
Not only this, even the stand of the respondents is somewhat identical.
4.
Though written statement in each case has been filed separately, but the stand of the State is that the petitioners are no entitled to claim minimum of the pay scale and allowances attached thereto because they are working purely on temporary/daily wages.
They are not performing same duties of similar responsibilities.
They were being engaged and were being paid on the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner for daily wages and in any case there are no sanctioned posts in existence against which the petitioners can be paid minimum of the regular pay scales.
It has also been referred in some cases that the petitioners do not possess the requisite qualifications.
5.
The facts pleaded in the petition are really not at dispute in the present cases.
The petitioners have pleaded specifically in every writ petition that they have been employed on daily wages for a considerably long time and have been continuously working on those posts discharging the same functions are responsibilities which their counter-parts are discharging as members of the regular cadre.
These facts have not been disputed in the counter affidavits filed on behalf of the State.
In fact in reply to para No. 2 of CWP No. 17014 of 2000, titled as Ashok Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, it is pleaded that the petitioners who were working as Helpers, were possessing qualifications like Matric and ITI diploma and even some petitioners were Graduates.
The minimum qualification for appointment to the post of helper was matric with diploma.
As such in all cases the petitioners satisfy the minimum qualifications prescribed for appointment to the post against which they are working on regular basis.
In fact for the posts of sweepers no educational qualifications are prescribed.
6.
There is no occasion for us to discuss this aspect of the matter as we are not concerned with the regularisation of service of the petitioners or their appointments to the respective posts.
On the contrary, the question before the Court in these petitions is very limited as the relief claimed is only equal pay for equal work on the basis that petitioners were performing similar duties, functions and responsibilities as are being performed by their counter-parts in the regular cadre.
It is not disputed that the petitioners have been working equally for a period of 7 years to 11 years and have discharged their duties to the satisfaction of all concerned.
In view of these undisputed facts the stand of the respondents that there are no sanctioned posts or that they were being paid wages as per the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner would be of no avail to the State for denying the relief of the petitioners.
7.
The Full Bench of this Court, after considering the various judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, larger as well as smaller Benches, right from 1982 till 2001, in the case of Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(2) SCT 732 (P&H)(DB) : CWP No. 14050 of 1999, on 31.12.2001 answered the question referred to it, relating to equal pay for equal work while holding as under :-  "Having discussed the general principles controlling the various aspects of these cases, it will be appropriate for us to refer to the view taken by the Hon'ble Apex Court in various judgments, spreading over a period of more than 20 years, sufficiently indicates the essentials which need to be satisfied for entertaining a claim founded on the principle of equal pay for equal work or equality.
Thus, we may concisely state these essentials :- a) The petitioners ought to be employed by the State as casual or daily rated workers ; b) The employee ought to have worked as such for a fairly reasonable time satisfying the ingredients of continuity in service ; c) The functions being discharged and work being performed by such employee should be similar, (of course, not by mathematical formula), as that being done by a regular employee of the same department; d) Work performance of the employees should be satisfactory.
At the cost of repetition, we may refer that there is no dispute to the similarity of work and functions and the fact that the petitioners do not lack essential qualifications.
Even if to some extent it was disputed, it would make no difference in the light of law laid down by the Apex Court.
The stress on payment of minimum of the pay scale i.e. the basic pay and dearness allowance alone as insisted upon by the Supreme Court repeatedly.
In the case of Devinder Singh (supra), the petitioners, who were working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger Keepers alike some of the petitioners before us in the same department, had filed a writ claiming parity of pay."
xx xx xx "The relief to be granted would have to be considered in light of the facts and circumstances of each case.
What we have stated is a mere reiteration of the law enunciated by the Apex Court and cannot be stated as a derivative enunciation.
The petitioners have been able to satisfy the fundamentals noticed in this judgment and in fact part of their claim stands on the admission of the respondents.
We have taken into consideration and followed the Larger Benches of the Apex Courtt as they discuss the rationale and logic at a greater length and have not given undue importance to the time and date on which the decisions were rendered.
The view of the Larger Bench subsequently followed, attaches certainty and uniformity to the law so declared.
Keeping in mind the law enunciated and in light of the facts and circumstances of these cases to assimilate, we feel persuaded to answer the question in favour of the petitioners.
In view of our detailed discussion above, we answer the question formulated in the reference order as under :- "The petitioners, who are working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger-Keepers, Pump Operators, Mali-cum-Chowkidars, Fitters, Petrol Men and Surveyor etc., and are satisfying the afore-stated essential ingredients, are entitled to the minimum of the pay scale (basic pay and dearness allowance alone) admissible to their counter-parts working regular basis in the same department."
The reference is answered accordingly and matters be listed before the regular Bench for disposal in accordance with law, subject to orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice.
8.
In view of the law enunciated by the Full Bench, the petitioner are entitled to the limited relief and cannot claim the pay scale or minimum thereof with all allowances attached thereto.
The petitioners can claim and are entitled to receive minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance alone and that too from the date of filing the writ petition.
As per their own showing the petitioners have been working in the respective posts for a considerable period for seven to eleven years, but at no point of time, they raised their demand upon the respondents except when they served notice in November, 2000 and immediately thereafter they filed the writ petition.
Thus, we are of the considered view that the ends of the justice would demand that the Government should not be called upon to pay wages for the period when the respondents did not raise any demand and kept on working on the limited payment/daily wages without protest.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow these writ petitions.
The petitioners would be entitled to the limited relief afore-stated.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.