JS Narang, J. - Mr. HS Gill, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, has contended that the Courts below have fallen into error by decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-respondent.
The Courts do not sit as a Court of appeal upon the orders passed in the civil hierarchy whereby the orders have been made appealable and the appellate jurisdiction is exercised consciously and by way of giving ample opportunity to the delinquent official.
In the case at hand, the process and procedure provided for granting opportunity to the plaintiff- respondent having been duly accorded, the courts were not justified in giving the relief to the plaintiff-respondent.
2.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has argued that the appropriate opportunity had not been granted to the delinquent official as the charge sheet had not been duly served upon the said official.
Resultantly, he was not able to furnish appropriate reply to the charges.
Though the witnesses were examined by the prosecution in the presence of the delinquent official but right to cross-examine could not be availed of in the absence of the plea permitted to be taken in respect of the charges.
It would have been appropriate for the Inquiry Officer to have granted the opportunity to the delinquent official for filing the reply to the charges and resultantly according appropriate opportunity to cross examine the witnesses.
In fact, prejudice had been caused to the delinquent official by denying such rights.
The learned counsel placed reliance upon the judicial pronouncements of the apex Court as well as this Court.
It is the settled law that actual service of show cause notice or charge sheet must be proved and established.
Admittedly, in the case at hand the charge sheet was not served upon the delinquent official personally.
In this view of the matter, a prejudice has been caused to the delinquent official.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the shortcomings which have been pointed and which have been noticed by the lower appellate Court do construe a case in favour of the plaintiff- respondent.
Resultantly, no effective opportunity to defend had been granted to the delinquent official which certainly caused prejudice to the rights of the delinquent official.
Thus, the lower appellate Court has correctly accepted the appeal by way of setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
It may be noticed that the right of the State to initiate enquiry de novo has not been shut down, liberty to conduct fresh enquiry in accordance with law, rules and in view of the above, I do not find any infirmity in the judgment and decree dated April 30, 1999 passed by the learned Additional District Judge by way of setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
There is no merit in the appeal.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.