TS Doabia, J - The appellant in this appeal was sent on deputation.
An order to this effect was issued being order No. 216/ME of 1987 dated 2661987.
He was to join with Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Science, Soura, Srinagar.
It is not in dispute that the appellant in fact had joined there.
What is in dispute is as to whether he is entitled to deputation allowance or not.
The case of the appellant before a learned Single Judge of this court was that as he was sent to an organisation which was not a State department, therefore, he was entitled to deputation allowance.
As per him the bar of R-52(D) of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations would be attracted only if he was sent on deputation from one Government department to another.
The Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Science was not held to be a Government department.
It was on this reasoning the learned Single Judge of this court allowed the writ.
It was concluded that the appellant was entitled to deputation allowance.
The fact that Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Science is an independent organisation is being disputed by the learned counsel appearing for the State.
The appellant in pursuance of the judgment given by this court was paid the difference of salary in September, 1996.
He has come to this Court.
He seeks payment of interest.
This is the subject matter of appeal preferred by him.
This bears No. LPA (SW) No. 171/1995.
2.
The State is also feeling aggrieved against the judgment given by the learned Single Judge.
It is urged -  (i) that the Institute in question is part and parcel of the Government; (ii) that in terms of Regulation 42(D) of the J&K Civil Service Regulations, the writ-petitioner was not entitled to any deputation allowance; (iii) that only Doctors who have been selected and appointed by the Institute are entitled to higher emoluments and not those who are sent on deputation; (iv) that the respondent/writ-petitioner is not entitled to any deputation allowance and he can claim only that salary which he was getting as an employee of the Health Department.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant has also urged that had he been working with the State Government, then he would have been permitted private practice.
This is not being allowed to a Doctor who is working in the said Institute.
4.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that so far as the argument of Mr. Dubay is concerned that is devoid of merit.
The Government letter dated 21.9.1989 is a complete answer to the argument which is being raised by the learned counsel for the State.
In this letter it was observed :  "Government of Jammu and Kashmir,  General Administration Department .... No. GD(Ser)KAS/H/Sgr dated 21.9.1989.
The Administrative Officer (Per)  S.K.
Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar.
Sub : Deputation of Prof. RN Sharma to SKIMS  Sir, I am directed to refer to your letter No. SIMS/Per/2638/89-8859 dated 181989 regarding the above subject and to say that as per standard terms of deputation as contained in the J&K CSR, a deputationist will have an option either to get his pay fixed on the deputation post under the operation of the normal rules or to draw pay of the post held by him in his parent department plus a deputation allowance.
As per rule 52-C(iii) of the J&K CSR an option exercised in this behalf shall be final except that on each occasion when such an employee receives proforma promotion in his parent Department or is reverted to a lower grade in the parent department or is appointed to another grade in the new department or there is a revision of pay scales in his parent department a fresh option shall be allowed to him.
In case the doctor has not given any option for drawing pay of the post held by him in his parent department he shall be admissible to get the pay of the deputation post in which event he would not be admissible to draw any deputation allowance.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/-  Under Secretary to Government,  General Administration Deptt."
5.
Independently of the above Regulation 45-D clearly lays down that deputation allowance is not permissible if a person is sent from one Government Department to another.
A learned Single Judge of this has observed that the Institute in question is an independent body.
It is not controlled by the State Government.
It has also been observed that merely because the Chief Minister happens to be the Chairman of the Managing Committee of that Institute cannot lead to the conclusion that the Institute in question is part and parcel of the Government.
6.
We are of the opinion that the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge that the Institute in question is an independent body and is not a Government Department is a finding which has been recorded on proper appreciation of material on record.
7.
Another question as to whether the writ petitioner i.e. appellant in LPA(SW) No. 171/95 is entitled to interest or not be now examined.
8.
The view expressed by the Supreme Court of India is that in case some emoluments are payable and these are with-held then the interest is payable.
9.
In case R Kapoor v. Director of Inspection, 1995(1) SCT 233 (SC) : 1994(6) SCC 589, the Supreme Court allowed the same at the rate of 18%.
While doing so reliance was placed on an earlier decision reported as State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, 1985(1) SCC 429.
Similar opinion has been expressed in some other cases and without multiplying the judicial precedents on the point, it can safely be concluded that the interest at the rate of 12% per annum can be allowed.
10.
In the above cases the interest has been allowed at the rate of 12%.
The fact that the appellant/writ-petitioner retired on 31.8.1990 is apparent from Govt. order dated 2061990 and the fact that even after decision was given by this Court, the arrears were not paid for almost 18 months is a matter which cannot be ignored.
The ratio of the afore-mentioned cases do apply to the facts of this case.
Thus, the appellant/writ petitioner is held entitled to interest at the rate of 12%.
Let this amount be paid within three months from the date copy of this order is made available by the appellant/writ-petitioner to the respondent-authorities.
In case this is not done the rate of interest would be 18% and this enhanced amount of interest shall be payable by the person from his own pocket on whose negligence the delay occurs.
The interest would be payable with effect from the date payment was wrongly with-held.
Disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.