Nirmal Singh, J - This petition is directed against the order of Labour Court, Chandigarh dated 2121991 vide which an application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure for amendment of the written statement filed by the management was dismissed.
2.
Respondent No. 2 filed an application for payment of wages for the period from 3111989 to 14.8.1989.
The workman was charge-sheeted vide charge sheet dated 3111989 for committing misconduct on 3011989 for the same period.
During the pendency of the application, an enquiry was conducted against the workman in connection with the charge sheet.
It was alleged that the charge sheet was proved against the workman.
Petitioner-management seeks permission to amend the written statement.
The amendment sought is as under :-  "That the management has conducted enquiry against the workman in connection with the charge sheet dated 23121988, 3011989 and 221989 and on the basis of the enquiry the absence period of the workman from 18121987 to 3011989 has been confirmed and from second half of 3011989 to 221989 has also been confirmed.
Since the charges have been proved in the enquiry, therefore, the matter in question is a complicated question of law and can only be looked into under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, and hence the claim application deserves to be filed.
In case the enquiry is found to be vitiated on any ground then management prays to allow him to prove the charges before the Hon'ble Court to justify his stand."
3.
At the hearing, the learned counsel for the management submitted that the enquiry report came during the pendency of the petition filed by the workman and the charge against the workman has been proved in the enquiry.
He submitted that the learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court has erroneously dismissed the application of the management on the flimsy ground that the management is adopting the delaying tactics.
4.
On the other hand, Shri OP Batra, learned counsel for the workman submitted that the Presiding Officer has rightly dismissed the application as the management is adopting the delaying tactics.
He submitted that the workman has closed the evidence on 1511991 and the application has been moved by the management after availing the opportunity of leading evidence.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the contention raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
With the amendment of the written statement, the workman is not to be prejudiced in any manner as the enquiry report came during the pendency of the petition after filing of the written statement.
No doubt, there is a delay on the part of the petitioner for moving the application for amendment of written statement.
The application for amendment cannot be rejected on the sole ground that there is a delay in moving the application.
The amendment sought is necessary for the adjudication of the case.
However, for the delay caused by the petitioner, the workman can be compensated with costs.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed subject to the payment of costs of Rs. 3,000/-.
The petitioner is allowed to amend the written statement as prayed for.
The petitioner will conclude the entire evidence on the date of hearing to be fixed by the Labour Court for that purpose.
The parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh on 3152001.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh is further directed to decide the case within two months of the receipt of the copy of this order.
Petition allowed.