SB Sinha, J - By consent of the parties, M.A.T.
3292 of 2000 is treated as on day's list and is taken up for hearing along with M.A.T.
3182 of 2000.
2.
In both these appeals the learned counsel for the parties having argued on merit at a great length, we are of the opinion that the same should be finally disposed of at this stage.
3.
These appeals are directed against an order 6.9.2000 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in W.P. No. 7484(W) of 2000, whereby and whereunder the writ application by the workman was allowed.
Certain basic facts are admitted.
Services of the workman was terminated by the employer by an order dated 23rd February, 1999 which reads thus :-  "Please refer to our letters dated 29 Dec 1998 transferring you to Talcher Bulk site with effect from 6 Jan 1999 and dated 11 Feb 1999 informing you that you were absenting from your duties (at Talcher) since 6 Jan 1999 without any information and/or permission.
You were therefore advised to immediately report for your duties.
However, you have continued to absent and have not reported for duty till date.
From the above it is clear that you are no longer interested in the services of the Company and you have lost lien on employment of your own accord, thereby terminating your employment with the Company.
Your name is, therefore, being struck off the rolls of the Company with immediate effect.
Please note that we are simultaneously tendering by Money Order a sum of Rs. 19,50600 (Rupees nineteen thousand five hundred six) only being three months' salary in lieu of notice.
We are also enclosing an account payee cheque No. 487288 dated 18 Feb 1999 for a sum of Rs. 7802400 (Rupees seventy eight thousand twenty four) only drawn on State Bank of India, Commercial Branch, Calcutta 700016 being compensation due to you under law.
You are, hereby, advised to collect your final settlement dues, if any, from the Accounts Manager, ICI India Limited, Explosives Business, 10A, Lee Road, Calcutta 700 020 on any working day after obtaining Clearance Certificate from the department concerned on the attached proforma.
Please contact Mr. R Venkatakrishnan, Taxatic Controller, I C I India Limited at 34 Choringhee Road, Calcutta 700071 on any working day for your retiral dues."
An industrial dispute was raised by the workman, whereupon the State of West Bengal by an order dated 71099 made a reference of adjudication before the learned Industrial Tribunal to decide the issues as to whether the termination of service of Shri Sudin Provat Mallick (Staff Code No. 3061) with effect from 23.2.1999 is justified and what relief, if any, is he entitled to.
By reason of an order dated 6th April, 2000, the learned Tribunal, inter alia, held that the concerned workman has not been able to prove a prima facie case for the purpose of grant of relief under Section 15(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, whereagainst the said writ application was filed.
Before the learned trial Judge, appears that the parties as before us, had addressed at a great length and even on merit of the matter.
It was found (1) that the order of termination is violative of Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes Act, (2) the said order is not saved within the meaning of provision of exception (bb) contained in Section 2(oo) of the Act, and (3) in any event, the said order is violative of principle of natural justice.
4.
Mr. Saha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the employer, has raised various contentions in support of his appeal.
Firstly, it was submitted that having regard to the provision contained in Section 2(oo)(bb), the order of termination dated 23rd February, 1999 being not an order of retrenchment, industrial dispute was not maintainable.
It was urged that from a perusal of the terms of appointment and in particular, Clauses 12 and 17 thereof, admittedly the workman being governed by the conditions of service laid down, therefore, was bound to comply with the order of transfer and as he had failed to join his duties, the order of termination is valid in law.
Our attention, in this connection, has also been drawn to the Procedure and Practices Manual For non Management Staff framed by ICI India Limited and in particular, provision with regard to the discharge/termination of service, which is in the following terms :  "Company gives one month's notice or one month's pay (including all allowances and shift allowance) in lieu thereof in case of termination/discharge of a permanent employee by the Company."
It was further urged that from a perusal of the order of reference made by the appropriate Government dated 71099, it would appear that the Second Schedule of the Industrial Disputes Act having been referred to therein, the impugned order must be held to be bad in law as the reference itself was invalid.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the workman, on the other hand, submitted that having regard to provisions of Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes Act as also the decision of the Apex Court in DK Yadav v. JMA Industries Ltd, reported in (1993)3 SCC.
259, the impugned order of termination must be held to be wholly illegal.
Our attention, in this connection, has also been drawn to a recent Full Bench decision of this Court in BG Sampat (Babulal Gobardhandas Sampat) v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 2000(1) C.H.N.
page 1.
In BG Sampat (supra), a Full Bench of this Court has analysed the provisions of Section 15(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act and inter alia, held that the said provision is beneficent in nature.
Having regard to the aforementioned Full Bench decision which is binding upon this Court, we need not go into the question of scope and ambit of the aforementioned provision.
Suffice it to point out, in terms of the aforementioned decision, the learned Tribunal for the purpose of grant of interim relief is not bound to arrive at a final conclusion as to whether reference should be answered in favour of the workman or in favour of the employee.
The merit of the matter was not, therefore, required to be gone into at that stage.
Finding of a prima facie case as regards the merit of the matter is what is required for the purpose of passing an order on an application under Section 15(2)(b) of the Act.
The learned Tribunal held that having regard to the order of termination that the concerned workman has failed to prove a prima facie case.
It is true, as has been contended by Mr. Saha, that this Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, does not exercise an appellate power and may interfere with an order passed by the learned Tribunal only when the same suffers from the vice of illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety, but equally it is well settled that when an order has been passed by the learned Tribunal without taking into consideration the relevant fact or upon taking into consideration the relevant fact which is not germane for the purpose of jurisdiction or where there is error apparent on the fact of the record or where legal principle have been applied in arriving at a conclusion, this Court may exercise its power of judicial review.
The learned trial Judge has considered prima facie, the question as to whether the order of termination passed against the concerned workman was bad in law.
While doing so, it has independently, to which it was entitled, entered into the merit of the matter for the purpose of arriving at a prima facie finding that not only the order of termination was illegal as provision of Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 had not been complied with, but also arrived at a finding that prima facie exception (bb) to Section 2(oo) of the Act was not attracted in the instant case.
6.
It is not in dispute that all orders of termination amount to retrenchment (see State Bank of India v. Shri N Sundara Money, reported in AIR 1976 SC 1111).
So far as the question as to whether in the fact situation of the matter Exception (bb) to Section 2(oo) is attracted or not, we are, having regard to the provision thereof, concurring with the view of the learned trial Judge that the same has no application.
Exception (bb) to Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 makes an exception with regard to the main provision, inter alia, in a case where contract of service is terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein or on expiry of the term of contract.
No such case had been made out even by the employer herein.
As indicated hereinbefore, the main ground for termination appears to be that the workman was bound to serve the employer at any place in terms of Clause 17 of the offer of appointment and his terms and conditions of service would be bound by the Rules and Regulations as may be made from time to time by the Company.
We at this stage need not go into the question as to whether rules and regulations framed by the Company meet the requirement of the Government Employment Standing Order or not; but even assuming that the rules and regulations framed by the Company are applicable, the question which would arise for consideration would be whether service of an employee can be dispensed with only on giving one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof, is itself a question which would prima facie attract Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act as has been held in DK Yadav's case (supra).
The minimal requirement for termination of service of a workman is compliance of principle of natural justice, which in this case admittedly, had not been done.
7.
So far as the submission of Mr. Saha to the effect that the order of reference is illegal inasmuch as while referring the issue in question for adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal, appropriate Government has referred to the provisions of Second Schedule of the Industrial Disputes Act which has no application herein; suffice it to say, that non-mentioning or wrong mentioning of provisions of law in a statutory order would not vitiate the same if the statutory authority has otherwise power to pass such an order.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge cannot be said to have committed any error in passing the impugned judgment.
However, it appears that while passing the said judgment, it was not stated therein that the concerned workman would be entitled to the payment of subsistence allowance in terms of the proviso appended to Section 15(2)(b) of the Act from the date of reference.
We, therefore, modify the order of the learned trial Judge to the aforementioned extent.
9.
However, we would request the learned counsel to dispose of the reference as expeditiously as possible and preferably within a period of eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
10.
With the aforementioned observations and directions, both the appeals and the application are disposed of without any order as to costs.
11.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order by given to the parties on priority basis.
Orders accordingly.