GS Singhvi, J - These petitions are being disposed of by a common order because the issues raised in the two cases are inter-related.
The facts :  C.W.P.
No. 8230 of 1988 The petitioners joined service as Junior Engineers on 381977 and 17.2.1977 respectively in P.W.D., Public Health Department.
They passed AMIE in August, 1980 and August, 1979 respectively.
Respondents No. 2- Kulwant Singh and respondent No. 3-Harcharan Singh, who had passed AMIE in October, 1983 and March, 1984 were promoted as ad hoc Sub Divisional Engineers in August, 1984 and December, 1984 respectively.
The petitioners were also promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineers on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
28121984.
2.
The grievance of the petitioners is that even though, they had become eligible for promotion as Sub Divisional Engineers on 111983, the government had failed to undertake exercise for making promotion in accordance with Rule 6 read with Rule 9 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class-II, P.W.D.
(Public Health) Rules, 1967 (for short, `the 1967 Rules') despite the fact that as many as 35 persons were appointed by direct recruitment in the year 1987 and in this manner, they are being deprived of their legitimate right to be promoted as regular Sub Divisional Engineers.
Their further grievance is that on the one hand, the government has failed to make regular promotions in accordance with the 1967 Rules and on the other hand, they are sought to be reverted to the lower post of Junior Engineer.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents, it has been averred that in terms of Rule 9(3) of the 19657 Rules, the Screening Committee is required to meet at an interval of one year, but regular promotions could not be made due to pending litigation.
According to them, respondent No. 2-Kulwant Singh was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer in April, 1984 because he was senior to the petitioners in the cadre of Junior Engineers.
In paragraphs 10 and 11, the official respondents have made the following averments :  "10.
Admitted to the extent that 35 persons were appointed to the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers in the year 1986 through direct recruitment.
The case for making regular appointment on the basis of eligibility as on 111985 was sent to the Commission, in which 3 posts in the quota of AMIE/B.Sc.
Engineering were included and the screening was held on 13121985.
But the proceedings of the Screening Committee were stayed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in C.W.P.
No. 4025 of 1981 filed by Shri Bishan Dass Bagha and following order were passed on 1721986 : "The Screening Committee's recommendation shall not be implemented up till the disposal of this case.
List the case for final disposal in August, 1986.
The officers who have been promoted including petitioner will continue on ad hoc basis on the promoted posts."
It is also mentioned here that Shri Bishan Dass Bagha was promoted from Junior Engineer category against the vacancy meant for direct recruits.
According to PSE Class-II Rules, 1967, the promotion quota of Junior Engineer category is separate from that of AMIE category.
It is further mentioned that later on, on the basis of the judgment announced by this Hon'ble Court in C.W.P.
No. 4436 of 1978 (Shri NS Gill v. State of Punjab and others) one Shri Gurvinder Bir Singh, who is direct appointee (source No. 1) filed a C.W.P.
No. 5589 of 1989 in this Hon'ble High Court.
After considering the whole facts, respondent No. 1 (Govt.) vide letter No. 231 (36) 89-BR2(4)/4856-59 dated 23.11.1989 (Annexure R.1) had decided the seniority of Shri Gurvinder Bir Singh by giving three points of AMIE quota to the direct recruits under Rule 6(2) of PSE Class-II P.W.D.
Public Health Rules, 1967, as no AMIE pass candidate was available at the time of occurrence of the vacancies.
In view of this decision, no regular point is available for the AMIE category up to the year 1985.
11.
Admitted to the extent that on the completion of training by direct recruits, petitioner No. 1 along with 8 others was reverted vide Govt. letter dated 15687 and the petitioner No. 2 along with 3 others was reverted vide Govt. letter dated 30687.
The petitioners along with others were reverted as they were promoted as Sub Divisional Engineers on purely temporary basis against the vacancies meant for direct recruitment for a period of six months.
After that, the petitioners and respondent No. 3 filed in C.W.P.
No. 3663 of 1987 in this Hon'ble High Court and got the stay orders against the reversion.
They were working in view of the stay order.
On 121190, this Hon'ble High Court had dismissed the C.W.P.
No. 3663 of 1987.
The petitioners along with other petitioners of C.W.P.
No. 3663 of 1987 were reverted as Junior Engineer vide Govt. order dated 14.12.1990.
Again the petitioners filed a CM No. 9198 of 1990 in C.W.P.
No. 8230 of 1988 and got the stay order against the reversion orders."
4.
C.W.P.
No. 7415 of 1995  Petitioner No. 1-Rajinder Pal Sharma joined service as Sectional Officer (re- designated as Junior Engineer) in P.W.D.
(Public Health) on 24.12.1969.
Likewise, petitioner No. 2-Amarjeet Singh was appointed as Sectional Officer in the same department on 2121969.
In the tentative seniority list of Junior Engineers (Annexure P.1), the names of the petitioners were shown at Sr. Nos. 136-A and 127-A respectively.
Petitioner No. 1 passed AMIE in April, 1989, whereas petitioner No. 2 qualified AMIE in September, 1985 and in this manner, both of them became eligible to be considered for promotion w.e.f.
1.1.1990 and 111986 respectively.
They have referred to the averments contained in the writ petition filed by Achhru Ram Sharma and another and have averred that despite the unequivocal stand taken by the State Government that in view of order dated 149,1994 passed by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.
(C) No. 7294 of 1993 - Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board v. SM Sharma and others, the respondents are not making promotions on the basis of seniority according to the length of service.
They have prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to the respondents to maintain the seniority of Junior Engineers on the basis of length of service in accordance with Rule 11 of the Punjab, Department of Public Works Junior Engineers (Public Health Branch) Class-III Service Rules, 1991 (for short, `the 1991 Rules') to consider them for promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer is accordance with the 1967 Rules.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, it has been averred that the screening of eligible officers for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineers was done on 13121985, but the proceedings could not be finalised on account of stay order passed by the Court.
They have referred to order dated 581994 passed in CWP Nos. 3405, 3406 and 3407 of 1994 and have averred that promotions to the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers were to be made in accordance with order dated 581994, but the needful could not be done because of the restraint order passed by the High Court in the case of the petitioners.
6.
In his written statement, respondent No. 3-Mohinder Kumar has averred that promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer are required to be made in accordance with the 1967 Rules against the year-wise vacancies.
He has referred to the decision of the Full Bench in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1980 P&H 117 and averred that seniority is to be determined with reference to the date of acquiring qualification.
7.
In a separate written statement filed by him, the added respondent-Shri Harcharan Singh has also pleaded that seniority is to be fixed by the government in accordance with the law laid down by the Full Bench in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case (supra).
8.
Respondent-Shri Surinder Mohan Singh Puri has also filed a written statement.
He has averred that the petitioners do not have the claim for promotion vis-a-vis him because they had acquired qualification for promotion from source 4 only in the years 1990 and 1988 respectively, whereas he had acquired the requisite qualification in 1980.
9.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The following two questions arise for determination in these petitions :  (a) Whether seniority of Junior Engineers is to be determined on the basis of length of service in terms of Rule 11 of the 1991 Rules or by taking into consideration the date of acquisition of qualification ?
(b) Whether the government is bound to make promotion to the post of Sub- Divisional Engineer with reference to year-wise vacancies ?
10.
In our opinion, the first question deserves to be answered in the light of order dated 14.9.1994 passed by the Supreme Court in SM Sharma's case (supra).
The facts of that case show that the High Court had accepted the claim of the respondents for fixation of seniority from the date of acquisition of qualification.
While reversing the order of this Court, their Lordships of the Supreme Court referred to Rule 121 of the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974, which is pari materia to Rule 11 of the 1991 Rules and observed as under :  "It is obvious from Rule 12 of the Rules, quoted above, that the inter-se seniority between Surinder Mohan Sharma and Dinesh Kumar could only be fixed on the basis of continuous length of service in the cadre of Sub Divisional Officer subject to the applicability of any of the clauses under proviso to the said rule.
The rule nowhere provides that the seniority is to be fixed on the basis of the date of acquiring the eligibility qualifications.
The rule which was before the Full Bench in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case was entirely different than the rule in this case.
The High Court became totally oblivious to Rule 12 of the rules and fell into patent error in allowing the writ petition following the judgment in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case which has no relevance whatsoever to the present case.
We, therefore, allow the appeal with costs and set aside the order of the High Court dated February 1, 1993 and dismiss the writ petition filed by Surinder Mohan Sharma before the High Court."
11.
A somewhat similar question was considered by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14581 of 1993 - Surinder Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others in the context of the petitioners' claim that ranking list for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer is to be prepared with reference to the date of acquisition of higher qualifications of AMIE/B.E.
and that those who had acquired eligibility qualifications after them should not be treated senior merely because they had longer length of service in the cadre of Junior Engineers.
The aforesaid question was examined in the context of Haryana Service of Engineers Class-II Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1970.
After making reference to the relevant rules, the Court observed as under :  "The list which is required to be prepared for the purpose of consideration of eligible officers must necessarily include names of all those who fulfil the conditions of eligibility in a particular year.
Those who are senior in the lower cadre and who fulfill the conditions of eligibility cannot be excluded from the list of eligibility merely because in earlier years, their names were not included.
If the list was to be prepared ignoring the seniority in the lower cadre, the very purpose of making of promotion on the basis of merit subject to suitability with due regard to seniority will be negated.
Moreover, when the list is required to be revised every year, it will be wholly illogical to take a view that a senior person should be excluded from the zone of consideration or should be placed at a lower position in the list of eligible officers merely because his junior had done AMIE or had acquired BE in an earlier year and had acquired eligibility earlier to the senior officers.
In our view, the right of preferential consideration which a junior officer acquires due to the fact that he has acquired requisite qualification at an earlier point of time cannot enure to his benefit and to a disadvantage of a senior officer for all times to come.
The very concept of preparation of list every year after consideration of the candidature of all eligible officers negatives the plea of the petitioners that they should be assigned higher position in the eligibility list for all times to come.
Rule regarding seniority among the Junior Engineers is to be treated in the Rules regulating recruitment to the posts of Junior Engineers.
Neither Rule 6 nor any other rule of 1970 Rules contemplate change of the seniority list in the cadre of Junior Engineers only on the ground that a junior person acquires the qualifications of BE or AMIE earlier than his senior in the cadre.
Rule 12 of the 1970 Rules also do not speak of any change in the seniority of eligible officers.
In fact, the rule speaks of seniority and the members of service i.e. persons belonging to the cadre of Assistant Engineer and, therefore, that rule is of no help to the case of the petitioners.
12.
Reference was also made to C.W.P.
No. 4403 of 1985 - Ranjit Singh v. State of Haryana and it was observed as under :  "In Ranjit Singh's case (supra), this Court has unequivocally held that eligibility list is to be prepared every year and it must contain names of all those officers who are eligible to be considered as on first day of the year concerned and that rule regarding preparation of eligibility list every year shall have to be followed strictly.
While deciding that case, this Court observed : "A bare perusal of these rules leaves no doubt that the Government shall every year reconsider the case of all eligible overseers for promotion to the service, i.e. SDO as on the Ist day of January of the relevant year.
It is further provided that the government shall prepare a list of officers suitable for promotion to the service and the selection for inclusion in such list should be based on merits and suitability with regard to seniority.
It also provides for promoting a Junior Engineer by superseding his seniors who in the opinion of the government is of exceptional merit, but in that case the government shall give specific reasons for the same.
This list along with the specific reasons for superseding any member of the service have to be approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission and the Commission is empowered to make any necessary changes in the list received from the government.
Sub-rule (4) further provides that the list prepared shall be revised every year.
The word `revised' has not been defined in the rules anywhere.
Thus the ordinary dictionary meaning has to be assigned to it.
According to Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary, New Edition, 1983 revise means to examine and correct, to make a new improved version of, to study anew, to look at again.
Thus sub- rule (4) clearly provides for the revision of such ranking list every year by the government.
If that is so, then a person who has become eligible by passing the departmental test etc. has a right to the inclusion of his name in such a list in the next year on his attaining eligibility even though in the list of previous year the name of some members, junior to him were placed at in ranking list on the ground of their ineligibility due to non-passing of departmental examination.
It is pertinent to note that in Rule 9 there is no corresponding provision in placing the name of a person becoming eligible at the bottom of the ranking list of the previous year as envisaged by paragraph 114 of the Administrative instructions.
Thus, it can be well inferred that the statutory rules were framed to evolve a better method of preparing a ranking list for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer than the existing instructions.
The only reasonable construction of sub-rule (4) providing for revising the list every year by the government is that even if a person has become eligible by passing a Deptt.
professional examination/deptt.
revenue examination, later than some of his junior, his name would be placed higher to such junior, officer in the ranking list as the seniority in the overseers service has to be given due regard.
xx xx xx The above referred conclusion is further fortified from the factum that in sub-rule (2) of Rule 9 relating to the preparation of the so-called ranking list of officers suitable for promotion to the service, it has been specifically provided that the selection for the inclusion in such list should be based on merits and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
Thus in a way it can be well said that other things being equal, the seniority in the Junior Engg.
service has to be respected.
If that is so, then there is no option but to hold that under sub-rule (4) of Rule 9, the revision of ranking list every year clearly envisages the placing of the name or names of officer/officers higher in the ranking list than those officers who though junior had already cleared the Deptt.
examination prior in point of time to such officer/officers, although the names of latter set of officers figured in the list of earlier years as in the case of all the private respondents in the present case, yet all the same as they being not yet promoted to the post in Engg.
Class-II, the revision of the list, would certainly bring them down because of their inter-se seniority in the Junior Engg.
Service."
In our considered opinion, the above quoted observations are applicable to the case of the petitioners.
Therefore, we do not find any merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners should be assigned higher position in the eligibility list for all times to come and that senior persons who too become eligible for being considered for promotion as Assistant Engineers should be placed below the petitioners for all times to come."
13.
The judgment of the Full Bench in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal (supra) was distinguished in the following words :  "The judgment of the Full Bench in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others case (supra) relates to the interpretation of Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) Provincial Service Class III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952.
Those rules do not contain a provision, like the one contained in Rule 9 of the 1970 Rules and, therefore, that decision cannot be read as laying down as a general proposition of law that a person who acquires eligibility conditions for promotion to higher post in a particular year has a vested right to be given preferential consideration qua person senior in the lower cadre even when such senior has acquired the requisite qualification before the preparation of eligibility list for the next year.
The concept of year-wise selection is singularly missing in the case decided by the Full Bench.
Similarly, judgment dated August 4, 1993 in L.P.A. No. 1613 of 1991, Prithvi Singh and another v. Haryana State Electricity Board which is in turn based on the Full Bench decision referred to hereinabove, does not advance the case of the petitioners.
Once again we would like to emphasise that the rules which came up for interpretation before the Division bench, in Prithvi Singh's case were substantially different than the rules of 1970.
Therefore, that decision is also not applicable to the facts of this case."
In view of the law laid down in the aforementioned decisions, we hold that seniority of Junior Engineer is to be determined on the basis of length of service in accordance with Rule 11 of the 1991 Rules.
14.
For the purpose of determining the second question, it will be useful to notice the provisions of Rules 6 and 9 of the 1967 Rules which reads as under :  "Rule 6 of the 1967 Rules 6.
Recruitment of Service : (I) Recruitment to the Service for the cadre and ex-cadre post shall be made in the following manner only from the source listed below in proportions and the order indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies; Method of recruitment Proportion Allocation to each sources in lot of 40 vacancies comprising five blocks.
(1)  (2)  (3) I  II  III  IV  V 1.
Direct appointment  26  5  6  5  5  5 2.
Promotion from the members of Punjab 
PWD Public Health Sectional Officer Service  8  2  1  2  1  2 3.
Promotion from Draftsman 
members of the Draftsmen and Teachers Service.
2  1  1 4.
Promotion from members of the Punjab PWD 
Public Sectional Officers Service and the Draftsmen 
members of the Draftsmen and Teachers Service 
possessing qualifications, prescribed in Appendix 'B'  -  1  1  1  1 Total :  40  8  8  8  8  8 (2) In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. 4, the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
(3) In case, a candidate is not available from source 1 and 3 and a person has to be appointed in public interest, as a stop-gap arrangement from other than the allotted source, such a person shall be liable to be referred to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted quota is available and the period of service rendered by such person will not be reckoned for the purpose of seniority.
(4) The Government may fill a short term vacancy, in the exigencies of public service after recording specific reasons, for a period not exceeding six months in each case by local arrangement from amongst the members of the Punjab PWD Public Health Sectional Officers Engineering Service, without resorting to the select list prepared under Rule 9.
(5) No person except to the extent provided under sub-rule (4) : (a) who is not a substantive member of the P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) Class II Service or a member of P.S.E.
(Public Health Branch) Class- III Service in the Junior scale on the date of enforcement of these rules; or (b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the Service as provided in Rule 7 read with Appendix `C' shall hold the post of a Sub Divisional Engineer even in an officiating capacity, unless he is declared within a period of six months from the date of enforcement of these rules, as suitable for appointment to the Service under the provisions of these Rules.
Rule 9 of the 1967 Rules 9.
Appointment by Promotion (1) A committee consisting of Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend, any other member of the Commission, representing it, Secretary, PWD (Public Health) and Chief Engineer of PWD (Public Health) shall be constituted.
2) The Chairman or the member of the Commission as the case may be will preside over the meeting of this Committee.
3) The Committee shall meet at intervals ordinarily not exceeding one year and consider the cases of all eligible officials for promotion to the service, as on the first day of January of that year; 4) The Committee shall prepare a list of officials suitable for promotion to the service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
5) The name of the officers included in the list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Punjab PWD (Public Health) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service; provided that any junior officer, who in the opinion of the Committee is of exceptional merit and suitability may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him in his own class; 6) The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
7) If in the process of preparing the list or its revision, it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the committee shall draw up a list of such official and may record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
8) The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government along with :- i) The records of all officials included in the list; ii) records of all officials proposed to be prescribed as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee; iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any official; and iv) the observations, if any, of the State Government on the recommendation of the Committee.
9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee along with other documents received from the State Government and, unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from government, the Commission shall make the changes it proposed and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government.
11) Appointment to the Service shall be made by the Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
12) Appointment by promotion may be made on ex-carde post, or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list prepared under this rule.
Note : This will also apply for assessing the suitability of temporary/Assistant Engineer for the Service, as provided in Appendix `B'."
The aforesaid rule was interpreted by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP Nos. 3405, 3406 and 3470 of 1994 which were disposed of on 581994 in the following terms :  "(1) The Government should determine the vacancies of promotion quota for the years 1985 and onwards.
(2) The recommendations of the committee which met on 13121985 be implemented if there is no other impediment in the implementation thereof.
(3) If for any reason, which must be recorded in writing, recommendations of the Committee which met on 13121985, cannot be implemented, a meeting of the Committee should now be convened and it be called upon to make its recommendations for the years 1985, 1986 and onwards.
(4) The Committee shall make its recommendations against year-wise anticipated vacancies for promotion quota and Government should make regular promotions under rule 9(11) in accordance with the recommendations of the committee after they are approved by the Commission.
(5) This exercise should be undertaken and completed within a period of three months.
(6) If direct recruits selected by the Public Service Commission become available and they are to be appointed against the quota prescribed for direct recruitment, the Government shall be free to replace, revert any existing Sub Divisional Engineer who may be holding the post on adhoc basis or who may be having current duty charge.
(7) If in the meanwhile, it become imperative for the Government to make any promotion on adhoc basis, such promotion be made strictly according to seniority subject to suitability.
(8) In future, no arrangement be made against the promotion quota posts by giving current duty charge to the holder of a lower post.
(9) The Government may resort to adhoc/officiating promotion and pay to the incumbent of the post, salary prescribed for the post of Sub Divisional Engineer."
In our opinion, the above quoted order represents the correct interpretation of the rules and, therefore, it would be in the interest of the parties and service as a whole that exercise for making promotions is completed in accordance with the directions already given by the Court.
Hence, the writ petitions are disposed of in the following terms :  (i) The official respondents shall finalise the seniority list of the Junior Engineers keeping in view the provisions of Rule 11 of the 1991 Rules and the observations made hereinabove.
(ii) The official respondents shall undertake and complete the exercise for making promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineers in terms of order dated 581994 within a period of 4 months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
iii) All those who are eligible for promotion shall be considered on the basis of their service record with reference to the year of consideration and those not found suitable shall be entitled to be considered in the subsequent years.
iv) If there is any legal impediment in implementation of the aforesaid directions, the parties may file miscellaneous applications for further directions.
Order accordingly.