Dr. DV Chandrachud, J - These two petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenge the convening of a departmental enquiry on the ground that a criminal prosecution is pending.
The law governing these cases is now well settled, but before adverting to the position in law, the circumstances giving rise to these proceedings may, briefly, he set out.
2.
The petitioner in Writ Petition No. 1702 of 2000 is serving as a Clerk in a school which is being run by the 1st respondent in the District of Nashik.
The petitioner in the companion writ petition, being writ petition No. 1714 of 2000, is the Head Master of the school.
On 23111999, a complaint was lodged by a library assistant working in the school alleging that on 18111999 while she and certain other staff members were attending a school camp at Nashik, she was taken to the room where the Head Master of the school was staying by the petitioner in the 1st petition and another lady staff member.
The complainant alleged that the two members of the staff left the room on some pretext after which the Head Master, who is the petitioner in the 2nd Petition, raped her.
The Head Master is alleged to have threatened the complainant against divulging what had happened to her to any person.
3.
On 2522000, a show cause notice was issued by the President of the 1st Respondent to the petitioner in the two petitions before us ("the petitioners") calling upon them to show cause as to why disciplinary proceedings should not be adopted against them.
These notices were replied to by the petitioners respectively on 722000 and 822000.
Following this, charge-sheets have been issued on 1332000 to the petitioners for the purpose of convening disciplinary proceedings.
The charges against the petitioners include the charge relating to the commission of the alleged rape on a member of the staff by the petitioner in the 2nd petition, as a result of which offences have been registered under Sections 376, 354, 342 and 405 read with 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Reference has also been made to the fact that the two petitioners were in custody between 23111999 and 22.12.1999.
There are other charges also in respect of which the departmental enquiry is proposed to be held.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the holding of a departmental enquiry was illegal in view of the fact that offences have been registered in respect of the incident in question.
It was submitted that if a departmental enquiry was to be held, that would result in a disclosure of the defence of the petitioners in the criminal proceedings.
5.
The submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be accepted.
The position in law is that there is no hard and fast rule which mandates that departmental proceedings should be stayed during the pendency of a criminal prosecution.
Essentially, the purpose and object of holding a departmental preceding is different from the underlying object of the State in proceeding with criminal prosecutions the departmental proceeding is adopted for the purpose of dealing with a case of misconduct under the Rules and Regulations governing the service of the employee.
On the other hand, a criminal prosecution is a proceeding for the purpose of dealing with a violation of the penal law of the land.
The standard of proof in a criminal trial is of proof beyond reasonable doubt.
In a departmental proceedings, the charge of misconduct has to be established on a proponderance of probabilities.
The applicable rules of substantive law of evidence and of procedure which govern departmental proceedings, are distinct from those which govern criminal prosecutions.
6.
In State of Rajasthan v. BK Meena, (1996)6 SCC 417 : 1996 Lab IC 2750 : 1996(4) SCT 708 (SC), the Supreme Court laid down the following principles of law :  "14....
The staying of disciplinary proceedings, it is emphasised, is a matter to be determined having regard to the facts and circumstances of a given case and that no hard and fast rules can be enunciated in that behalf.
The only ground suggested in the above decisions as constituting a valid ground for staying the disciplinary proceedings is that "the defence of the employee in the criminal case may not be prejudiced".
This ground has, however, been hedged in by providing further that this may be done in cases of grave nature involving questions of fact and law.
In our respectful opinion, it means that not only the charges must be grave but that the case must involve complicated questions of law and fact....
The disciplinary proceedings are meant not really to punish the guilty but to keep the administrative machinery unsullied, by getting rid of bad elements.
The interest of the delinquent officer also lies in a prompt conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings.
If he is not guilty of the charges, his honours should be vindicated at the earliest possible moment and if he is guilty, he should be dealt with promptly according to law, it is not also in the interest of administration that persons accused of serious misdemeanour should be continued in office indefinitely, whereas in the criminal proceedings the question is whether the offences registered against him under the Prevention of Corruption Act (and the Indian Penal Code, if any) are established and, if established, what sentence should be imposed upon him.
The standard of proof, the mode of enquiry and the rules governing the enquiry and trial in both the cases are entirely distinct and different.
"(Emphasis supplied) In M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines, 1999(3) SCC 679 : 1999 Lab IC 1565, the Supreme Court laid down the following principles, after a review of the earlier decisions of the Court on the subject :  "The conclusions which are deducible from various decisions of this Court referred to above are : (i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case against the delinquent employee is of a grave nature which involves complicated questions of law and fact, it would be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal case.
(iii) Whether the nature of a charge in a criminal case is grave and whether complicated questions of fact and law are involved in that case, will depend upon the nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis of evidence and material collected against him during investigation or as reflected in the charge-sheet.
(iv) The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above cannot be considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceedings but due regard has to be given to the fact that the departmental proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to conclude them at an early date, so that if the employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and in case he is found guilty, the administration may get rid of him at the earliest."
In view of the position in law as elaborated in the judgment of the Supreme Court and having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the opinion that this is not a fit and proper case for staying the departmental enquiry pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings.
The case does not raise complicated questions of law and fact as enunciated by the Supreme Court so as to warrant the staying of the departmental proceedings.
The criminal proceedings are still in their incipient stage.
Having regard to the fact that the petitioners are employees of the school, being a Clerk and Head Master respectively, it is in the interest of justice that the disciplinary proceedings are concluded without any delay.
Considering the nature of the case, the fact that the institution in question is an educational institution, it is manifestly not proper for the disciplinary enquiry to be stayed pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings.
Both the petitions are, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs.
7.
Before concluding, we wish to make it clear that we have not gone into the merits of the case, nor should any of our observations be construed as an expression of any opinion on the correctness of the allegations or charges against the petitioners.
The petitioners would be entitled to a full recourse to their rights and remedies under the law.
8.
Petitions to stand dismissed with no order as to costs.
Parties to act on ordinary copy of this order duly authenticated by the Sheristedar of the Court.
Certified copy expedited.
Petitions dismissed.