Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the award dated March 4, 1999 (Annexure P- 11) passed by respondent No. 1-Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court, Panipat.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he was employed by respondent No. 2 on the post of Beldar on November 1, 1987.
He worked continuously from November, 1, 1987 to November 30, 1994.
The petitioner had, though, completed 240 days of service, but his services were abruptly terminated on November 30, 1994.
He was not given any notice nor any charge-sheet or retrenchment compensation prior to his termination on November 30, 1994.
Persons junior to him, namely, S/Shri Ombir, Kheata Ram, Tellu Ram and Jai Bhagwan were retained in service.
Demand notice dated December 30, 1994 (Annexure P-1) was served on respondent No. 2 under section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
3.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents.
Respondent No. 2- Municipal Council, Panipat through its Executive Officer appeared and filed written statement.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the petition and the annexures attached therewith.
5.
In para 4 of the petition, the petitioner has mentioned the names of the persons junior to him are - S/Shri Ombir, Kheata Ram, Tellu Ram and Jai Bhagwan.
In reply to this para, respondent No. 2-Secretary, Municipal Council, Panipat, has stated that no seniority list was produced by the petitioner and the question of junior and senior does not arise in the circumstances of the present case.
6.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has contended that it was for the petitioner to prove his seniority.
We do not agree with this proposition as the list of seniority of its employees is in the possession of respondent No. 2, who could have produced it, but as there was no list kept as to junior and senior employees, that was the only reason that respondent No. 2 could not place it before the Labour Court.
7.
In support of his contention, the Learned Counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the Industrial Disputes (Punjab) Rules, 1958, the relevant part of which is reproduced as under :  "Maintenance of Seniority List of Workmen :- The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated arranged according to the seniority of their service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date or retrenchment : Provided that a copy of the seniority list shall also be supplied to the union or unions of workmen if existing in the Industrial Establishment within the aforesaid period."
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further placed reliance upon a decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 5552 of 1997 (Bal Raj v. HUDA, Manimajra, UT Chandigarh and others), wherein a Division Bench of this Court has stated that the petitioner has specifically pleaded that person junior to him had been retained in service and he had supported this plea by oral statement.
This itself prima facie was violative of Section 25-G of the Act.
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under :-  ".....the petitioner has specifically pleaded (that persons) junior to him had been retained in service.
He supported this plea by oral statement.
In this manner he proved that the action of the employer was prima facie violative of Section 25-G of the Act.
The respondents did not lead evidence to disprove the case set up by the petitioner.
However, the Labour Court has not at all dealt with the issue relating to violation of Section 25-G, of the Act....." From the above discussion, the only conclusion one comes to is that the management (respondent No. 2) is trying to hide the seniority list from the court, the presumption is that juniors to the petitioner have been retained.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow the writ petition and quash the award dated March 4, 1999 (Annexure P-11) passed by the Labour Court, Panipat.
Respondent No. 2-Municipal Council is directed to reinstate the petitioner in service with full back wages.
Petition allowed.