RL Anand, J - Shri Randhir Singh Gill has given the challenge to the judgment and decree dated 23.2.1999 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur who allowed the appeal of the State and set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court with the direction to the punishing authority to re-hold the inquiry after the stage of the charge-sheet with a further direction that inquiry be completed within a period of six months.
2.Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:  Shri Randhir Singh Gill, plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for declaration that order dated 381993 passed by the Additional Secretary Village Development and Panchayats Department and conveyed to the plaintiff on 191993, stopping his four increments with cumulative effect, was null, void, without jurisdiction, in violation of the principles of natural justice and also in violation of mandatory provisions of law and rules and is not binding upon the plaintiff for the reasons stated in the plaint.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendant-State and tried to justify the impugned order.
The trial Court decreed the suit and granted a declaration in favour of the plaintiff to the effect that order dated 381993 conveyed to the plaintiff on 191993, vide which four increments of the plaintiff were stopped, is null and void and against the principles of natural justice.
4.
The State of Punjab filed an appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur and for the reasons given in para No. 8 of its judgment, the learned Additional District Judge allowed the appeal of the State and set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court by giving direction to the punishing authority as stated above.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the first appellate Court, the plaintiff has filed the present Regular Second Appeal.
6.
I have heard Shri BR Mahajan, learned counsel for the appellant and Mrs. SK Bhatia, learned DAG, Punjab, for the respondent.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that even if the observations made by the learned Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, are taken for the advantage of the defendant, still the impugned order dated 381993 conveyed to the plaintiff on 191999, has to go because the judgment dated 23.2.1999, has given a fresh right to the punishing authority to re-hold the inquiry from the stage of the charge-sheet.
8.
There is merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
The moment the first appellate Courts gives permission to the State to re-hold the inquiry from the stage of the charge, the earlier order dated 381993 conveyed on 191993 cannot be sustained in the eye of law and it has to fall with the passing of the judgment dated 23.2.1999.
The punishing authority after re-holding the inquiry can pass any appropriate sentence.
It can even pass lesser sentence than the one which was awarded earlier to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff can also be exonerated in the fresh inquiry.
Even the punishing authority can re-affirm the earlier decision vide which the four increments of the plaintiff were stopped.
Therefore, the order dated 381993 cannot remain in operation till the fresh inquiry is completed according to law.
9.
Resultantly, the present appeal is hereby allowed partly and it is declared that the order dated 381993 has become non-existent.
With these observations the appeal stands disposed of.
Appeal partly allowed.