Arun Kumar Goel, J (Oral) - Heard learned counsel.
2.
Petitioner has questioned the order issued by Director School Education, Jammu vide No. DSEJ/GEN/383-87 dated 2nd May, 1994 (Annexure PH to the petition), whereby on review of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Committee in its report dated 5th November, 1993 following was ordered :-  "i) The period of suspension w.e.f.
871976 to 18.5.93 is treated as on leave of whatever kind is due to him.
ii) An amount of Rs. 173838 be recovered from him and deposited into Govt. Treasury under proper head.
iii) He should not be entrusted with jon of Store Keeper/cash dealing in future wherever he is posted."
3.
Petitioner was working Clerk-cum-Store Keeper in the office of Additional Tehsil Education Officer at Gool.
It appears that certain purchases were made during such period and the cost whereof came to Rs. 173878.
It is further not in dispute that petitioner alongwith one Mr. Radha Krishan, Tehsil Education Officer and Inder Nath, supplier of goods was challaned and tried under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with Sections 120-B, 467, 468, and 420 RPC.
Case against all three of them was that the goods had not in fact been purchased and the aforesaid amount had been mis-appropriated by all three of them by cheating government as well as by fabricating record which they knew to be so.
Thus petitioner alongwith Radha Krishan acted in a manner to give undue financial benefit to the third co-conspirator namely Inder Nath, supplier of goods.
Common case of the parties is that after conviction of all these three persons they approached this court and were acquitted in terms of the judgment dated Ist October, 1992 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 59/1980.
4.
While allowing the appeals filed by the convicts, regarding petitioner following observations were made by the learned Judge :-  "At the most Parmanand who was store keeper at that time can be said to be guilty of dereliction of duty for not recording receipt of goods and also explaining about the same which items were not found in the store at the time of physical verification by the investigating agency.
Remedy for that lies by holding departmental inquiry against Parmanand and if he is found guilty punishing him under rules.
So far criminal offences are concerned those are not made out against all the accused-appellants and while allowing these appeals they are acquitted of all the charge."
5.
On the basis of above noted observations of this Court, Director School Education decided to hold enquiry against the petitioner, and for that purpose issued an order constituting Committee to hold enquiry against the petitioner.
Original order served upon the petitioner in that behalf has been placed on record as Annexure PD.
In terms of this order following were appointed as Members of the Committee :  a) Shri ML Misri, Joint Director School, Education, Jammu; b) Chief Education Officer, Udhampur; and c) Zonal Education Officer, Gool.
6.
Constitution of the Committee clearly indicates that except Shri ML Misri, other two officers were appointed by designation as members of the enquiry committee.
7.
A perusal of the impugned order (Annexure PH to the petition) indicates that the enquiry committee, which gave the report was of Joint Director School Education, Additional DEO, (emphasis supplied), and ZEO (Zonal Education Officer), Gool.
Only submission made in support of this writ petition by Mr. Sharma is that Additional D.E.O., Udhampur was never appointed by the appointing authority as a member of the enquiry committee, as such report submitted by this Committee in no case can be made basis to sustain the impugned order, which is liable to be quashed.
8.
In the aforesaid background of the case this Court vide its order dated 27th June, 1994 ordered issuance of notice to the respondents for filing objections.
File of the case shows that vide order dated 24th August, 1995 last and final opportunity of six weeks was granted to respondents for filing objections.
Still objections were not filed and the writ petition was admitted after hearing the learned counsel on 1st February, 1996.
Schedule was again fixed by the court for filing counter as well as rejoinder, still needful was not done.
Still court on 5th September, 1997 allowed last opportunity subject to payment of cost.
It was stated in this order that if counter is not filed within two weeks the matter was to be listed for hearing without further reference to the Bench.
9.
Net result of aforesaid circumstances is that for reasons best known to the department it chose not to contest the claim of petitioner.
Here it may be noted that while supporting the impugned order, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent produced the original file dealing with the suspension case of petitioner.
Original order passed by Director School Education on 18th May, 1993 is there on the file, wherein above noted three officers (including Shri ML Misri by name) is there.
It has further been stated by Shri Chouhan that except this file produced by him in court today, there is no other record with the department.
Still learned counsel for the respondents persisted that the impugned order does not suffer from any legal infirmity calling for interference in this writ petition.
At the same time he controverted the pleas urged by Shri Sharma in support of the writ petition.
10.
It is not in dispute that appointing authority, Director School Education in the instant case was competent to have appointed an enquiry officer/Committee in the present case for going ahead with the matter.
After having exercised such power, the enquiry committee was required to have proceeded with the matter and submit his report.
It may be worthwhile to notice here that Chief Education Officer in a District is higher in rank as compared to Additional District Education Officer in the District.
In addition to this, latter works in the office and under the control of former.
In case for any reason the appointing authority i.e. Director School Education, Jammu thought it fit to substitute Chief Education Officer, Udhampur with Additional District Education Officer, Udhampur as one of the members of the enquiry committee, he could have done that, but by passing a proper order in that behalf.
As already observed there is nothing on the record produced in court in that behalf and there being no other record available with the department, this is a clear cut case where an unauthorised person acted as a member of the enquiry committee, that too without his having been appointed by the competent authority.
11.
Once this conclusion had been arrived at, there is no difficulty in further holding that the report submitted by such enquiry committee is vitiated having been made by such members, one of whom was never appointed in his capacity as such.
12.
No other point is urged.
13.
In view of the aforesaid discussion this writ petition is allowed and consequently order issued by Director School Education, Jammu Vied No. DSEJ/GEN/383-87 dated 2nd May, 1994 is hereby quashed and set aside as if it was non-est and the department will deal with the case of petitioner while allowing admissible benefits to him.
No costs.
File produced by Shri Chouhan has been returned to him.
Petition allowed.