ML Singhal, J - On 2571988, Balwant Singh driver was on duty on bus bearing registration No. HYO-8752 of the Haryana Roadways on Ladwa-Pipli road.
This bus met with an accident with a tractor.
As a result of the accident, one Gian Chand died at the spot.
Rulla Ram and Kuldeep Singh received injuries in the accident.
They were admitted in Ladwa Hospital.
He was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 for having driven that bus rashly and negligently on 25788 on Ladwa-Pipli road when it met with an accident resulting in the death of Gian Chand, Rulia Ram and injuries to Kuldip Singh etc.
He filed detailed reply to the charge sheet.
He denied that he was driving that bus rashly and negligently.
General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Karnal, without considering his contentions, issued him show cause notice on 261289 calling upon him to show cause why he be not dismissed from service.
He reiterated his stand in the reply filed to show cause notice, which he had taken earlier while combating the charge sheet.
General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Karnal, without considering his reply and request for personal hearing, awarded punishment of bringing him down to the minimum of the time scale for a period of four years.
Vide another order No. 7919-94 dated 17992 his services were terminated on the basis of case FIR No. 127 dated 25788 registered under Sections 279, 337, 338 and 304-A Indian Penal Code at Police Station Ladwa against him.
He was in jail in connection with conviction and sentence passed upon him in this case when the order terminating his services dated 17992 was conveyed in Central Jail, Ambala.
He was released from jail on 11121992 after he had undergone the sentence.
After his release from jail, he submitted joining report in the office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Karnal in January 1993.
Instead of allowing him to join duty, he was served with the termination order dated 17992.
On receipt of this order, he went in appeal to Commissioner/Secretary, Transport, Haryana, Chandigarh on 10.2.93.
It was alleged that the order dated 17992 received in the month of January, 1993 whereby services of the plaintiff were terminated was illegal, mala fide, arbitrary, against the rules of natural justice and against the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana vide No. 1449-5CS-1-75 dated 17/2631975 and against the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1987.
On these allegations, plaintiff filed suit for declaration to the effect that order, dated 17992 whereby his services were terminated was illegal, mala fide, arbitrary, against the rules of natural justice and against the instructions issued by the Haryana Government and against the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1987 and that he is entitled to the benefit towards back wages, seniority and increments etc. as if his services had never been terminated.
2.
Defendant contested the suit urging that order dated 12390 was passed as the State of Haryana had been burdened with the award of compensation by Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Kurukshetra because of the rash and negligent driving of the said bus by Balwant Singh driver resulting in the death of Gian Chand, Rulia Ram and injuries to Kuldip Singh etc. Order dated 17992 was passed in view of the judgment of conviction and sentence passed upon him by the Criminal Court in the said criminal case.
It was urged that the services of the plaintiff were terminated because he was found not to be a good driver.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the order dated 17992 is illegal, mala fide and against the rules of natural justice ?
OPP 2.
If issue No. 1 is proved, whether the plaintiff is entitled to all the service benefits withheld under the garb of impugned orders ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in its present form ?
OPD 4.
Whether the civil court has got no jurisdiction to try and entertain the present suit ?
OPD 5.
Whether no notice under section 80 CPC has been served upon the defendant ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
Civil Judge, Junior Division, Karnal vide order dated 13.12.96 dismissed the plaintiff's suit, in view of his findings, that his services were justifiably terminated because of conduct, which led to his conviction.
No inquiry was required to have been conducted against him when his services were terminated because of the conduct, which had led to his conviction in the criminal case.
He was convicted and sentenced in the criminal case because he was found to have been driving that bus rashly and negligently resulting the death of Gian Chand, Rulia Ram and injuries to Kuldip Singh etc.  4.
Plaintiff went in appeal.
Appeal was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Karnal vide order dated 341998.
5.
Not satisfied with the order dismissing his appeal by the Additional District Judge, Karnal, plaintiff has come up in further appeal to this Court.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant, learned counsel for the State of Haryana and have gone through the record.
7.
Plaintiff was punished vide order dated 12390 for having driven that bus rashly and negligently on 25788 on Ladwa-Pipli Road resulting in the death of one Gian Chand, Rulia Ram and injuries to Kuldip Singh etc. Vide this order, he was brought to the minimum of time scale of drivers for a period of four years.
This order was passed against him in the wake of the order of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Kurukshetra holding the State of Haryana liable for claim to compensation arising out of this accident.
His services were terminated vide order dated 17992, obviously, for the same rash and negligent driving but that was in the wake of the order of conviction passed in case FIR No. 127 dated 2571988 of Police Station, Ladwa under Sections 279, 337, 338 and 304-A Indian Penal Code.
It was the same rash and negligent driving by him that led to the passing of the order one on 12390 and the other on 17992.
Question arises whether he was vexed twice over for the same misconduct with the passing of the order dated 17992.
In my opinion, he was definitely vexed twice over.
In Bhim Singh v. The State of Haryana, 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 408 : 1991(1) SCT 621 (P&H), it was held by a learned Single Judge of this Court that "an employee cannot be punished twice over for the same lapse."
Bhim Singh was employed as Patwari in the revenue department.
He retired from service on August 4, 1967 on attaining the age of superannuation.
He was informed by Sub Divisional Officer (C), Hissar that since he had wilfully remained absent from duty from July 20, 1960 to January 4, 1961 for more than six months, this period will be deemed to be break in service and he was not entitled to pension.
He challenged that order in the Civil Court on the ground that he was transferred from the consolidation department to Panniwala Mota circle on July 16, 1960.
He was not allowed to join duty at his new place of posting.
He was charge-sheeted and after enquiry a warning was administered to him for remaining absent without leave.
The subsequent order by which the period during which he remained absent was treated as a break in service and further disentitling him to pension was without any notice to him.
The State of Haryana controverted the pleas, made in the plaint by him.
8.
In this case also, Balwant Singh was punished twice over.
He could not be punished twice over.
It was held in Parkash Nath Saidha, Naib Tehsildar v. The Financial Commissioner (Revenue) Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1950-88 Recent Services Judgments 109 by a Division Bench of this Court that "no one shall punished or put in peril twice for the same matter, is a principle, which is applicable even in departmental enquiries."
Principle enshrined in Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India that "no person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once is applicable as much to criminal cases as to departmental enquiries."
9.
Plaintiff's suit should have been decreed on this short ground.
10.
For the reasons given above, this appeal succeeds and is accepted, judgments and decrees of both the courts below are set aside and the plaintiff's suit is decreed for declaration to the effect that order dated 17992 passed by General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Karnal whereby the services of the plaintiff had been terminated is illegal, void and against the rules of natural justice and the same is set aside and that he is entitled to all benefits withheld in the garb of that order namely the backwages, seniority, increments and all other benefits.
Earlier order of punishment will, however, remain.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.