JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of CWPs No. 16519 of 1994 and 12507 of 1996 as the common questions of law are involved in both these petitions.
The facts are being taken from CWP No. 16519 of 1994.
2.
The petitioners are in the employment of Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewell Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation') and are working on different posts, as such, belong to different categories.
Since the claim of all the petitioners is one, that is seeking revision in pay scale w.e.f.
151990, as has been granted to their counterparts in the Irrigation Department of Haryana.
It is contended that the Corporation is a Public Sector Company incorporated on 141970 and is fully owned and controlled by State of Haryana, as such, is an instrumentality of the State and an authority in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, therefore, the present petition is maintainable against the Corporation.
It is averred that the Board of Directors of the Corporation had taken a decision in their 6th meeting held on 451971 that the pay scales and the dearness allowance etc. shall be the same as payable to the employees of the Government of Haryana.
The decision of the Board was subsequently incorporated in the service bye-laws and the relevant bye-law No. 51 reads as under :-  "51 Pay Grade (1) Each post in the Corporation will carry a time scale of pay; the present pay scale being indicated in Appendix II (2) The pay scale is subject to revision by the Board, which will, however, generally follow the pattern adopted by the Govt. of Haryana from time to time."
This fact is not being disputed by the Corporation.
3.
According to the recommendations of 4th Central Pay Commission and the Notification No. GSR-39/Const./Art.309/87 dated 2941987, the general pay revision and had been ordered w.e.f.
111986 and in pursuance to the decision, the Corporation enforced the same for the benefit of the employees of the Corporation.
It shall be appropriate to mention here that some anomalies had arisen which had been sorted out later on to the benefit of the employees of the corporation.
However, certain discrepancies in the pay scales revised w.e.f.
111986 were pointed out to the Government by various Associations and also by some of the departments.
Upon examination of the said discrepancies, the Government had decided to modify the pay scales to remove the anomaly w.e.f.
151990 and the said modification was subsequently notified by the Government and as per the categoric decision of the Goverment, the said modification was to be applied in accordance with the norms laid down in the notification dated April 29, 1987.
4.
The Corporation examined this aspect and the matter was placed in the 98th meeting of the Board of Directors held on 2591990.
The proposal was approved by the Finance Department of Haryana and the sanction of Governor of Haryana was accorded which was further communicated to the Corporation vide communication dated 28101992, copy Annexure P5.
In accordance with the said communication, the revised pay scales were made applicable w.e.f.
28101992 instead of May 1, 1990.
Aggrieved of the said decision, some of the petitioners filed CWP 4094 of 1994, challenging the enforcement of revised pay scale w.e.f.
28101992 instead of May 5, 1990.
The said petition was disposed of by this Court vide order dated 3031994, directing the respondents to decide the justice demand notice by passing a speaking order within a period of three months.
5.
Since the relief was not granted the petitioners being aggrieved challenged the act of the respondents for not granting the revised pay scales w.e.f.
151990, the present petition was admitted vide order dated 2841995.
The written statement has been filed by the Corporation and substantial facts relating to the claim of the petitioners have been admitted.
The only stand of the Corporation is that the matter had been referred to the Government for sanction and the said sanction having been conveyed on October 28, 1992 with the stipulation that the revised pay scales shall be effective from 28101992, and has been made effective accordingly.
In this regard, reference has been made to an order issued by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. of Haryana, Department of Finance, wherein it is stated that the revision of pay scales concerning all the Public Enterprises are effective from the date, the Administrative Department issued sanction in this regard, copy Annexure P7.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the stand of the Corporation is devoid of any merit as the Govt. itself had decided to revise the pay scales w.e.f.
151990 of all the employees of the Govt. of Haryana and by virtue of the resolution having been passed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation that the pay scales of the employees shall be the same as similarly situated employees is Govt. of Haryana and the revision so effected shall be applicable from time to time.
It is discriminatory that the employees of Govt. of Haryana are granted the revision in the pay scales w.e.f.
151990 and the employees of the Corporation are granted the revision of w.e.f.
28101992.
In this regard, a decision given by the Division Bench of this Court has been referred to where the similar situation has been dealt with and the petitioners in the said petition have been granted the benefit of revised pay scales with effect from the date the similarly situated persons had been granted.
My attention has also been drawn to another decision rendered by the Division Bench of this Court which is reported as Rajpal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(1) SLR 655 : 1996(2) SCT 225 (SC).
In the said case para 51 of the Bye-laws was referred to and the Corporation had similarly approved the pay scales of the technical posts in the service of the Corporation and the said scales were made effective w.e.f.
October 7, 1992, in pursuance to the decision of the Standing Committee, by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. of Haryana.
The concluding para of the judgment reads as under :-  "On the basis of the above discussion, we allow the writ petition and declare that the date 7.10.1992 indicated in Annexures P-5 and P-6 is arbitrary, irrational and discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Accordingly that date is struck down and substituted by 151990 because that is the date enumerated in the resolution Annexure P3 and that is the date from which similarly situated employees of other Public Enterprises have been given the benefit of revised pay scales.
The respondent-Corporation is directed to issue appropriate order within three months of the submission of the copy of this order, granting the benefit of revised pay scales to the petitioners and other similarly situated persons with effect from 151990.
Arrears payable to the petitioners on the basis of such revised pay fixation shall be so paid to them within the next four months.
Costs made easy."
I find substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The inherent administrative power of the Govt. for granting scales of pay from any date cannot be accepted in its entirety.
The State cannot arbitrarily fix different dates for revision of pay scales of the employees who are similarly situated unless good reasons are shown for different treatment but normally the employees who are similarly situated the parity has to be maintained.
In the case at hand, no such argument is forthcoming nor any reason has been given for enforcement of the revision of the pay scales w.e.f.
28101992.
The mere fact that the approval/sanction has been accorded on that date is no ground to be accepted as a reason for such differential treatment.
7.
The act of the respondents of fixing different dates for enforcement of the revised pay scales for similarly situated persons is definitely violative of the fundamental right i.e. right to equality guaranteed under the Constitution of India.
The stand of the corporation is that the decision was taken by it and the revision of pay scales was to be accorded to the employees of the Corporation in accordance with the bye-laws with the emphasis to bye-law 51 (supra).
However, the Government of Haryana having specified the date from which the revision shall be applicable, the Corporation was left with no alternative but to make it applicable accordingly.
The State cannot grant different dates in respect of the pay scales to the employees who are similarly situated.
A question had been raised by a Division Bench of this Court for itself, that is : It is permissible for the State to grant the benefit of revised scales of pay to employees from different dates ?
I respectfully borrow the answer given by the Division Bench of this Court while making reference to the decision rendered in Ajmer Singh's case reported as Ajmer Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(2) SCT 225 (SC) : 1994(3) SLR 169.
I have been further informed that against the said judgment Special Leave Petition has also been dismissed by the Apex Court vide order dated 1741995.
It has been seen that the Government has been setting up Pay Commissions periodically to assess the cost of living, increase/rise in the price index and thereafter giving effect thereto by revising the pay scales of the employees and if any anomalies are seen or are found, the employer is expected to remove the same and in case this exercise is not performed by the State, the Courts are expected to decide the same by applying the rule of equality.
8.
In the absence of any plausible reason having been put forth for making the revised pay scales applicable from 28101992, I allow this writ petition and hold that the date i.e. 28101992 indicated in Annexure P5, is arbitrary, irrational and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Thus, the said date, that is October 28, 1992, is struck down and substituted by May 1, 1990, i.e. the date from which similarly situated employees have been given the benefit of revised pay scales.
The Corporation is directed to issue appropriate orders within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof being submitted by the petitioners, whichever is earlier.
It is made clear that while granting the benefit of revised pay scales to the petitioners w.e.f.
151990 the arrears so payable to the petitioners on the basis of such revised pay fixation shall be paid within a period of one month from the date of determination, for which the period has been specified as three months hereabove.
So far as the case of the petitioner in CWP 12507 of 1996 is concerned, the substitution date shall be read as 111986 instead of 151990.
The rest of the directions, that is the period within which the effect is to be given to shall remain the same.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.