SB Sinha, ACJ.
- This writ petition is directed against an order dated 4.8.1999 passed by a Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal, whereby and whereunder the writ application filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
On the said date, nobody had appeared on behalf of the petitioner and the Central Administrative Tribunal upon considering the records and upon hearing the learned counsel for the respondents found no merit in the writ application.
2.
At the very outset, we had asked Mr. Banerjee, learned cousel appearing on behalf of the petitioner as to whether he would like to file an application for recalling the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, before it, as it was alleged that a prayer for adjournment was made on that date through another Advocate and the same had not been entertained on the ground that he had no Vakalatnama.
Mr. Banerjee, however, submitted that he would like this Court to hear the matter on merits and dispose of the same.
3.
The petitioner was working as Extra Departmental Delivery Agent in Borda Post Office, Howrah.
Keeping in view the exigency of work, he was also asked to perform the duties of EDBPM in the said post office, which duties he had been discharging for a long time.
According to the petitioner, he had been working for a long time.
He allegedly made a request for transfer from the post of EDDA to EDBPM.
It appears that for the purpose of filling up the post of EDBPM regularly, the Employment Exchange was asked to sponsor the names of candidates concerned.
It appears from the petitioner's own letter dated 611995 as contained in annexure `F' to the application that he had also applied for the said post and appeared at the interview.
However, despite appearing at the interview, he purported to exercise his option only on 611995 praying for getting a preference for appointment in the said post.
4.
Before us, Mr. Banerjee has strongly relied upon a purported clarification issued by the concerned authorities which is in the following term :  "If surplus ED Agents are not available, the senior-most Agent, working in the same office and/or the seniormost ED Agent in the same recruitment unit may be given preference in that order.
The resultant vacancy, if any, can also be offered in the same manner."
5.
In the instant case, keeping in view the fact that the authorities concerned intended to fill up the said post on a regular basis, wherefor the Employement Exchange was asked to sponsor the names and interview had been taken, wherein the petitioner participated, the said purported clarification cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
Mr. Banerjee submits that the scale of pay of EDDA and EDBPM is the same but the latter post carries a higher status, whereas according to the learned counsel for the respondents, the post of EDBPM is a higher post.
Be that as it may, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner himself appeared at the interview, he cannot be permitted to turn around and now contend that he should have been regularised in service.
He is estopped from doing so.
Furthermore, keeping in view the recruitment rules as also Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, prayer for regularisation made by the petitioner only on the ground that he had worked in the said post on officiating basis for some time, could not be considered.
Mr. Banerjee has placed reliance on N.S.K.
Nayar and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1992 SC 1574.
The Apex Court in that case was considering the rules under Telegraph Engineering Service (Class I) Rules, which reads thus :  "27(b) Posts in the senior time scale may, however, be filled as a purely temporary measure, in an officiating capacity to hold charge by the promotion of permanent members of Telegraph Engineering and Wireless Service, Class II, who are on the approved list for promotion to the Junior Time scale."
6.
The said decision evidently has no application in the facts of the present case, as it is well known that each case must be decided on its own facts.
Furthermore, the Apex Court may exercise its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution, which jurisdiction neither the Central Administrative Tribunal nor this Court has.
In Arun Kumar Rout and others v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1998 SC 1477 : 1998(1) SCT 331 (SC), whereupon Mr. Banerjee has placed reliance, an ad-hoc arrangement had been made and the Apex Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, in the special fact of the case, issued certain directions stating :  "These directions are given on consideration of the special facts of this case and this order being confined to the special facts of this case is not to be treated as a precedent.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of without any order as to costs.
We reasonably expect that the concerned authorities will make the exercise as early as practicable for filling up the vacant sanctioned posts preferably within a period of six months from today."
7.
As the said decision was not to be treated as a precedent, it is not a law within the meaning of Article 141 of the Constitution of India.
The Supreme Court itself in a series of decisions have held that regularisation is not a mode of recruitment.
The said decisions have been considered by Division Bench and Full Bench of this Court in WB Board of Secondary.
Education v. State of WB and others, 1997(1) CLJ 165, Debasish Dutta v. State of WB and others, 1998(2) CLJ 1, Director of Public Instructions, WB v. Dr. Asish Pal, 1998(2) CHN 241 and Ziaul Islam v. State of WB and others, CLJ 1999(1) 509 HC.
8.
For the reasns aforementioned, there is no merit in this application, which is accordingly dismissed.
Xerox certified copy of the order be supplied on priority basis.
Petition dismissed.