VK Bali, J (Oral) - Shri ML Sharma, retired Controller (Finance & Accounts) through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus so as to quash order dated 171998 (Annexure P-2) and in consequence of setting aside the order aforesaid direct the respondents to allow and disburse to him emoluments of the post of Controller (F&A) from the period from 2111989 to 2821991 and also disburse to him consequential difference of pensionary claim accruing therefrom.
2.
The facts that need a necessary mention for the relief asked for in the petition referred to above are in a very narrow compass.
After serving on various posts, petitioner came to be promoted on the post of Joint Controller (F&A) on 2681985.
Vide order dated 2111989 (Annexure P-5) the Government of Punjab upgraded the post of Chief Accounts Officer/Joint Controller (F&A) to the post of Controller (F&A) with effect from 2111989.
The petitioner while performing the duties of Controller as ordered on 25.5.1990 (Annexure P-7) superannuated on 2821991.
The only claim of the petitioner is for pay scale of the post of Controller (F&A) w.e.f.
2111989 to 2821991 on the sole ground that an employee who may be asked to perform the duties of a higher post in an officiating capacity or in any manner whatsoever is entitled to pay scale of the said post even though as such he may not be entitled to promotion on the said post.
For the relief asked for i.e. for the pay scale of Controller (F&A) Counsel relies upon the Judgment of the Apex Court in Selva Raj v. Lt. Government of Island, Port Blair and others, AIR 1999 Supreme Court 838 : 1999(2) SCT 286 (SC).
3.
The claim of the petitioner has been seriously opposed.
It has been urged before this Court that for promotion to the post of Controller (F&A) an officer has to have experience on the feeder post i.e. Joint Controller (F&A) for a period of five years in accordance with rule 6 of the Punjab State Accounts (Class I) Service Rules, 1984 as amended vide notification dated 1761985 vide Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
Petitioner had worked on the post of Joint Controller (F&A) from 2681985 and when he came to perform the duties of Controller (F&A), he had to his credit experience of about four years and three months only.
He completed five years on 2581990.
The learned counsel representing the respondent-State vehemently contents that the petitioner was not entitled to hold the post of Controller (F&A) and that is why he was only asked to perform the duties of Controller.
He was also given a special pay of Rs. 400/- per month and in these circumstances, the petitioner cannot ask for a regular pay scale attached to the post of Controller (F&A).
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the records of the case.
This Court is of the firm view that the present petitioner deserves to succeed only to limited extent.
Whereas it may be true that an officer who is performing the duties of a higher post by officiating on the post, he is entitled to regular pay scale attached to the said post, it is equally true that to hold a higher post one has necessarily to have the requisite qualifications and experience under the rules.
Rule 6 of the Punjab State Accounts (Class I) Service Rules, 1984 clothes right of promotion only if he has put in five years experience on the post of Joint Controller (F&A) which the petitioner did not concededly have when he was asked to perform the duty of Controller (F&A).
Besides the petitioner was also given special pay of Rs. 400/-.
The Supreme Court judgment Selva Raj's case (supra) cited by the learned Counsel for the petitioner does not talk of a situation, where a person performing duty of a higher post did not have the requisite qualifications to hold such a post.
This Court is of the considered view that judgment of the Supreme Court in Selva Raj's case (supra) cannot be relied upon to press the claim of payment of pay scale attached to the post of Controller (F&A).
However concededly, the petitioner acquired five years experience either on the post of Joint Controller (F&A) or higher post even though on which he was officiating or was performing the duty by 2581990 and from that date onward, he cannot be denied regular pay scale.
However, as mentioned above, petitioner superannuated on 2821991.
It is for this limited period i.e. from 2581990 to 2821991 that the petitioner shall be entitled to regular pay scale of Controller (F&A).
While giving the regular pay scale of Controller (F&A) to the petitioner from 2581990 to 2821991, obviously, the petitioner shall not be entitled to special pay of Rs. 400/-.
While making over the arrears to the petitioner, it shall be open to the respondent-State to deduct Rs. 400/- per month already made over to the petitioner as special pay consequent upon the pay scale now made admissible to the petitioner which he would have certainly got at the time of superannuation as well.
The department shall examine if petitioner by getting benefit in revision to pay scale would also get benefit on post-retiral benefits and if the same are admissible to him on the basis of the last pay drawn, then the department shall calculate the same and make over to the petitioner the arrears thereof within six weeks from today.
5.
The writ petition is partly allowed in the manner indicated above, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.