Lokeshwar Singh Panta, J - Petitioners Ms. Madhu Sood, Ms. Veena Sharma, Ms. Santosh Sharma, Ms. Kamla Thakur and Ms. Kala Sharma have filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking to issue directions to the respondents to give regular appointments to them; to grant them minimum of the regular scale of the Balsevikas employed by respondent Himachal Pradesh State Council of Child Welfare and to direct respondent No. 1 to pay the difference in salary and the arrears to which the petitioners are found entitled to.
2.
The Himachal Pradesh State Council of Child Welfare (respondent No. 1) is a Society registered under the Registration of Societies Act established for the welfare of children in Himachal Pradesh with primary aim and object to co-ordinate the activities and help the child welfare movement in the State of Himachal Pradesh by organising and maintaining Institutions for the training of Child Welfare Works and to promote their employment for the child welfare work, particularly, in the neglected areas.
The petitioners alleged that to achieve the aim and object of the Society, respondent No. 1 is running various Institutions like Balwari Centres and Creche Centres where children belonging to poor sections of the Society are being nourished and taught.
The first respondent has employed various persons as Balsevaks, Balsevikas and Balwari Teachers for running their Institutions in the State for which regular training is imparted by the Institution known as Balsevika Training Institute, Shimla which is a recognized Institution.
After a person undergoes training in the Institute, the persons so trained are being employed by the 1st respondent to serve as Balsevikas/Balwari Teachers either in the Creche Centres or Balwari Centres run by the 1st respondent.
3.
Ms. Madhu Sood (petitioner No. 1) is said to have passed her matric examination in July, 1980 and was employed as Balsevika in Patlikuhal District Kullu at a consolidated salary of Rs. 100/- per month initially.
Thereafter, she was directed to undergo Balsevika Training in Training Institute in the Session of 1983-84 which she underwent and thereafter she was posted as Balsevika on ad hoc basis by respondent No. 1 at Balwari Centre Vashisht District Kullu at a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month vide order dated 9111984 issued by the District Welfare Officer, Kullu District and marked as Annexure-PA to the writ petition.
This petitioner contended that she was transferred to village Chansari in District Kullu and was posted as Balsevika on a consolidated salary of Rs. 190/- per month but in the year 1986 her consolidated salary was enhanced to Rs. 400/- per month and since then she is serving at that place on the consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month till today.
4.
Ms. Veena Sharma (petitioner No. 2) passed her matriculation in July 1980 and was employed as Balsevika in the Creche Centre Gadauri, District Kullu on a consolidated salary of Rs. 100/- per month.
She was directed to undergo training of Balsevika in the Training Institute Shimla for the Session 1983-84 and after undergoing her training successfully, she was employed and directed to join as Balsevika in Creche Centre Gadauri on a consolidated salary of Rs. 190/- per month which was enhanced to Rs. 400/- per month in lump sum in the year 1986.
Thereafter, she was transferred to Creche Centre Devdhar Dhalpur District Kullu where she is still working and continuing as such till date.
5.
Ms. Santosh Sharma (Petitioner No. 3) alleged that after doing her Higher Secondary in April, 1977, she joined the services of respondent No. 1 on 1st of September, 1983 at a consolidated salary of Rs. 150/- per month in the Centre in Village Chansari, District Kullu, and she was also directed to undergo training of Balsevika during the Session 1983-84 and after completing the training successful, she was again posted as Balsevika in Creche Centre Chansari at a consolidated salary of Rs. 190/- per month which lateron came to be enhanced to Rs 400/- per month in the year 1986.
She contended that till date she is working as Balsevika in the same Centre.
6.
Ms. Kamla Thakur (petitioner No. 4) passed her matriculation examination in the year 1976 and thereafter was employed as Balsevika in the year 1983 in Creche Centre Fariyadi, District Kullu.
She was also asked to undergo Balsevika Training in the Session 1983-84 and after successfully completing the training she was employed as Balsevika in the Creche Centre Banjar at a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month.
From Banjar she was transferred to another Centre at Fariyadi where she is working in Tinder Creche Centre District Kullu at a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month.
7.
Ms. Kala Sharma (petitioner No. 5) stated to have passed matriculation examination and was employed as Balsevika in the Creche Centre Ramshila Akhara Bazar, Kullu, District Kullu at a consolidated salary of Rs. 400/- per month.
She also completed the training as Balsevika successfully in the Session 1985-86.
8.
All the petitioners have placed on record their certificates of successfully completing the training in the Institute and are marked as Annexure PB, PC, PD, PE and PF.
9.
The petitioners alleged in this writ petition that number of Balwari Centres and Creche Centres are being run by respondent No. 1 in the State in which there are regular posts of Balsevikas-cum-Balwari teachers but the practice of respondent No. 1 in filling up those posts in the past has been that no regular posts have been filled up by adopting a legal method.
They alleged that the posts are not being advertised nor the candidates are being requisitioned through Employment Exchanges and as such, the persons who have undergone the training of Balsevika in the earlier sessions are not being employed on regular basis which has prejudiced the rights of every person who is eligible for regular post of Balsevika-cum-Balwari Teachers.
According the petitioners respondent No. 1 has adopted the policy of pick and choose and thereby the persons who have got push and pull in the Head Office of respondent No. 1 are being appointed as Balsevikas-cum-Balwari Teachers by ignoring the preferential rights of other persons who are senior in session of the training of Balsevikas and who have got more experience to those who are regularly appointed.
The petitioners also alleged that they are being paid lump sum salary irrespective of the fact that they are senior in training and employment to those who have been employed on regular basis by respondent No. 1 and thereby the pick and choose policy of respondent No. 1 is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
10.
The petitioners stated that their functions and duties are identical and similar to those of the regularly employed Balsevikas of respondent No. 1 and those employees who have been appointed on regular basis have been paid regular pay scale of Balsevikas/Balwari Teachers whereas the petitioners have been employed on consolidated salary and that they are also entitled to the salary equivalent to the minimum in the regular pay-scale of Balsevikas which has been wrongly denied to them in illegal and unconstitutional manner by respondent No. 1.
The petitioner also stated that they have been making representation to respondent No. 1 on various occasions through their legislative representatives, but, so far respondent No. 1 has not acceded to their request as well as other similarly situated Balsevikas in other Districts.
The petitioners also alleged that one Bhupindera Devi who had undergone training of Balsevika during the Session 1985-86 has been given appointment as regular Balsevika in Chamba Town and another Balsevika by name Kubja Devi having undergone training in the Session 1984-85 has also been appointed on regular basis and besides these two women various other Balsevikas have been appointed on regular basis though they are junior in session and in employment to the petitioners but their names and bio-data were not being made available to the petitioners and in these circumstances, the petitioners are not in a position to give more examples.
On these premises, the present writ petition has been filed seeking the reliefs noticed hereinabove on the basis of discrimination and equal pay for equal work.
11.
The written statement on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 has been filed on the affidavit of Mrs. Uma Sharma, Executive Officer of the 1st respondent in which two preliminary objections have been taken.
In the 1st preliminary objection it is submitted that petitioners 1 to 3 are working as Balsevikas in the Centrally-sponsored Schemes and their pay-scales, staffing pattern etc. are governed by the Indian Council for Child Welfare (respondent No. 5 herein).
It is contended that the first respondent is running various schemes sponsored by the Union of India through respondent No. 5 and the State of Himachal Pradesh (respondent No. 3).
It is also contended that the pay- scales etc. are given to the employees working in various schemes according to the instructions issued by the financing agency and petitioners No. 1 to 3 are being given pay-scales recommended by the 5th respondent and the first respondent has no jurisdiction to provide a pay-scale different than one provided by respondent No. 5.
As a matter of fact the funds being provided by the financing agencies are according to the prescribed status of salary and the schemes in which petitioners 1 to 3 are working are wholly financed by respondent No. 5 whereas respondent No. 1 only functions as an agent to execute the scheme and channelize the funds as per instructions of the financing agencies.
12.
With regard to the working of petitioners No. 4 and 5, it is admitted that they are working in schemes sponsored by the State of Himachal Pradesh, respondent No. 3.
The contesting respondents have also stated that in all there are 158 Creche Centres out of which 122 are being run on behalf of respondent No. 5 and the remaining 36 are being executed on behalf of respondent No. 3-State.
Regarding regularisation of petitioners No. 4 and 5 and grant of higher pay-scale to them, it is submitted that at present there are no regular posts of Balsevikas available under the control of respondent No. 1.
However, it is contended that cases of regularisation and grant of equal pay-scales will be considered immediately on the availability of regular posts and necessary funds sanctioned by respondent No. 5 for the said purposes.
13.
On merits respondents 1 and 2 have stated that respondent No. 1 is not an instrumentally of the State.
It is a voluntary organization comprising founder-members, life-members and other respectable citizens, who offer their services for charitable activities and respondent No. 1 is running certain schemes on behalf of respondents No. 5 and 3 in the State who are the hundred per cent funding agencies.
In addition to these two funding agencies, respondent No. 1 raises funds from the other charitable organisations and individuals.
With regard to the payment of the consolidated salary to petitioners No. 1 to 3, respondents 1 and 2 have stated in their reply that they act according to the staffing pattern prescribed by the financing agency and in their case financing agency is respondent No. 5.
It is contended that until and unless necessary budget is provided by respondent No. 5 for payment of salary/regular pay-scales to petitioners 1 to 3, the 1st and 2nd respondents are not in a position to pay higher pay scale as prayed for by these petitioners.
Petitioners 1 to 3 are being paid Rs. 500/- inclusive of Rs. 100/- for the helper and as such an amount of Rs. 400/- only is prescribed to be given to the workers per creche by respondent No. 5 as per its circulars dated 751990 and 271991 marked as Annexures R-1/1 and R-1/2 respectively.
The contesting respondents have stated that regular payments to the posts of Balsevikas have been made on the basis of merit and suitability of the individual to the post in question and they have denied that the method adopted by them is wrong and respondent No. 1 has been appointing Balsevikas on regular basis on the basis of pick and choose policy.
However, these respondents have submitted that there are no specific instructions or rules and regulations for making appointments to the posts of Balsevikas and regular appointments if any made during the past cannot be challenged by the petitioners at this belated stage.
It is also stated that the petitioners have not specified in which cases the Balsevikas were regularized ignoring their claim and when such regularisation was made.
The allegations of pick and choose policy are vague, unspecified and uncertain and therefore, no specific reply could be given to such vague allegations.
These respondents have also stated that the petitioners have acquiesced with the present arrangements and have never objected to the amount of honorarium being paid to them since their initial appointments which were made during 1984 and 1986 and that the petitioners are debarred from agitating the matter after a lapse of 7 years when this writ petition was filed in the year 1991.
These respondents have also stated that none of the Balsevikas in the Centre has been regularised illegally and the regular appointments have been made after assessing the suitability of the individuals by the competent authority on the basis of their merit as there are no instructions or regulations requiring Balsevikas of senior session to be regularised first.
At last the contesting respondents have prayed for dismissal of the writ petition for the reasons stated in their reply-affidavit.
14.
The other respondents namely State of Himachal Pradesh, Director of Social Welfare, Himachal Pradesh and Indian Council for Child Welfare who are stated to be the Funding Agencies of the Centres being run by respondents 1 and 2 have chosen not to file their respective counters to the writ petition.
15.
In their rejoinder-affidavit the petitioners have denied the averments made by the contesting respondents in their reply-affidavit and re- asserted and re-affirmed their averments made in the writ petition.
The petitioners have stated that for the purpose of deciding this writ petition it is not required that under what scheme the writ petitioners are working but the main crux of the matter is that the petitioners being similarly situate to those of the other persons employed by the respondents on regular basis, the petitioners are also entitled to get minimum regular pay-scale of Rs. 950-1800 of Balsevikas.
They have further stated that simply because they did not object to the honorarium being paid to them since their initial appointments, they cannot be denied the same at this stage because there cannot be any estoppel against the Fundamental Rights as guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
16.
We have heard learned counsel on either side and perused the material on record.
17.
Mr. BK Malhotra, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contended that the petitioners are working with respondents 1 and 2 since their initial appointments after successfully completing the course of the posts for which they were initially appointed and on the doctrine of `Equal pay for equal work' which is constitutional obligation on the part of the respondents, the petitioners cannot be denied the benefit of equal pay for equal work by the respondents more particularly by respondent No. 1 when the petitioners are performing same and similar nature of duties which are being carried out by regularly appointed Balsevikas.
In support of his submissions, learned counsel has relied upon a judgment of the Apex Court in Bhagwan Dass and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2049 and a decision of Division Bench of this Court in Vidya Sharma and others v. State of Himachal Pradesh, I.L.R.
1988-HP-629.
18.
Per contra Mr. KD Shridhar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 has contended that there are two sets of employees who are the petitioners in this writ petition and they are being employed in two different funding agency schemes.
Petitioners 1 to 3 are working in the schemes which are being 100 per cent funded by the Indian Council for Child Welfare whereas petitioners 3 and 5 are being employed in the schemes which are wholly being funded by the State of Himachal Pradesh.
The honorarium as being fixed by Indian Council of Child Welfare (respondent No. 5) is being paid to those petitioners who are working in those schemes.
Similarly, according to the learned counsel, the petitioners who are working against the schemes being wholly funded by the State Government are being salary as provided by the Funding Agency and respondent No. 1-Council cannot enhance the amount of salary being paid to the petitioners unless the Funding Agencies grant the pay-scale to the petitioners.
19.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties we propose to deal with the doctrine of `Equal pay for equal work' as contained in Article 39(d) of the Constitution.
Equal pay for equal work are not expressly declared by the Constitution to be a fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principle of State Policy as contained in Article 39(d) of the Constitution "Equal pay for equal work" has assumed the status of fundamental right in service jurisprudence having regard to the Constitutional mandate of equality in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Equal pay for equal work and providing security for service by regularising casual employment within a reasonable period has been accepted by the Apex Court as a constitutional goal to our socialistic pattern.
It is the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensures a welfare socialistic pattern of a State providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similarly placed employees of the State.
The Apex Court has enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice in a number of decisions.
(See : Randhir Singh v. Union of India, 1982(1) SCC 618 : 1999(3) S.C.T.
663, Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P&T Department v. Union of India, 1988(1) SCC 122; Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, 1986(1) SCC 637; Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, 1986(1) SCC 639; RD Gupta v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi Administration, 1987(4) SCC 505; Bhagwan Daass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2049) Jaipal v. State of Haryana, 1988(3) SCC 354; Dharwad District PWD Literate Daily Wage Employees Association v. State of Karnataka, 1990(2) SCC 396; Garib Kalyan Kendra Workers' Union v. Union of India, 1991(1) SLR 618; State of Madhya Pradesh v. Pramod Bhartya, 1993(1) Supreme Court Cases 539 : 1993(1) SCT 138 (SC); State of West Bengal v. Monirujjaman Mullick, 1996(4) SLR 605 : 1996(4) SCT 182 (SC) and Sita Devi v. State of Haryana, 1996(10) SCC 1 : 1996(4) SCT 185 (SC).
Therefore, the principle of equal pay for equal work even in an establishment which is an instrumentality of a State is applicable to its full vigour.
20.
The question then arises whether the respondents have practised discrimination in denying the petitioners pay which the respondent No. 1 has been paying to other similarly placed employees doing the same or similar work.
The question is of primary importance which requires investigation of facts.
Unless it is demonstrated that the petitioners are discriminated in matters relating to pay and other emoluments with other similarly placed employees, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be applied.
While considering this question it is not necessary to find out similarly by mathematics formula but there must be a reasonable similarly in the nature of work, performance of duties, the qualification and the quality of work performed by them.
It is permissible to have classification in services based on hierarchy of posts, pay scale, value of work and responsibility and experience.
The classification must, however, have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
In other words the question is whether respondent No. 1-Council is guilty of unlawful discrimination in refusing to extend the pay-scale which has been extended to the regular employees holding the same posts in the employment of respondent No. 1-Council.
The petitioners have not shown that they are holding the same and similar professional qualifications, discharging the same and similar duties which are being discharged by the regular Balsevikas employed by respondent No. 1-Council.
The allegations of the petitioners that they are similarly situate in all respects as the regular Balsevikas are too vague and uncertain.
The petitioners have not brought on record any material which can be taken into consideration giving them the relief sought for in this writ petition.
The petitioners have not spelled out in the writ petition as to how many posts are regular/permanent or temporary of the Balsevikas which have been filled in by respondent No. 1-Council giving preferential treatment to the said employees over and above the petitioners.
In the absence of any material brought on record, we are not inclined to accept the contentions of the petitioners that they have been discriminated in the party of pay-scales.
It has been specifically stated by respondent No. 1-Council that all the petitioners have been engaged on honorarium basis by respondent No. 5-Indian Council for Child Welfare.
There is no enforceable provisions under which the petitioners in this writ petition can either get equal pay for equal work at par with the regular Balsevikas alleged to have been appointed by respondent No. 1 - Council.
Therefore, the first relief claimed by the petitioner cannot be granted to them in this writ petition.
21.
There is no dispute that all the Centres being run by 1st respondent- Council are being given 100% grant-in-aid by the State of Himachal Pradesh and Indian Council for Child Welfare and respondent No. 1-Council is an instrumentally of the State.
It has been alleged by the petitioners and admitted by respondent No. 1-Council that there are no specific instructions or rules and regulations for making appointments to the posts of Balsevikas on regular basis framed by it and regular appointments, if any, made during the past were made on merits and suitability of the individual to the post in question.
This method adopted by respondent No. 1-Council is unwarranted and unknown to law respondent No. 1-Council is a registered society and it is hundred percent funded by the State Government and Indian Council for Child Welfare, therefore, respondent No. 1-Council is under obligation to frame guidelines/Policy/Rules or Regulations for appointments of its employees by adopting some method known to law and respondent No. 1-Council cannot be permitted to make the appointments on whims and fancies of the Incharge of the Council in the State.
22.
In this view of the matter, we direct the concerned authority of the respondents to frame some guidelines/policy/Rules and Regulations governing the appointments, regularization etc. of the employees of respondent No. 1- Council.
The process for framing of such guidelines, policy, rules or regulations shall be undertaken by the concerned respondents and finalized within 6 months from this date.
23.
However, the dismissal of the writ petition of the petitioners shall not debar them from making appropriate representations to the respondents vindicating their grievances made in this writ petition.
It is for the concerned authorities to consider their representations sympathetically if and when so made having regard to the fact that the petitioners have been in service for such a long time and having in mind the provisions of Articles 14, 16, 21 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India and dispose of such representations within 6 months from the receipt thereof.
24.
For the above reasons, discussion and observations, the writ petition stands dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.