Basudeva Panigrahi, J - This writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against respondents, particularly respondent Nos. 3 and 4 by making a prayer therein to issue confirmation letter in favour of the petitioner for the post of Assistant Teacher (Physical Training) in terms of the service condition as laid down in the Code of Regulation for Anglo Indian and other listed schools 1993 and to disburse the full salary in her favour as per the condition of services of staff.
The petitioner has stated inter alia that she was appointed as an Assistant Teacher (P.T.)
in Saint Joseph Convent School, Chandannagore, against a regular vacancy since 3rd April, 1996.
The respondent No. 3 has been receiving dearness allowance from the Government of West Bengal and also performing a public duty.
Pursuant to a regular vacancy of an assistant teacher (physical training) in the Saint Joseph Convent School, the petitioner had, thus, applied and was successful in interview followed by a letter of appointment on and from 3rd April, 1996.
As per the regulation No. 21 sub-regulation (a) thereof, ordinarily a teacher appointed against a permanent vacancy should be confirmed within one year from the date of appointment but the probation period may be extended by a further period of one year.
If no such extension has been made, the said teacher shall be deemed to be confirmed in that appointment.
The petitioner was since appointed on 3rd April, 1996 against a regular vacancy, her probation expired on or from about 2nd April, 1997.
No notice for a further probation period of one year was served upon her within 2nd April, 1997.
Therefore, it is according to the petitioner to presume that she was deemed to have been regularly appointed after expiry of the probation period.
The management allowed the petitioner a sum of Rs. 2,500/- consolidated pay per month.
Initially she was given a consolidated salary of Rs. 2,000/- per month which was subsequently enhanced to Rs. 3,500/-.
Therefore, she made a representation before the management to allow her the usual salary as other teaching staff were receiving.
The respondent No. 4 seems to have sent a reply on 1st March, 1999 that her case would be considered after the respondent No. 4 would be free from the burden of process of examination of the students.
Even thereafter the petitioner did not receive any positive reply, therefore, her apprehension was gradually hardened into true that she had been discriminated compared to other teaching staff.
She also received similar reply on 17th March, 1999.
Thus in the aforementioned situation she was forced to file the present case.
The school authority, namely the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have filed an application for vacating the interim stay which was subsequently treated as affidavit in opposition.
They strongly disputed and denied that the petitioner was appointed as a permanent staff in a permanent vacancy and was kept on probation.
The respondents have, further, claimed that the petitioner having come to the court with unclean hands by making untrue and misleading statement deliberately in order to get the ex parte order as would be evident from the facts and documents in affidavit in opposition such interim order should be vacated.
2.
The need for a temporary appointment of an assistant teacher in physical training arose during the pendency of litigation by two permanent physical training teachers Mrs. Kavita Neogi and Mrs. Kajali Bhattachariya against whom the disciplinary proceedings were initiated and they were placed under suspension by the School authority in 1993.
Those two teachers had further challenged the order of suspension in the Civil Court of Chandannagore and obtained an order of injunction.
As a result, they have continued to enjoy the benefits without work.
Challenging the aforesaid order passed by the court below, the respondents had filed a civil revision in CO No. 1909 of 1998.
In the aforesaid circumstances when there was no physical training assistant teacher in the school, therefore, the management deemed it proper to manage the Classes, issued an order of appointment on 3rd April, 1996 to the petitioner for a period from 1st April, 1996 till the end of the session, i.e. the last day of March, 1997 on a consolidated salary.
3.
The respondents have further stated that on expiry of the term of appointment the petitioner was appointed again on a purely temporary basis on 1st April, 1997 till the end of March, 1998.
The second letter of appointment will indicate the terms and conditions of appointment and the petitioner has agreed to such terms by putting her signature.
Those facts have been suppressed by the petitioner and she has unreasonably held back the appointment letter deliberately.
4.
By a letter dated 6th August, 1998 the petitioner was informed that her agreement with the managing committee as an assistant teacher for physical training is renewed for the present academic year 1998-99.
Had these appointment letters been brought to the notice of the court while the petitioner moved the interim injunction, possibly, the court could have declined to grant any interim relief.
Since the petitioner seeks equitable relief she should not have behaved in the manner as she did in this case.
Therefore, her application should be dismissed on that ground alone.
5.
Mr. Banerjee, the learned Advocate appearing for the writ petitions had vehemently argued that the petitioner was appointed against a permanent vacancy and she has been continuing till today, no condition was mentioned in her appointment letter that the petitioner shall serve in a leave vacancy.
She is working in an approved sanction post.
Before issuing the order of appointment to the petitioner the managing committee scrupulously and meticulously followed the recruitment procedure.
But when she claimed usual salary in par with the other teaching staff, possibly, the managing committee did not appreciate the claim of the petitioner, therefore, they unlawfully, whimsically and illegally wanted to get rid of the petitioner.
6.
Mr. Sarkar, the learned Advocate appearing for the Managing Committee has, however, argued with strong intensity of conviction that the petitioner having suppressed the material facts in the writ petition by not stating that she was appointed in a temporary vacancy, her writ petition on that ground alone should be dismissed.
She has not come to the court with clean hands while withholding the letter of appointment which would disclose that her appointment was only for one year.
The second appointment was also on the same term.
The third appointment revealed that the petitioner would serve for a temporary period.
Therefore, the petitioner does not have any lien of service and accordingly the writ petition should be dismissed.
The expression probation has not been mentioned in the appointment letter.
Regulation 21A of the regulation has laid down the procedure for appointment in the case of a temporary vacancy.
Regulation 21C had laid down the procedure in respect of permanent vacancy and there may be a situation for keeping a staff appointed against a permanent vacancy under probation.
Regulation 21E will hold the field in case of a permanent vacancy.
The Clauses in the appointment letter would, however, reveal that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis by mentioning the period therein.
Therefore, in the aforesaid situation the petitioner has to be treated to have been employed for a temporary period.
7.
While examining the rival contentions advanced by both parties, it is necessary to go in depth about Clause 21 of Code of Regulation Anglo Indian and other listed Schools 1993.
Both parties have admitted that the said Regulation is applicable to this case.
8.
Regulation 21 is quoted hereunder :-  "Appointment of all categories of staff shall be made as per rules framed by the founder.
Every employee, whether a teaching or a non-teaching staff, shall be engaged by a letter of appointment which shall state clearly the type of employment offered - Permanent, temporary or against a leave vacancy.
The letter of appointment shall describe the nature of the duties, salary and emoluments, term for which the employment is offered, the period of probation, if any, requirement of training and manner of termination of the appointment.
In the case of an appointment against a permanent vacancy, the terms and conditions of appointment, salary, initial salary and retiring benefits shall be stated clearly in writing and shall be signed by both the parties and returned to the school.
A copy of the same shall be given to the teacher for future reference.
Ordinarily, a teacher appointed against a permanent vacancy will be placed on probation, a letter terminating the service or extending the period of probation, as the case may be, shall be served to him/her, one month before the end of the probationary period filling which, the teacher will be deemed to be confirmed in that appointment."
9.
The petitioner has, however, not enclosed any letter of appointment issued by the managing committee.
The respondent 4 and 5 have placed the xerox copy of the appointment letter dated 3496.
In the appointment letter it has been clearly stated that the petitioner was appointed on a purely temporary basis for a period from 1496 to end of March, 1997 at Rs. 2,000/- per month.
It has been further laid down that during the period of appointment the managing committee of the school will be entitled to terminate the service even before the expiry of the period for which the petitioner was appointed without assigning any reason whatsoever upon one month notice in writing.
In the appointment letter the petitioner as well as the Headmistress of School had signed.
Similarly, she was appointed temporarily from 1st April, 1997 till 1st March, 1998 at Rs. 2,460/- upon same terms and conditions including the termination of service.
The managing committee further issued a notice that the petitioner's service was no longer required after 31st March, 1999.
The managing committee does not wish to re-appoint her.
10.
From the Regulation it is crystal clear that the letter of appointment shall precisely describe the nature of duties, the salary and emoluments, terms on which the employment is offered.
From the xerox copy of the letter of appointment, it has been disclosed that it was for temporary period for one year and after expiry of one year a fresh letter of appointment was given for a further period of one year.
The appointment letter, however, is silent as regards the period of probation.
In case of appointment against a permanent vacancy the appointment order should further disclose salary, all allowances, initial salary and the retirement benefits.
In such case it should be signed by both parties.
Therefore, those terms are conspicuously absent in the appointment letter.
The respondent Nos. 3 and 4, however, have advanced a contention that since there are two cases pending in respect of assistant teacher in physical training there was pressing exigency for appointing a temporary teacher to obviate the said impasse.
11.
Mr. Banerjee has relied upon a decision reported in 1997 (II) page 613 in the case of Don Bosko School and another v. Luton Thakur and others and has contended that the managing committee cannot claim an unlimited right to run the institution in accordance with their own whims.
"The administration does not, however, include maladiminstration".
Such privilege is not a unfettered right but is subject to the principle of equality in the eye of law natural justice, impartiality and human rights.
On a careful reading of the facts of that case I found Luton Thakur was appointed as a permanent teacher after expiry of probation but thereafter his services were terminated without following any disciplinary proceedings.
Therefore, there was such occasion for the court to heavily comment upon the managing committee.
But in this case I found from the terms of appointment that the writ petitions was favoured with an order of appointment for a specific term and after its expiry she was further given a fresh appointment.
The terms of the appointment also clearly envisaged that it could be terminated even during the continuance of term with one month salary.
Therefore, in my considered view after expiry of the term, the petitioner cannot claim any legal right against the management to confirm her in the said post.
12.
The petitioner having been appointed against a suspended or vacancy for a temporary period not even on probation, therefore, she cannot claim right to be appointed permanently.
Thus I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
Accordingly the same is dismissed but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.