SS Sudhalkar, J - This appeal is filed by the defendant-appellants who have lost in both the courts below.
The respondents are ex-servicemen having served the Indian Army.
In the Army, they were drawing salary of Rs. 215/- and 291/- respectively, per month.
After the retirement from the Army, they joined service under the appellant-Punjab State Electricity Board (in short "PSEB") as Firemen in the pay scale of Rs. 110-300 on 671977 and 23121977 respectively.
Subsequently, the pay scale was revised to Rs. 400-650 with effect from 111978.
The respondents claimed that as per rule 720 of Punjab Civil Services Rules (in short "the Rules") which have been adopted by the PSEB, they were required to be given benefit of the pay which they were actually drawing in the Army when they were retired and when they were drawing Rs. 215/- and Rs. 291/- per month respectively in the Army, their salary at the time of entry into PSEB should have been fixed at the same figure.
This benefit was not given and hence they filed a suit for mandatory injunction.
The appellants contested the suit.
The fact that the respondents were drawing salary of Rs. 215/- and Rs. 291/- per month respectively at the time of their retirement from the Army is admitted.
They also admitted that rule 720 of the Rules was applicable to the case of the respondents.
However, the defence of the appellants is that the scales of the Central Government employees were revised w.e.f.
111973 and the dearness allowance and additional allowance which was admissible to the Government employees on 111973 was merged in their basic pay and they started drawing more basic pay than the employees of the State Government.
It is their contention that the scales of State Government employees were revised with effect from 111978 and with effect from that date scales of State Government employees and Central Government employees came at par.
It is further their contention that though equal emoluments were drawn by the Central Government employees and State Government employees with effect from 111973 to 111978, yet there was lot of difference of basic pay between the two sets of employees and, therefore, the respondents were not covered under rule 720 of the Rules.
Other contentions regarding bar of time etc. and locus standi were taken.
The suit was decreed.
The appeal filed by the appellants was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Bathinda and hence this second appeal is before this court.
2.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.
There is no dispute regarding the facts and the rule 720 of the Rules.
The dispute is a limited one i.e. the pay scales of the Central Government employees having been revised and the DA being merged, whether the respondents are not entitled to the benefit of rule 720 of the Rules because in this way they would get double advantage.
4.
The lower appellate court has held that the said rule has not made any distinction between when the scales of the Central Government employees were revised and when the scales of the State Government employees were revised and it has not accepted the DA which was added to the basic pay.
The lower appellate court, however, accepted the cross objections and ordered that the arrears so calculated would be limited to three years immediately prior to the filing of the suit.
Learned counsel for the appellants argued that similar matter arose before this court in RSA No. 773 of 1997.
In that case the learned Additional District Judge had affirmed the judgment of the Sub Judge I Class Bathinda and decreed the suit and claim in the suit was for mandatory injunction to the effect that the defendants be directed to fix the salary of the plaintiffs according to rule 720 of the Rules and to make payment of arrears as per Government notifications dated 1511983 and 781985 which have been adopted by the PSEB.
The appellants had filed the second appeal and the same was dismissed by a short order "No. merit.
Dismissed".
The matter went upto the Supreme Court where SLP 5113 of 1998 was filed.
The same was also dismissed on 191998.
I am shown copies of the orders of this court and the Supreme Court.
5.
In view of the above position, there appears to be no reason for not accepting the reasons adopted by the Courts below.
Rule 720 of the Rules is reproduced as under :  "When Junior Commissioner (Commissioned ?)
Officer of the rank formerly in military service contains (obtains ?)
employment in Civil department, after having been granted military pension, he shall continue to draw his military pension.
His pay in the Civil post shall be fixed at a stage in the time scale of the Civil Post which is equal to the basic pay exclusive of allowances of any kind drawn at time of retirement or, if there is no such stage, the stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference to be observed in to next increment, subject to the condition that it shall not in any case be below the minimum or above the maximum of the time scale of the Civil Post in which he is re-employed.
He will be allowed to draw usual annual increments in the time scale of the Civil Post."
6.
There is no distinction made in the rule for excluding those retired Army personnel who had their pay revised before retirement.
In view of the above position, this appeal is without merit and deserves to be dismissed.
As a result, this appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.