SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner completed her MBBS in the year 1987.
The petitioner was serving as PCMS Doctor since 871991.
She wanted to get admission in the Post Graduate Degree course.
The provisions for admission as per the notification dated 2421992 and the prospectus were as under :  "According to rule 13, 25% of the total number of seats were to be filled, speciality-wise on all India basis through a competitive entrance test.
Of the remaining seats 60% were to be filled from the eligible in - service candidates having service as PCMS for atleast 5 years while the remaining 40% seats were to be filled from amongst fresh graduates.
That rule 15 pertains to reservation of seats stipulated that 25% seats will be reserved for scheduled castes/schedules tribes and NOTE (b) to rule 15 stipulated that the roster for the reserve points in the various specialities will be made on the basis of the combined seats in all the medical colleges."
2.
The petitioner who was serving as PCMS Doctor since 871991, applied for admission to Post Graduate Course in the 40% category of fresh graduates.
Admittedly he had not completed five years as PCMS for consideration of her admission in the 60% quota as mentioned in the prospectus mentioned above.
3.
Vide Public Notice dated 25.4.1992 published in the English "Tribune" (copy annexure P/1), the general public was informed that the Punjab Govt. has decided that those doctors who are in service (PCMS) and have not completed the period of five years can apply and get provisional roll number.
It will be appropriate to quote the public notice Annexure P/1 as under :  DIRECTOR RESEARCH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION PUNJAB, CHANDIGARH PUBLIC NOTICE IT IS HEREBY INFORMED TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC THAT PUNJAB GOVT. HAS DECIDED THAT THOSE DOCTORS WHO ARE IN SERVICE (PCMS) AND HAVE NOT COMPLETED THE PERIOD OF 5 YEARS CAN APPLY AND GET PROVISIONAL ROLL NO. FOR APPEARING IN P.G.
TEST FROM THE PUNJABI UNIVERSITY, PATIALA WHICH IS BEING CONDUCTED BY PUNJABI UNIVERSITY, PATIALA.
SD/- ASSTT/DEPUTY DIRECTOR, 25.4.1992.
(MEDICAL EDUCATION) FOR DIRECTOR RESEARCH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION, PUNJAB, CHANDIGARH.
4.
The petitioner was not called for the interview.
So her father made representation Annexure P/2.
Ultimately, as her request was not heeded to, she has filed this writ petition.
It is also contended by the petitioner that respondents No. 5 and 6 who were also serving as a Medical Officers like the petitioner, had applied in 40% quota and they were given admission.
It is also contended that respondents No. 7 and 8 who had also applied in the 40% quota and secured less marks than the petitioner were given admission in the diploma course of Anaesthesia and DGO respectively in the Scheduled Caste category.
In the written statement to this para, it is contended that only those candidates have been considered for admission to Post-Graduate course in session 1992 who have applied as fresh graduates and have not claimed as PCMS candidates in their application forms.
5.
In the written statements various contentions raised by the petitioner are denied.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
It may be worthwhile to mention here that the petitioner was granted provisional admission by the order of this Court.
Order dated 28.9.1992 may be quoted as under :-  "Counsel for the petitioner states that respondents No. 6, 7 and 8 have been admitted to the course in spite of the fact that the petitioner who is similarly situated as they are and is higher on merit, has been denied the admission.
Prima facie, in view of the written statement filed, no distinguishing feature for treating the petitioner differently than respondents No. 6, 7 and 8 has been pointed out.
In view of this, the writ petition is admitted.
The respondents are directed to grant provisional admission to the petitioner subject to the result of the writ petition according to the merit."
Thereafter on 851995, this Court had passed the following order :  "Let this misc. application be listed for hearing along with the main writ petition on July 3, 1995 at No. 1.
In the meanwhile, the respondents will accept the petitioner's application for permission to appear in the examination and issue the roll No., if necessary."
8.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is three fold.
The Public Notice Annexure P/1 was published after the petitioner had applied for the post; secondly, there is discrimination as other similarly situated persons were given admission and, thirdly, that now she has completed the course, the same may be regularised.
Photocopy of the application form of the petitioner has been shown by the learned DAG, Punjab.
It is dated 951992.
The petitioner was, at that time, serving and as per the statement of learned counsel for the petitioner, she left service on 5111992.
The petitioner has filled up the form by answering the questions as under :  (a) Are you a regular PCMS employee ?
Yes.
(b) Whether eligible to apply under 60% quota ?
No. 9.
Actually because of the policy as per Public Notice Annexure P/1, the petitioner who was at that time employed as PCMS doctor, was eligible to apply in 60% quota, though she has written "No" in the application.
This is one factor.
There is no denial to the allegation of the petitioner that similarly situated persons who had applied in the 40% quota were also given admission though they were PCMS doctors.
No reason is shown for the discrimination.
Learned State counsel has relied on various authorities.
He has cited before me the case of Kumari Madhuri Patil and another v. Addl.
Commissioner, Tribal Development and others, AIR 1995 SC 94 : 1995(1) SCT 261 (SC).
In that case it is held that "one who comes to the Court with false claim, cannot plead equity nor the court would be justified to exercise equity jurisdiction in his favour."
It is also held that "there is no estoppel as no promise of the social status is made by the State when a false plea was put forth for the social status recognised".
However, it can be found that in that case it is also held that false social status certificate was secured and orders of the court are used to gain admission and the judicial process is made use of to secure admission.
However, though the Supreme Court upheld the cancellation and confiscation of appellant and of Suchita of social status as Mahadeo Koli, it also held that :  "But for the fact that she has completed the entire course except to appear for the final examination, we would have directed to debar her from prosecuting the studies and appearing in the examination.
In this factual situation no useful purpose would be served to debar her from appearing for the examination of final year MBBS.
Therefore, we uphold the cancellation of the social status as Mahadeo Koli fraudulently obtained by Km.
Suchita Laxman Patil, but she be allowed to appear for the final year examination of MBBS course.
She will not, however, be entitled in future for any benefits on the basis of the fraudulent social status as Mahadeo Koli."
It is further held therein that the aforesaid direction should not be treated and used as a precedent in future cases to give any similar directions since the same defeats constitutional goals.
10.
In the case of Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University and another, AIR 1986 SC 1448, it is upheld as under :  "We would, therefore, notwithstanding the view taken by us in this judgment allow the appellants to continue their studies in the respective Engineering Colleges in which they were granted admission."
11.
The present case is on much better footing.
The petitioner was a PCMS doctor when she applied and she was eligible under 60% quota, though she had written "No" against the relevant column.
The other similarly situated persons were given admission and the respondents should not have been hypotechnical in denying the admission to the petitioner in above mentioned situation.
As a PCMS doctor by virtue of policy Annexure P/1, she could have got admission in the PCMS quota.
In view of these factors and the fact that the petitioner has now completed the studies, I find that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
12.
As a result, I allow this writ petition and direct that the admission of the petitioners be treated as regular.
Petition allowed.