SR Nayak, J - A very stale matter has been brought the Court by way of this writ petition after a lapse of more than six (6) long years.
Let me first state the facts pleaded by the petitioner in brief as under :  In the year 1990, the predecessor-in-office of the 3rd respondent requested the Employment Exchange to sponsor the names of eligible persons for appointment to the post of Conductors on daily wage basis.
Accordingly, the Employment Exchange sponsored the name of the petitioner.
The petitioner was directed by the predecessor of the 3rd respondent to make an application for the post of Conductor on daily wage basis.
The application was accordingly submitted by the petitioner.
The petitioner was selected for the post on 20.9.1990.
The petitioner was deputed to undergo training for a period of two months.
The petitioner completed the training and he was appointed as Conductor on daily wage basis and posted to work as Probation Conductor for one month at Barkatputra Depot during August, 1991.
There afterwards the services of the petitioner were dispensed with.
The petitioner personally met the 2nd respondent and the 3rd respondent and gave several letters to them with a request to give him posting.
The request of the petitioner went unheeded.
So averring and alleging, the instant writ petition is filed praying for Mandamus declaring the action of the respondents 2 to 4 in not appointment the petitioner as Conductor in the Secunderabad Division after selecting him with Sl.
No. 1911 as arbitrary, illegal, against the rules, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and for a consequential direction to the respondents to appoint him as Conductor with immediate effect.
2.
In my considered opinion, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed in limine on the ground of laches itself.
Even accepting the whole case of the petitioner as correct, I do not find any explanation offered in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition why the petitioner kept aloof without seeking legal remedies either before the Industrial Court or before this Court by way of judicial review for a long period of more than six years.
The affidavit averments are as vague as they could be.
Specifies are wanting.
Though the petitioner has stated that he went to the respondent No. 2 and made enquiries about the matter, the petitioner quite curiously has not given the dates on which he met the respondents or the dates on which he made representations to the other respondents.
The petitioner has also not produced the copies of the so-called appointment order given to him in the year 1991.
Even assuming that the petitioner made certain representation to the respondents 2 to 4, after his alleged disengagement in the month of September, 1991, that fact itself cannot be a mitigating circumstance to overlook the inordinate delay in approaching this Court.
It is needless to state that the representations made to the respondents 2 to 4, in the nature of things, are extra-legal in nature.
The Supreme Court, in Rabindra v. Union of India, 1972(2) SCR 697, State of Orissa v. Pyarimohan, AIR 1976 SC 2617 and large number of other cases to follow, opined that making repeated representations would not exonerate delay in moving the Court.
Further the Supreme Court in Naib Subedar v. Union of India, 1997 UJ SC 353 opined that pursuing an ill-conceived remedy is not a proper explanation for the delay.
The repeated representations made before the respondents 2 to 4, even accepting to be true cannot be a valid circumstance to condone the inordinate delay of roughly seven (7) years.
There is also no merit in the claim of the petitioner.
Service of a daily wager for a specific term can be terminated by the employer in terms of the conditions incorporated in the appointment order, and such action of the employer does not violate any law.
3.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed on the ground of laches as well as on merit.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.