Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner who was discharged from the Indian Army on Medical grounds with disability of 30% has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for a direction to the respondents to sanction and pay disability pension to the petitioner.
He further prays for quashing Annexure P/11, the order passed by the respondents rejecting such request of the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army on 27.1.1966 and because of his performance he was given different promotions from time to time and was ultimately discharged on medical grounds from Army on 3111981 after 15 years and 4 days of active service.
At the time of discharge the Medical Board assessed the disability of the petitioner at 30% and the case was recommended for grant pension on that basis.
However, the case of the petitioner was rejected by the Accountant General Branch.
The petitioner moved various representations and then served a legal notice on 21.4.1997 through his counsel.
This notice was replied to by the authorities concerned reiterating the rejection on the ground that the disability of the petitioner was neither attributable not aggravated by army service.
This compelled the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
From the above noted undisputed facts it is clear that the service of the petitioner for 15 years 4 days in Army is not disputed.
It is also not disputed that he was discharged from the Army on Medical grounds with recommended disability of 30% by the Medical Board.
The only objection raised by the respondents earlier and even in the reply filed before this Court now is that "it is further submitted that the petitioner is not entitled to grant of disability pension since his disability was not considered as either attributable to or aggravated by military service.
Further, Rule 7(b) is to be read along with Rule 7(c) and it has to be established as a matter of fact that conditions of military service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease ........."  4.
At the very outset it will be relevant to refer to the reply given by the respondents to the legal notice served upon the respondents by the Advocate on behalf of the petitioner.
The relevant portion of the reply reads as under :  "No. 13729811 Ex Lnk Gian Chand was enrolled in the Army on 27th Jan, 1966.
He was transferred to pension establishment on fulfilling the terms of engagement under Rule 13III(i) of Army Rules, 1954.
At the time of retirement Release Medical Board was held which recommended him to be released in medical category (C&E) permanent with 30% disability.
Accordingly his case was forwarded to CDA (P) Allahabad for disability pension.
But CDA (P) Allahabad had rejected the disability pension claim as the disability suffered by the individual during his service in the Army was not considered attributable to military service.
Legal notice served by No. 1377229811 Ex Lnk Gian Chand has been examined and ignored by the Army Headquarter.
Please inform the petitioner accordingly."
From the above admission of the respondents it is clear that the petitioner at the time of his enrollment in the Army was not found suffering from any disease nor any such entry was recorded upon his medical examination in his service record.
The above noting of the Medical Board, thus, leaves no onus to be discharged by the petitioner in regard to disability being more than 20% and entitlement of the petitioner to the claim of disability pension.
In the case of Union of India and others v. Bodan Lal Yadav, 1994(1) SCT 369 (P&H) : 1994(1) R.S.J.
381, the Court took the view that no adverse inference could be drawn against member of the armed forces in relation to disease-oriented disability unless such entry was made on his record at the time of enrollment.
5.
In reply it is stated that as per the released medical board proceedings the petitioner was suffering from acute Mocar Dial Infraction and, thus, was not able to maintain required physical standards.
The petitioner was admitted to Army Hospital, Rani Khet on 3041980 and thereafter was discharged on 2481980.
6.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner placed reliance upon Appendix-II referring to Regulations 48, 173 and 185 of the Pension Regulations relating to the entitlement rules for Casualty Pensionary Award, 1982.
Under the head "prior to and during the service" effect of such disablement has been dealt with under Clauses (5) and (6) of the said Appendix.
The said clauses read as under :  "5.
The approach to the question of entitlement to casualty pensionary awards and evaluation of disabilities shall be based on the following presumptions :- Prior to and during service  a) A member is presumed to have been in sound physical and mental condition upon entering service except as to physical disabilities noted or recorded at the time of entrance.
b) In the event of his subsequently being discharged from service on medical grounds any deterioration in his health which has taken place is due to service.
6.
Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to military service provided it is certified by appropriate medical authority that :- a) the disablement is due to a wound, injury or disease which (i) is attributable to military service, or (ii) existed before or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
This will also include the precipitating/hastening of the onset of a disability.
b) the death was due to or hastened by -  (i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to military service; or (ii) the aggravation by military service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during military service."
7.
The ancillary question, therefore, now arises is what onus the petitioner is required to discharge in relation to the medical disablement resulting in the release from the Army.
In this regard reference to Clauses (7 to 9) of the same Appendix II would be appropriately referred to :-  "7.
Where there is no note in contemporary official records of a material fact on which the claim is based, other reliable corroborative evidence of that fact may be accepted.
8.
Attributability/aggravation shall be conceded if casual connection between death/disablement and military service is certified by appropriate medical authority.
Onus of proof 9.
The claimant shall not be called upon to prove the conditions of entitlements.
He/she will receive the benefit of any reasonable doubt.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimants in field/afloat service cases."
8.
The classification of diseases as postulated under the annexure to the rules/regulations under the head "B-diseases affected by stress and strain", the disease of Myocarditis-acute or chronic has been specifically noticed.
The analytic examination of the above regulations/instructions read in conjunction with Rule 173 of the Pension Rules governing the subject shows that it is certainly difficult for this Court to hold that the petitioner's claim was not tenable for grant of disability pension.
It is not clear from the record as to on what basis the respondents held that the disability suffered was not attributable to military service.
Even if such disability was not attributable to military service simplicitor, it would be stated to be aggravated because of strain and stress of the Army duties.
The strain and stress could lead to such aggravation is clear from the aforestated instructions.
9.
Lastly, the learned counsel for Union of India contended that the claim of the petitioner was a belated one and suffer from laches.
The petitioner had made various representations which were firstly not replied to and it was only after service of a legal notice that the reply dated 2561997 was sent by the respondents to the petitioner.
Thus, vide letter dated 2561997 a definite cause of action accrued in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.
Even otherwise, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of SR Bhanrale v Union of India and others, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 27 : 1996(4) SCT 573 (SC) has already held that claim to pension is a continuing recurring cause of action and as such would not be hit by the plea of laches or delay.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case Sant Parkash v. Union of India, 1994(1) SCT 665 (P&H) : 1994(3) R.S.J.
498 has also held that the claim of disability pension cannot be frustrated for reason of delay.
10.
Another reason for rejecting this contention is that the petitioner was entitled to the relief as per the record of the respondents itself.
This relief was denied to the petitioner for all these years for no fault of the petitioner.
The Union of India cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong by raising the plea of laches.
Grant of pension is not ex-gratia payment by the State.
It is a right of an employee.
Once the employee fulfils the conditions of entitlement under the Rules, he cannot be denied and his such claim would be legitimately due by process of law.
11.
For the reasons afore-stated, the writ petition of the petitioner is accepted.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner afresh for grant of disability pension is accordance with law.
The petitioner shall be paid all the benefit accruing therefrom.
However, the respondents have a right to subject the petitioner to a re-survey Medical Board for the purposes of continuing the disability pensionary benefits to the petitioner.
The respondents shall have that right in accordance with law.
The writ petition is allowed to the above extent, without any order as to costs.
Petition allowed.