VS Singhvi, J - Feeling aggrieved by the dismissal of the application filed by him before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench for issuance of a direction to the Senior Superintendent of Post Offices, Karnal (hereinafter described as `the respondent No. 2') and the Sub Divisional Inspector, Postal, Karnal (hereinafter described as `the respondent No. 3') to interview him for recruitment on the post of Extra Departmental Branch Post Master (for short `E.D.B.P.M.
'), the petitioner has invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner was given the charge of the post of E.D.B.P.M.
at Kalsora on 2411997 because the previous incumbent had resigned w.e.f.
13.1.1997.
Simultaneously, the respondent No. 3 initiated process for regular appointment of E.D.B.P.M.
for Kalsora.
For this purpose, he sent letter of requisition dated 1711997 to the District Employment Officer, Kanal requesting the latter to forward the names of suitable persons fulfilling the following conditions of eligibility :  "(i) The candidates should be within the age limit of 18 to 65 years.
(ii) The minimum educational qualification is matric or equivalent.
No weightage is allowed for higher qualification.
(iii) He should normally be resident of the village where the post office is located.
In case of a candidate who is not resident of the post office village he will have to take up residence in the village of the post office before appointment.
(iv) He should be in a position to provide suitable accommodation to house the post office.
(v) He should also have some other independent adequate source of livelihood/income as the job is a part time one.
(vi) He will be required to furnish the security as required under the rules of this Department.
The nomination must reach this office on or before 2021997.
The nomination received after the target dated (2021997) will not be considered.
(vii) Minimum three candidates should be sponsored.
(viii) If the list of the candidates is not received within 30 days from the date of the issue of the letter, the vacancy will be filled up by direct recruitment without further notice.
List received after 30 days will not be entertained at all."
The District Employment Officer, Karnal forwarded a copy of requisition to the Assistant Employment Officer, Rural Employment Exchange, Indri, District Karnal (hereinafter described as the respondent No. 4) vide letter No. VC-1/PT-5/97/1375-76 dated 2411997.
It appears that the said communication was not received by the respondent No. 4 and, therefore, he wrote letter dated 27/3011997 to the District Employment Officer, Karnal to send a copy of the requisition.
A copy of this letter was also sent to the respondent No. 2.
On receipt of the copy of requisition in the second week of February, the respondent No. 4 informed respondent No. 2 vide letter No. OC-PT-37/97/817-18 dated 17/1821997 that due to paucity of time, he will be able to forward the names of eligible applicants by 2821997.
He also issued call letters to 20 applicants as per their seniority.
After scrutinising the documents produced by the candidates, the respondent No. 2 forwarded the names of 6 persons to the respondent No. 2 vide his letter No. IO-A-37/97/511-12 dated 27/2821997.
Later on, five of the 20 applicants, to whom call letters dated 20/2121997 were issued, appeared before the respondent No. 4 and complained about the delayed receipt of the call letters.
Therefore, after scrutinising their particulars, the respondent No. 4 forwarded the names of those 5 persons to the respondent No. 2 vide letter No. IO-A-37/97/624-25 dated 6.3.1997.
However, the respondents No. 2 and 3 declined to consider the petitioner's candidature on the ground that the list forwarded by the respondent No. 4 was received after 30 days of the sending of requisition.
The other ground on which the respondent No. 3 declined the consideration of the petitioner's candidature was that the number of candidates sponsored by the employment exchange was far in excess of the zone of consideration specified in the instructions issued by the department.
3.
The petitioner sought the Tribunal's intervention but failed to persuade it to accept his submission that the action of the respondent No. 2 and 3 is illegal, arbitrary and violative of his fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
We have heard S/Shri M.S.
Cheema, AK Sharma and Parmod Goyal.
5.
The only reasons which has found favour with the Tribunal for declining relief to the petitioner is that as per the departmental rules, the respondents are to consider only 3 names for one post and in view of the availability of as many as 6 eligible candidates, whose names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange, Karnal, the petitioner cannot claim consideration as of right.
6.
Shri AK Sharma invited our attention to Annexure R. 2 and submitted that in terms of the letter No. 43-233/84-Pen dated 151986, the zone of consideration has to be confined to 3 candidates against one post and, therefore, the action of the respondent No. 2 cannot be dubbed as arbitrary or discriminatory.
7.
In our opinion, this argument is based on a total misreading of the contents of letter dated 151986, the relevant portion of which is extracted below :  "It was ordered above that ED Agents should be appointed through the Employment Exchange of the area.
Several instances of nomination of only one candidate by the employment exchange have come to the notice of this Directorate.
In such cases, the resultant selection process gets totally devoid of any element of competition.
It has, therefore, been decided that in future sponsoring of at least three candidates by the Employment Exchange should be insisted upon.
In case of any difficulty in this regard, the matter may be taken up with the Director of the Employment Exchanges of the State Government concerned.
Normally, they have instruction to send a panel of candidates not less than thrice the number of posts notified to them.
In the event of the Employment Exchange failing to sponsor the minimum number of candidates, the vacancy should be notified through public advertisements and while making the final selection, the comparative merit of all the candidates i.e. those who respond to the notification as also those sponsored by the employment exchange should be taken into consideration.
Heads of Circles will please issue suitable instructions in this regard to their subordinate formations and ensure compliance of the above procedure for recruitment to different categories of ED Agents."
8.
A bare perusal of the above extract of the letter, relied upon by Shri Sharma, shows that the minimum number of candidates to be considered for selection against one post is three.
However, there is nothing in this letter which prescribes the maximum number of candidates whose names can be considered for selection against the advertised post(s).
Thus, there is no merit in the submission of Shri Sharma that the respondents No. 2 and 3 could not have considered the candidature of the petitioner on the basis of inclusion of his name in the second list forwarded by the respondent No. 4.
9.
Here, it is necessary to emphasize that the calling of names from the employment exchange is only one of the modes of giving an opportunity of competition to the eligible candidates.
In The Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam Krishna District, AP v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and others, JT 1996(9) SC 638, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the employer is required to issue public advertisement in the newspapers and electronic media in addition to sending requisition to the employment exchange.
Therefore, we do not find any justification to accept the plea set up by the respondents that the number of candidates who can be considered for selection against one post/vacancy cannot exceed 3 and hold that the instructions issued by the department do not contain any restriction on the number of candidates to be considered for selection.
However, we wish to make it clear that by making these observations we are not suggesting that the employer is bound to consider all the eligible candidates.
Rather, it is an established principle of law that the employer can resort to the mechanism of short-listing if it is found that the number of applicants is unusually large and it is not practicable to interview all of them.
However, this proposition cannot be invoked by the official respondents because they have to come forward with a plea that the petitioner was excluded from the zone of consideration by applying the mechanism of short-listing.
10.
In view of the afore-mentioned conclusion, we hold that the order passed by the Tribunal suffers from an error of law apparent on the face of the record and, therefore, it is liable to be set aside.
11.
In the result, we allow the petition and set aside the order Annexure P.8 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench.
Consequently, the application filed by the petitioner is allowed.
The respondents No. 2 and 3 are directed to consider his candidature along with other eligible applicants for recruitment of E.D.B.M.P., Kalsora.
We also hope that other candidates, whose names were sponsored by the respondent No. 4, will also be similarly considered to avoid further litigation on the subject.
12.
Before parting with the case, we deem it necessary to take cognizance of a slightly disturbing feature towards which our attention was drawn by the learned counsel for the parties.
They pointed out that one Shri Khushi Ram son of Shri Prithvi Singh, resident of Village Kalsora, Tehsil Indri, District Karnal filed Civil Suit No. 35 of 1997 for grant of permanent injunction against the respondents No. 2 and 3 restraining them from filling the post of E.D.B.P.M.
On being noticed, the respondents No. 2 and 3 appeared and contested the application filed by Khushi Ram for grant of temporary injunction.
They questioned the very maintainability of the civil suit in view of the bar contained in Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
They pleaded that the Civil Court cannot entertain the suits in the matters relating to recruitment etc. under the Central Government.
The learned Civil Judge (Junior Division) (Shri Ajay Prashar) brushed aside that objection on wholly untenable ground and passed an order of injunction in favour of the plaintiff.
It is a matter of satisfaction that the appellate Court properly appreciated the intention of the Legislature in the enactment of Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and vacated the order of injunction passed by the trial Court.
If this had not happened, we may have suo motu interfered with the order passed by the learned trial Court.
We, therefore, conclude the matter by recording our disapproval of the manner in which the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Karnal bye-passed the legislative embargo on the jurisdiction of the Civil Court without appreciating the impact of transgressing the limits of his jurisdiction.
13.
A copy of this order be sent to the District Judge, Karnal who should bring the same to the notice of the concerned officer so that he may not repeat similar mistake in future.
Petition allowed.