GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Research Assistant.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts necessary for deciding whether the relief sought by the petitioner should be granted or not, are that on the basis of selection made for appointment on 12 posts of Research Assistants in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P.1 issued by the Director, Language Department, the petitioner's name was recommended for appointment against one of the reserved posts of Scheduled Castes but he was not given appointment.
He made representations but failed to get any positive result.
Therefore, he has invoked writ jurisdiction of this court by filing petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The respondents have admitted the factum of issuance of advertisement for appointment on 12 posts of Research Assistants.
They have also admitted the fact that the petitioner, who is a Scheduled Caste (Balmiki), was interviewed by the selection committee.
Their contention is that the appointment against all the advertised posts could not be made because of the injunction order passed by Sub Judge Ist Class, Patiala on 9101995 in the civil suit filed by Harpreet Kaur for challenging the selection of Assistant Directors.
According to the respondents, out of the 12 vacancies of Research Assistants, only 6 were available for appointment by direct recruitment and the remaining 6 were utilised for adjusting the persons who were due for appointment as Assistant Directors.
4.
After hearing the parties, the Court disposed of the writ petition on 18121996 with the following directions :  "In view of the above position, we dispose of the writ petition with the following directions : (1) The learned Sub Judge Ist Class, Patiala is directed to decide the injunction application, if the same is still pending before him, within two months of the presentation of a certified copy of this order by the representative of the Government or the petitioner in this case.
(2) If the injunction application has already been decided by the Sub Judge, then he should decide the main suit within three months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
(3) Learned Sub Judge should prepone the date of hearing after giving notice to the parties, if it becomes necessary for the purpose of compliance of this order.
(4) The State Government/its representative shall be free to apply for modification of the order of injunction.
(5) Immediately after the decision of the injunction application/suit in compliance of the aforementioned direction, the department should pass appropriate order keeping in view the decision of the trial Court.
In case the injunction order passed by the learned Sub Judge is vacated and/or the suit is dismissed, the result of the remaining vacancies should be declared and appointments should be made within one month thereafter strictly in the order of merit."
5.
That order was reviewed and recalled in RA No. 9250 of 1997 because it was found that the subject matter of civil suit filed by Harpreet Kaur in the Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division), Patiala was different from the subject matter of the writ petition.
6.
At the commencement of rehearing of the writ petition, learned Deputy Advocate General placed before us the latest vacancy position of the Research Assistants.
The details incorporated in this statement are :  No. of total posts of Research Assistants 60 No. of vacant posts of Research Assistants 24 Requisition sent to the Subordinate Staff Selection Board including ad hoc employees working on 89 days basis 18 Assistant Director/DLOs.
lien over the post of Research Assistants 6 Shri Sanjiv Gupta argued that the petitioner is one of the candidates selected by the committee for appointment as Research Assistant but he has not been appointed, though candidates of general category have been given appointment.
Learned counsel submitted that the posts of Research Assistants advertised vide Annexure P.1 were clear vacant posts and, therefore, the respondent No. 2 could not have taken shelter of the litigation pending with regard to the appointment of Assistant Directors for denying appointment to the petitioner.
Learned Deputy Advocate General fairly conceded that the name of the petitioner has been included in the select list but argued that no mandamus may be issued at this stage directing the respondent No. 2 to appoint the petitioner because the requisition for making regular selection has already been sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and, in our opinion, there is no substance in the argument of Shri Khosla that direction for appointing the petitioner may not be issued because requisition has been sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board for making regular appointments.
It appears to us that the petitioner has become victim of the circumstances and the usual apathy shown by the authorities towards the members of reserved category, else there was no justification to deny appointment to the petitioner in spite of his selection against the posts earmarked for Scheduled Castes.
It is indeed unfortunate that by making misleading statement in the Court by linking the appointment of Research Assistants with the suit filed by Harpeet Kaur challenging the selection of Assistant Directors, the respondents have deprived the petitioner of his legitimate right for last almost 2 years.
In our view, it is a fit case in which a mandamus should be issued directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Research Assistant on temporary basis because the reason assigned by the respondent No. 2 for withholding his appointment is clearly irrelevant and extraneous.
In support of the view, which we have taken, reference may be made to the decision in this Court in Girish Arora and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(5) SLR 660 : 1997(3) SCT 240 (P&H).
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent No. 2 is directed to issue order appointing the petitioner as Research Assistant within 7 days from today.
However, it is made clear that this temporary appointment shall not confer upon or create any right in favour of the petitioner to seek regularisation of service or regular appointment.
The petitioner shall get costs of this petition which we assess at Rs. 5,000/-.
The amount of costs may be recovered by the government from the officer who may be found responsible for having frustrated the appointment of the petitioner who happened to be a member of a recognised weaker section of the Society.
9.
Copy of this order be given to the learned Deputy Advocate General by the Bench Secretary after due attestation under her signatures so that the implementation of this order may be facilitated.
Petition allowed.