Satyabrata Sinha, J - The petitioners No. 1 and 2 are Supervisors and the petitioner No. 3 is said to be an Association registered under the Trade Union Act, 1926.
2.
The question which arises for consideration in this application is as to whether the respondents can deny promotion to them upon completion of 3 years of service as per the existing policy decision.
The Ist respondent had several units.
Farakka is one of the oldest units having been established in the year 1979.
In between 1979 to 1993 the National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd 2nd respondent recruited personnel of various categories including Executives, Supervisors and workmen and posted them at Farakka Super Thermal Power Project.
Supervisors are divided into 4 grades being S-1 to S-4.
The petitioners contend that save and except difference of pay scales in different grades, there does not exist any differentiation as regards the nature and responsibility of job.
The petitioners contend that the 2nd respondent had all along been following a policy decision upon acquisition of experience for a period of 3 years in substantive grade, a time bound promotion would be gained to a higher grade.
Thus, 100% promotions used to be gained and allegedly are continued to be granted in other projects but recently a deviation has been made from the said practice as would appear from the letter of the Chief Personnel Manager dated 25th November, 1993 as contained in Annexure `A' to the writ application; in terms whereof the higher officers were directed to consider as to whether vacancies could be increased to bring about reasonable degree of satisfaction amongst the Supervisors.
3.
Several grounds of discussion had been held by and between the representatives of the petitioners and the management.
The petitioner No. 3 through its General Secretary by a letter dated 2nd April, 1994 requested the General Manager of Farakka Super Thermal Power Project to settle their demands by allowing 100% promotion as is being done in other projects and further formulate uniform promotion policy for all the Projects of National Thermal Power Corp Ltd..
Admittedly at Farakka the 2nd respondent had sought to implement the vacancy-wise promotion.
The petitioners contend that the same is discriminatory in nature.
4.
Mr. Arun Prakash Sarkar, the learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted that keeping in view the fact that Supervisors had been appointed by the 2nd respondent and their jobs being transferable, a uniform promotion policy ought to have been adhered to.
5.
Mr. Aloke Banerjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that the promotion policy was framed in the year 1982.
The learned Counsel contends that although the posts are transferable, a separate gradation list is maintained projectwise and keeping in view the fact Farakka Super Thermal Power Project is an old project, the vacancies in the higher grade having gone down, the respondents have no other option but to implement the said policy.
The learned Counsel contends that promotion being not a matter of right, this writ application should not be entertained.
6.
There is no doubt that the petitioners have been appointed by the Respondent-Corporation and not in one of its projects.
They have merely been posted in one of its projects.
It is also not disputed that the promotion policy had been framed in the year 1982.
The said promotion policy as regards employees of the categories had been framed by the Board of Directors as far back as on 451982.
7.
Clause 21, 24, 281, 32, 33. and 35 of the said rules read thus :  "21.
Promotions will be effected only against vacant sanctioned posts.
24.
Seniority : The seniority lists of the employees in various grades/channels will be prepared and up-dated from time to time by the concerned Personnel Department in accordance with the rules framed for this purpose.
281.
No employee whose latest confidential/merit rating report, whether annual or special, is adjudged as `Adverse' will be considered for promotion.
31.
Written test/Trade test/Interview, wherever prescribed, of the candidates fulfilling all the eligibility conditions as mentioned hereinbefore will be conducted twice in a year in the same order.
The number of eligible candidates to be trade tested will be limited to three times the number of anticipated vacancies and all those who qualify in the test will be allowed to appear for an interview before the Departmental Promotion Committee comprising of General Manager's nominee, representative of the Head of the Department where the vacancy exists/is likely to occur, an officer of the Training Department and Personnel Officer/Senior Personnel Officer as nominated by the concerned Head of Personnel and Administration.
Where, in addition to Trade test and Interview, the candidates are required to appear for Written Test also, the number of eligible candidates to be called for the written test should be limited to four/five times the number of anticipated vacancies.
Out of those who qualify in the Written Test, the number of candidates to be called for Trade Test and/or Interview will be limited to three times the number of anticipated vacancies.
32.
Departmental Promotion Committee for selecting candidates for promotion to various grades/posts will be constituted by the authority competent to approve the Selection panels (General Manager).
33.
The promotions will generally be based on seniority-cum-merit and the relative weightage for the different factors will be as follows :- Seniority ......................... 30 marks CR Report/Merit Rating............. 30 marks Test, Trade Test & Interview....... 40 marks Total ............................ 100 marks In cases where no test and/or interview is involved, the total maximum marks will be 60.
The merit rating reports for the last three consecutive years will be taken into account for the above purpose.
35.
Based on the above mentioned criteria, the panel of the successful candidates will be drawn up by the Committee on which every member of the committee will affix his signature.
Thereafter the panel will be put up for the approval of the competent authority who will be the General Manager of the concerned project/unit in all cases of promotions to non-executive posts.
The panel thus approved will be valid for a period of six months which can be renewed by the General Manager for a period not exceeding six months."
8.
Annexure 1/1 annexed to the said promotion policy shows rational designation in respect of new projects.
Although the same do not relate to the petitioners, it is stipulated :  "Similar channels of promotion chart will be drawn up for various sections/departments/groups with the approval of Chairman and Managing Director."
9.
A bare perusal of the aforementioned promotion policy would clearly show that promotions are to be made in the available posts meaning thereby the posts which may fall found vacant.
The said promotion policy read in its entirety postulates maintenance of gradation list projectwise.
Keeping in view the aforementioned policy decision there does not appear to be any provision for grant of promotion to a higher grade upon taking into consideration the vacancies in all the projects simultaneously.
10.
It is true that despite the fact that the said policy decision was circulated as far back as on 451982, till 1993-94 100% promotions used to be granted.
11.
From the letter dated 25.10.1994 issued by the petitioner No. 3 as contained in Annexure `B' to the affidavit-in-opposition it appears that the members had withdrawn their letters of non-acceptance of promotion with protest.
However, they had threatened to take recourse to agitational programmes if 100% promotion for Supervisors is not granted.
It also appears that attempts had been made for resolving the disputes.
From the fax message dated 25.11.1993 issued by the Chief Personnel Manager as contained in Annexure `A' to the writ application, it appears that the following matters had been communicated to the higher authorities :-  "Promotion percentage as per vacancies provided for 1993-94 budget level wise is such that we may effect only 1 out of 22 in S3 to S4 cadre, 5 out of 24 in S2 to S3 and 10 out of 37 in S1 and S2 Cadre(.)
As such till now within the supervisory rank the promotions were not based on vacancies and may please be examined, if the vacancies can be increased to bring out reasonable degree of satisfaction.
Providing approved Manpower modules with necessary executive strength for energy conservation environment group."
12.
A letter dated 2761994 issued by the General Secretary of the petitioner No. 3 Association also shows that promotion granted to some of them had not been accepted keeping in view the past practice as also the fact that the same practice is prevailing in other projects.
13.
The letter dated 2571994 issued by Chief Personnel Manager as contained in Annexure `G' to the writ application to the 2nd respondent is to the following effect :  "This has reference to your letter dated 771994 regarding promotion.
In this regard you would appreciate the fact that promotion depends on the total availability of vacancies in a particular project keeping in view various aspects such as recruitments made in different grades, persons promoted within the project, transfers in and out of the project, eligibility or otherwise of employees for promotion etc.
Hence these parameters being different for different projects at different stages of the projects a comparison is not possible.
Kahalgaon where 2 units are yet to be synchronied and NCPP where a few more units are to be commissioned and recruitments in connection with those units still going on, the situation at these projects is not at all comparable with that obtaining at Farakka.
Keeping in view the overall vacancy position at these projects, it is quite possible that percentage of promotions at these projects is higher as compared to other old projects such as Singrauli, Korba, Ramagundam including Farakka where this stage has already crossed when higher percentage of promotions were possible."
14.
It further appears that additional vacancies in the Supervisor cadre had been created as would appear from Annexure `J' to the writ application.
15.
Contextual matrix of fact thus clearly depicts that although a promotion policy had been laid down as far back as in the year 1982, the same had not been given effect to till 1994.
The question which arises for consideration is as to whether the concerned respondents are debarred from doing so at this stage.
The answer to the said question must be rendered in negative.
There cannot be any doubt that the respondent No. 2 is a juristic person.
It has, therefore, a right to lay down conditions of service.
Preparation and maintenance of gradation list unitwise or projectwise is permissible under service jurisprudence.
Furthermore, only because the posts are transferable ones, it is not incumbent upon the second respondent to direct maintenance of a combined gradation list.
A person when transferred from one unit to another, may be suitably fitted in the gradation list of that unit to which he is transferred in terms of the extant seniority rules or in absence thereof on the basis of their date of joining in the concerned grade.
A fortuitous circumstance to the effect that there exists higher chances of promotion in one unit in comparison to other unit cannot be itself said to be arbitrary or discriminatory in nature.
In terms of Article 16 of the Constitution of India an employee is entitled to be considered for promotion along with persons similarly situated.
A mere chance of promotion does not confer any right nor the same is enforceable in a court of law.
This court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of Constitution of India has a limited role to play.
This court can only consider as to whether the promotional policy adopted by the second respondent is unconstitutional or not.
The correctness or otherwise of its policy decision is beyond the scope of judicial review.
This court cannot also direct the concerned respondents to give effect to its alleged past practice irrespective of absence of vacancies particularly keeping in view the financial implications.
16.
The matter relating to correctness or otherwise of conditions of service can be subject matter of an industrial dispute provided the provisions thereof are applicable to the case of the petitioners.
Only in an industrial adjudication, the justification or otherwise of conditions of service can be gone into keeping in view the scope and ambit of the industrial dispute raised by the Union and further keeping in view the necessity of maintaining an industrial peace.
It is also difficult to accept the submission of Mr. Sarkar to the effect that as allegedly Supervisors of all the four grades perform similar nature of duties, in real sense, it would not be a case of promotion.
17.
Before this court a transfer policy bearing No. 395/98 dated 1210.1998 has also been placed.
Clause 26 whereof reads thus :-  "Supervisors being promoted from the grades of S3/S4 to EI will be generally transferred to a different location.
Similarly, workmen being promoted/laterally appointed from the grade of workman to supervisor may be transferred within the Region, as far as possible, in order of duration of posting/stay in the existing place of posting."
18.
The said policy, therefore, lays down the criterias for transfer.
The same may not be automatic.
The necessity of transfer may depend upon the administrative exigency.
In any event only when Supervisors of Grade-3 or Grade-4 are promoted, they may be transferred.
The said policy does not support the proposition that promotion from one supervisory grade to the other is automatic.
19.
In Dr. Meera Massey v. Dr. SR Mehrotra & Ors., 1998(3) SCC 88 : 1998(1) SCT 727 (SC), the Apex Court noticed :-  "In support that it is a case of promotion reliance is place on State of Rajasthan v. Fateh Chand Soni, 1996(1) SCC 562 : 1996(2) SCT 222 (SC).
In the literal sense the word `promote' means `to advance to a higher position, grade, on honour'.
So also `promotion' means `advancement or preferment in honour, dignity, rank or grade'.
`Promotion' thus not only covers advancement to higher position or rank but also implies advancement to a higher grade.
In service law also the expression `promotion' has been understood in the wider sense and it has been held that `promotion can be either to a higher pay scale or to a higher post'."
`Promotion as understood under the service law jurisprudence means advancement in rank, grade or both.
Promotion is always a step towards advancement to a higher position, grade or honour.'
Director, Central Rice Research Institution v. Khetra Mohan Das, 1994 Supp.
(3) SCC 595 : 1995(1) S.C.T.
653.
"8.
....`Promotion' as understood in ordinary parlance and also as a term frequently used in cases involving service law means that a person already holding a position would have a promotion if he is appointed to another post which satisfies either of the two conditions namely that the new post is in a higher category of the same service or that the new post carries higher grade in the same service or class."
20.
In this view of the matter the submission of Mr. Sarkar to the effect that posts of Supervisors from Grade 1 to 4 are equivalent posts doing same nature of duties, cannot be accepted.
If a person is to be posted to a higher grade the same also constitutes promotion.
Furthermore evidently, for the purpose of promotion from one grade to higher grade also the procedures laid down in the Promotion Rules have to be followed.
Thus, the action on the part of the respondents in arriving at a policy decision that promotion would be granted only when a post fells vacant cannot be said to be arbitrary so as to attract the wrath of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
21.
In this view of the matter no relief can be granted to the petitioners.
The petitioners may, however, seek appropriate relief before any other forum, if available to it in law.
The application is dismissed with the aforementioned observations but there will be no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.