SS Sudhalkar, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties.
The prayer made in the writ petition is three-fold.
(i) for granting interest @ 18% per annum on the delayed payment of the GPF amount from 141995 to 1261997; (ii) for making payment of outstanding TA bills, and (iii) granting compensation for unnecessary mental agony and harassment.
2.
So far as the TA bills are concerned, the learned DAG has stated that the TA bills have been sanctioned and the amount can be withdrawn by the petitioner at any time.
This being the position, petition qua the prayer with regard to TA bills has become infructuous.
3.
So far as interest on the delayed payment of GPF is concerned, the petitioner retired form service on 3131995 and the amount of GPF was paid to him on 1261997.
So far as these dates are concerned, there is no dispute.
The reason stated in the written statement regarding delay is in paragraph 1 of the preliminary objection, which reads as under :-  "That as per instructions and rules, the petitioner was required to submit his form No. PF 10 M for final withdrawal six months prior to the date of his retirement i.e. 3091994, but he submitted his form No. PF 10 M on 3131995, therefore, he has not observed the rules, instructions.
The writ is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone."
4.
The learned D.A.G.
has submitted that it is because the petitioner did not fill up form No. PF 10 M for final withdrawal six months prior to the date of his retirement and he submitted the form on 3131995, therefore, he has not observed the rules and instructions.
The petitioner retired as Deputy Director, Rural Development and Panchayats.
It is for the Accounts Department of an office to get completed all the necessary formalities regarding retiral benefits of an employee, who is to retire.
Actually, all the formalities should start at least six months prior to the date of retirement of an employee.
If any form is to be filled up, it is for the Accounts Department of an office to get it filled.
The burden, thus, cannot be shifted on the petitioner.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has cited before me the case of The State of Kerala and others v. M Padmanabhan Nair, 1985(1) S.L.R.
750.
In that case the pension and gratuity were paid to the employee after more than two years and three months after his retirement.
The appellants in that case had put the blame on the employee for delayed payment on the ground that he had not produced the requisite L.P.C.
(Last Pay Certificate) from the Treasury Office under Rule 186 of the Treasury Code.
It was further held therein that a duty was cast on the Treasury Officer to grant to every retiring Government servant the last pay certificate which in that case was delayed by the concerned officer.
In that case an interest @ 12% per annum was claimed but he was granted interest @ 6% per annum only.
It was because the respondent- employee had not preferred any cross objections in that case; that the Apex Court found it improper to enhance the interest rate to 12% per annum.
6.
The aforesaid was a case regarding pension and gratuity and it was held by the Apex Court that pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to its employees on their retirement but have become, under the decisions of the Court, valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment.
7.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Kulwant Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 2434 of 1997, decided on 2471997, in which a judgment in the case of M Padmanabhan Nair (supra) was followed and the respondents in that case were directed to pay interest @ 18% per annum on the amount of gratuity.
8.
In the present case also, the petitioner has claimed the interest @ 18% per annum.
I find no reason to differ from the view taken by the Apex Court and the Division Bench of this Court in the above-mentioned cases and find it proper to allow interest @ 18% per annum w.e.f.
141995 to 1261997 on the GPF amount which was paid to the petitioner on 1261997.
9.
So far as the compensation is concerned, as I have allowed interest @ 18% per annum on the GPF amount of the petitioner, I do not find it necessary to grant any further compensation.
10.
As a result, this petition stands allowed to the extent that the respondents are directed to pay interest @ 18% per annum w.e.f.
141995 to 1261997 on the GPF amount of the petitioner.
These directions be carried out within a period of two months from today.
11.
A copy of his order, attested by Special Secretary of this court, be given to the learned State counsel for onward transmission to the concerned quarters.
Petition allowed.