Harjit Singh Bedi, J (oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15024 and 15420 of 1998.
2.
The petitioner, a domicile of the State of Haryana, passed his matriculation examination in June 1998 from a school at Panchkula (Haryana).
He, thereafter, appeared in the Joint Entrance Test on 3151998 for admission to the various diploma courses in Engineering held by the State Board of Technical Education & Industrial Training (hereinafter referred to as the Board) and on the declaration of the result on 29.6.1998, was shown to have qualified by securing 666 marks.
As per the procedure prescribed, the successful candidates were required to submit fresh forms for admission to the specific institutions covered by the entrance test.
As the petitioner intended to seek admission to the Central Tool Room Ludhiana (in Tool & Die Technology) he also appeared in the special aptitude test held by the Board on 1971998 and cleared the same and was placed at merit No. 8 in the category of candidates who were claiming admission as Domiciles of Haryana.
The counselling for admission to the Central Tool Room, Ludhiana in the Tool & Die Technology was to be held on 1691998 as per the advertisement/Admission Notice Annexure P-3 dated 2881998.
The petitioner, accordingly, appeared for counselling on the fixed date at the Govt. Polytechnic Khunimajra, Tehsil Kharar, seeking admission against one of the four seats that had been reserved for residents of the State of Haryana.
It is the petitioner's case that he had reached the venue of the counselling at 830. a.m. and at 9 am the candidates who had secured upto 665 marks were called for marking their presence and for completing the formalities leading to admission.
The petitioner apparently marked his presence in the Attendance Register at 915 am and an entrance slip at serial No. 14 was issued to him noting that his first preference was for admission in the Central Tool Room, Ludhiana.
It is further the petitioner's case that he was called for counselling at about 10 am and at that time as only one out of the four seats had by then been filled in, three still remained vacant and that he was, accordingly, allowed admission but on a check of the documents, the counselling staff asked him to produce a Certificate showing him as a domicile of the State of Haryana.
It is further the petitioner's case that as this certificate was not immediately forthcoming, he had asked for a few hours time to produce it.
The father of the petitioner left the venue of the counselling at 1030. a.m. for Panchkula, his place of residence, and returned at 1150 am but found that all the seats had by then been filled.
The petitioner has, accordingly, pleaded that the admission granted to the candidates after his counselling at 10am.
could not have been made for the reason that up to that time, only one seat had been filled in whereas he had been granted time to produce the Domicile Certificate.
It has also been urged that in any case, the production of a Domicile Certificate from the State of Haryana was not a pre-requisite for admission as the same did not find mention in Annexure P-3, the advertisement calling the candidates for counselling and that this stood proved from the fact that the petitioner had nevertheless been granted admission in the JR. Polytechnic College Hoshiarpur on the basis of the record which was then available.
It has lastly been pleaded by the petitioner that admission granted to Sumit Sharma, respondent No. 5 on 21101998 was also unjustified for the reasons mentioned above.
3.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the State Board of Technical Education & Industrial Training on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and it has been pleaded that the petitioner who had 666 marks in the Joint Entrance Test was not entitled to admission the last candidate admitted on the basis of being a resident of the State of Haryana had, 674 marks.
It has also been clarified that on 1691998, only three seats had been filled as the fourth seat had to be given to be one Ajay Malik under the orders of this court made in CWPNo.
18543 of 1996.
It has also been clarified that Sumit Sharma- respondent No. 5 had, in fact, been granted admission on 1691998 at the time of counselling as he had higher marks than the petitioner but as he did not deposit the fee on that date, he alongwith Ajay Malik had been granted time up to 21101998 to deposit their fees as per the advertisement Annexure R-1/1 dated 18101998.
4.
Mr. Ashok Jindal, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has first and foremost argued that as the petitioner was the second candidate who had appeared for counselling on 1691998, he ought to have been granted admission at the time of counselling against one of the seats that had been reserved for the domiciles of the State of Haryana as the respondents were not justified in demanding a Domicile Certificate from the petitioner.
Primary reliance for this argument has been placed by Mr. Jindal on Clause 14 of Annexure P-3.
5.
The respondents counsel has, however, argued that the aforesaid clause could not be mechanically construed and as the private respondents had higher marks than the petitioner, they had a preferential right to admission for the reason that they too had appeared at the appropriate time for counselling.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
Clause 14 is reproduced below :-  "A candidate not reporting on time shall lose the right of his priority in Merit and shall be offered seat available at the time of his reporting to the venue of interview".
7.
A mechanical reading of the aforequoted clause may support the argument advanced by Mr. Jindal but a close scrutiny of the interpretation attempted by the learned counsel would make the clause unworkable.
If the clause was to be literally interpreted as suggested, a candidate having 90% marks in the Joint Entrance Test happened to reach within time but a few minutes after a candidate with only 45% marks in the test would be denied admission on the ground that he had not reported first.
The mere fact that the petitioner happened to appear for counselling before the other candidates would not, therefore, mean that the petitioner had a preferential or prior right to admission ignoring others with higher merit.
It is the conceded position that the private respondents herein and in the connected writ petition No. 15420 of 1998 had higher marks than the petitioner.
Moreover, it is apparent that no specific time for reporting had been spelt out in clause 14 and all that clause 9 of Annexure P-3 provided was that the interviews would start at 9 am every day and could continue well past 5 pm as the number of candidates appearing for interview could not be determined before hand.
In the light of the above position, the other arguments advanced by Mr. Jindal do not require any decision.
8.
For the reason mentioned above, there is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
9.
CWPNo.
15420 of 1998.
This matter also pertains to admission to the Three years Diploma Course in Tool and Die Technology, at the Central Tool Room Ludhiana, sought by a candidate belonging to the State of Haryana and claiming admission against one of the four seats reserved for the domiciles of that State.
Neeraj Chandna, the petitioner's son, who had sought admission had 699 marks in the Joint Entrance Test and was called for counselling on 16th September, 1998.
He appeared before the counselling Board at the relevant time and it was found that though he had the requisite merit position, a Domicile Certificate showing him as a domicile of the State of Haryana, was not forthcoming.
His father, accordingly, sought a few hours time so as to enable him to produce the certificate which was lying at his residence at Panchkula.
The petitioner's father returned from Panchkula shortly thereafter, but in the meanwhile, admission had been offered to Sumit Sharma-respondent No. 6 who had 674 marks.
10.
To recapitulate the facts once again, the first Counselling for the fourth seat was held on 16th September, 1998 when three seats were offered for admission whereas the fourth seat was kept vacant for one Ajay Malik on account of a Judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 18543 of 1996.
A representation was, however, submitted to the Secretary of the Board that as Ajay Malik who had to get admission in view of the judgment had also not deposited his fee on 16th September, 1998, it was prudent to give both him and Sumit Sharma another chance to make good the deposit.
The respondents, accordingly, vide notice dated 18th October, 1998 (Annexure R-II/2) published in The Tribune granted them time up to 21st October, 1998 to deposit the fee.
Pursuant to this notice, Sumit Sharma respondent No. 6 deposited his fee in time, whereas Ajay Malik still did not choose to take admission and as this seat had not figured in any of the counsellings held earlier, a fresh counselling was ordered for the 21st October, 1998 and the seat was offered to one Sumit Kumar who had 763 marks in the Joint Entrance Test.
11.
Mr. HN Mehtani, the learned counsel for the petitioner has, accordingly, confined his challenge to two aspects: firstly that the petitioner was not called upon to produce a domicile certificate as per the prospectus and that the seat offered to Sumit Sharma respondent No. 6, was also contrary to the provisions of the Advertisement Annexure P-3, as the said respondent had not deposited his fee on 16th September, 1998.
12.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that both these arguments have merit.
It is clear from clause 4 of the advertisement Annexure P-3 that domiciled/resident candidates of UT Chandigarh claiming a seat as residents/domiciles of Punjab, were required to attach an appropriate certificate, failing which they would be considered against seats meant for Other States categories, Admittedly, there was no clause calling upon candidates from the State of Haryana to produce a similar certificate at the time of interview.
Mr. Patwalia has, however, sought to explain away the omission by stating that it had to be understood that such a certificate was a pre-requisite for considering a candidate against one of the four seats reserved for Haryana State.
Be that as it may, the omission in the advertisement was a lacuna which could not work to the detriment of a candidate.
Moreover, it is apparent from the pleadings in C.W.P.
No. 15024 of 1998 dealt with in the earlier part of the judgment that the petitioner, therein who had also been denied admission in the Central Tool Room, Ludhiana as he did not produce a Domicile Certificate from the State of Haryana at the time of interview, had been granted admission without the production of that certificate in an Engineering Institution in Hoshiarpur.
The second argument has equal merit.
At page 2 of the prospectus pertaining to admissions to the course, it has been clearly mentioned that failure of a candidate to join within the stipulated period, would render the candidate's admission liable to cancellation and that the selected candidates were required to deposit their original certificates and pay the prescribed fee at the time of admission.
It is apparent from a reading of this provision that all the selected candidates were required to deposit their fee on 16th September, 1998 (straight after the counselling) and on failure to do so, forfeited the right to admission.
It is apparent that the special chance given to Sumit Sharma respondent No. 6 vide the advertisement No. R-II/2 dated 21st October, 1998, was contrary to the explicit language of the prospectus.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the admission granted to Sumit Sharma-respondent No. 6 was not in accordance with the procedure prescribed and cannot be sustained.
13.
The question now arises as to the ultimate outcome of the writ petition.
It is no body's case that Sumit Sharma respondent No. 6 had been granted any undue favour by any of the respondents.
Moreover, it is apparent that he had not mis-represented any of the facts at the time he got admission.
He has also been taking instructions now for the last four months or so.
It was in this situation that this Court in a Full Bench decision reported as Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and another, 1997(3) P.L.R.
691 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H), observed that though the admission may itself have been faulty, but if it had been made in bona fide exercise of authority and no misrepresentation had been made by the student concerned and some part of the course of study had been completed, it would be unfair to quash the admission.
In a Division Bench of this court reported as Kamal Masih v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1992(1) SCT 455, it was observed as under :-  ".............. Where there is misrepresentation, concealment of facts, fraud or other wrong-doing on the part of the candidate, admissions once granted even on the basis of some qualification was not recognised by the University, it cannot, on that account, be cancelled, if at that stage, it would be inequitable to the candidate, like where he would have no fault of his, thereby lose a year.
This view is also clearly in accord with binding precedents on this Court".
14.
Likewise, in Iqbal Kaur v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) SCT 576, a Division Bench of this Court once again found that the admissions had been wrongly made but as no fraud had been played, the students could not be penalised for a mistake committed by the respondents.
It is apparent that respondent No. 6 had not obtained admission by fraudulent means as it was the Board which had, vide the advertisement Annexure R-II/2 dated 21st October, 1998, called upon him to deposit his fee by 21st October, 1998.
It has been explained by Mr. Patwalia that this concession had been granted to Sumit Sharma for the reason that Ajay Malik who was to be granted admission under the orders of this Court had also not come for counselling on 16th October, 1998.
15.
Mr. Patwalia has further pointed out that there is no seat presently available for admission in the trade of Tool and Die Technology in the Central Tool Room Ludhiana.
In this view of the matter, it is directed that Neeraj Chandna, the petitioner's son shall be granted admission in the session commencing 1999-2000 against one of the seats reserved for the domiciles of Haryana.
16.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed subject to the observations made above.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.