VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to order, Annexure P-15, dated 12.4.1999 vide which services of the petitioner have been terminated.
In consequence of setting aside of the order aforesaid, it is further the prayer of the petitioner that respondent be directed to re-instate her as Mathematics Mistress with all consequential benefits including arrears of salary with interest @ 18%.
2.
Brief facts, on which the reliefs, as referred to above, are sought to rest, reveal that petitioner initially joined MG Ashoka Girls Senior Secondary School, Sirhind-respondent No. 1 in May, 1989, on Temporary basis as Science-cum-Math teacher.
She continued working as such in the said school till 25101991 and thereafter she resigned from the post due to some domestic circumstances.
On 531997 respondent school issued an advertisement for the post of Math Mistress.
The petitioner applied for the said post and was selected.
Post of Math Mistress was once again advertised on 2831997.
Last date for filing the applications was 641997 and interview was to be held on 1041997.
Petitioner was called for interview and on the basis of her qualifications and experience, she was once again selected.
It is the case of petitioner that respondents asked her to give an affidavit that she can teach Math to classes 10+1 and if she could not, her services may be terminated and further that she would not join any other institute for teaching for two years.
On 1241997 petitioner was issued appointment order for the post of Math Mistress.
On 8.12.1997 Principal of the school had given a certificate to the petitioner that her work and conduct was satisfactory.
Approval to the appointment of petitioner as Math Mistress was given by respondent No. 4 on 521998.
A couple of months thereafter, i.e., on 1541999 the respondents, however, passed an order that the services of petitioner stand dispensed with as per Rule 8(1)(d) of the Security of Service Rules, 1981.
Constrained, petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5208 of 1998 in this Court.
It is further the case of the petitioner that in reply that came to be filed by the respondents in the writ petition, referred to above, it was for the first time that the respondents attached a report of the Principal on a representation made by the petitioner seeking confirmation in service.
Petitioner has attached a copy of report of the Principal as Annexure P-8 and a copy of proceedings of the meeting of the Managing Committee as Annexure P-9 with this writ petition.
During the pendency of that writ petition, respondents again advertised the post held by the petitioner.
However, appointment of respondent No. 5 was made subject to decision of writ petition vide order, Annexure P-11.
On 841999 writ petition came up for hearing and on the said date, the respondent withdrew order, Annexure P-7 and, therefore, writ filed by the petitioner was rendered infructuous.
It is the case of petitioner that the Court clarified that while the respondents would be free to pass a fresh order in accordance with law, petitioner would be entitled to all her consequential benefits as a consequence of withdrawal of order by the respondents.
Thereafter, the petitioner approached the respondent-Managing Committee with her joining report on 941999 and 10.4.1999 along with orders of this Court, Annexures P-13 and P-14.
However, she was not permitted to join her duties.
On 12.4.1999 petitioner was given a copy of order whereby she was informed that the Managing Committee had decided that her services are no longer required.
It is this order, Annexure P-15, as mentioned above, that has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
Impugned order, Annexure P-15 reads as follows:-  "This is to inform you that in accordance with the decision of the Managing Committee taken in its meeting dated 12.4.1999, your services are no longer required w.e.f.
today i.e. 12.4.1999.
The cheque for Rs. 61356/- vide ch.
No. 292091 D/10499 for the period of 15.4.98 to 941999 and a cheque for Rs. 519/- for the period from 10499 to 12499 vide ch.
No. 292092 dt. 12499 are attached herewith.
Both the cheques are drawn on Punjab National Bank, Sirhind".
4.
When the matter came up for hearing before us on 20.4.1999, learned counsel for the petitioner canvassed that by virtue of the impugned order, work and conduct of the petitioner had been adversely commented and the order being stigmatic, could not sustain.
Inasmuch as language employed in order, Annexure P-15, did not show any adverse comments having been made against the petitioner, counsel insisted upon to have a look at the decision of the Managing Committee taken in its meeting held on 12.4.1999 as it was pleaded before us that if the resolution, on the basis of which order, Annexure P-15, had been passed, could not sustain, so would be the position with regard to order, Annexure P-15 as well.
On 20.4.1999 this court passed following orders:-  "Before we might issue notice in this case, we would like to see the resolution dated 12.4.1999 on the basis whereof the impugned order, Annexure P-2 is passed.
It may be mentioned here that the contention of Mr. Patwalia is that if the resolution cannot sustain, then the order passed on the basis thereof also cannot sustain.
We direct the respondents to give a copy of the resolution dated 12.4.1999 to the petitioner immediately on his making an application for the said purpose.
Put up for hearing after the resolution is placed on record."
5.
Persuant to orders passed by this Court, resolution of Managing Committee has been annexed with the petition.
A perusal of the aforesaid resolution would make it clear that as per the provisions contained in the Privately Managed Aided Schools (Security of Services) Act, 1981, the period of probation of every employee is one year which can be extended for a total period of two years and this two years period was to expire on 1441999.
It further transpires from reading of resolution, Annexure P-16 that no adverse comments upon the work and conduct of the petitioner had been made.
All that has been mentioned is that the services of petitioner are terminated w.e.f.
12.4.1999 in terms of Rule 8 of the 1981 Act.
The background of case has also been given.
6.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that the material which may be stigmatic need not be contained in the order of termination of the probation but might be contained in any document referred to in termination order or in its Annexures.
Obviously, such a document could be asked for or called for by any future employer of the probationer and in such a case, order of termination would stand vitiated on the ground that no regular enquiry was conducted.
For his aforestated contention, learned counsel relies upon a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Dipti Parkash Banerjee v. Satvendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Calcutta & Ors., 1999(1) SCT 861 (SC) : JT 1999(1) SC 396.
7.
The facts of the case cited before us reveal that on 11121995 the Director had informed the appellant in the said case that his work was not satisfactory on several counts.
The points mentioned in the said letter were as follows :-  "(i) Your handling of the movements to the new campus was good till the good impression was spoiled by your refusal to handle the furniture in the Director's room and your statements about other administrative staff members, which were not corroborated by academic members present.
Later movement to the JD Block by Prof. A Mookerjee and the Director's office found you non- cooperative.
(ii) You have been preparing false bills, the fact that they were passed by your immediate superior does not mitigate your guilt.
(iii) Your handing of quotations about cleaning agencies, xerox machines, purchases of stationery etc. were faulty and several times you were told to redo the whole job.
Unfortunately your performance has not improved even after repeated advice.
(iv) You have misbehaved with workmen academic staff members, one of them has even submitted a written complaint.
(v) You are rather frequently absent from office premises and the faculty members complained about your absence.
Your handling of the room allocations in the guest house, confirmatory reply to people asking for accommodation and general supervision have been unsatisfactory.
In general your attitude to office work leaves much to be desired.
It is expected that you would rectify the faults noted above and improve your performance in the coming months, so that your confirmation could be favourably considered."
8.
On 3041996 the appellant was again informed that he was on probation and his confirmation would be considered soon.
On 1541996 the Director addressed another letter stating as follows :-  "1.
It appears that your attitude concerning the guests for the guest house has not shown any improvement.
When Dr. R Bhatt fell sick with chicken pox and was in quarantine for three weeks, you were nowhere to be seen, and the AO was also not seen to take any interest.
Similarly, when a Canadian professor (Professor Dragland) fell sick, you were not to be found.
Most of the time, you left the work to be done by others, who had to do extra work for your inefficiency.
2.
You have not done a proper job of releasing the houses at DB 17 and CD 85.
It is known that the date 31.1.1996 is not the actual date of release of DB 17 and the landlord showed us proof that this was so.
3.
You have not explained how the revenue stock verification was done by you and the AO Please refer to SNB/DIR/ADM/95-96/84 dated 2021996 about stock verification (especially numbering and locating new furniture).
Has any progress been made ?
No activity on this important job has been noticed by me.
Please report to me on point 3 by April 16, 1996.
Your performance leaves a lot to be desired and you must show evidence of good work to the academic staff members to merit confirmation."
9.
On 17101996 the Director wrote to the appellant that his performance in previous six months was again assessed and that there were serious deficiencies.
The said deficiencies are mentioned in para 9 of the judgment.
10.
Whereas, there cannot be any quarrel with the proposition of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case aforesaid, we hardly find any parity in the facts of Dipti Parkash Banerjee's case (supra) and the one in hand.
There is no material before us from where it could be gathered that the petitioner had been shown the exit door by adversely commenting upon her performance.
The resolution relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner, Annexure P- 16, does not contain any such adverse remarks.
All that, therefore, the petitioner is left with, perhaps, is the earlier order which, after the petitioner filed earlier writ petition, was withdrawn by the respondent- Managment.
Assuming, there were some adverse remarks contained in the order, vide which petitioner was earlier asked to quit, resulting into filing of earlier writ petition by her and which order had since been withdrawn, can it be said that it will be permissible for the future employer of the petitioner to say that her conduct was adversely commented ?
In our view, the question has to be answered against the petitioner.
The order terminating the services of the petitioner, earlier in point of time, stood withdrawn and, surely, if the future employer of the petitioner has to see the earlier order of termination, he has also to see that the same was withdrawn.
The order that stood withdrawn, is no order in the eyes of law and, in our view, it cannot come in the way of petitioner in getting employment from any quarters whatsoever.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same in limine.
Petition dismissed.