HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in this and in C.W.P.
No. 14763 of 1998 are sports category applicants.
Their grievance is that the sports gradation was to be made by the Director of Sports, Punjab on the basis of the instructions Annexure P-5 dated 4th August, 1992 and the subsequent instructions Annexure P6 dated 10th December, 1997.
It is the petitioner's case that this criteria was changed vide the clarification Annexure R-3 published in The Tribune dated 25th February, 1998 with the result that there was a possibility that one or the other amongst the petitioners may be kept out or that a candidate who was not earlier entitled to seek admission under the instructions Annexures P-5 and P-6 would not get admission.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab, 1993(2) P.L.R.
212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H) to argue that the prospectus issued had the force of law and once it had been issued no modification or amendment could be made therein for that particular admission.
2.
Mr. RK Singla, the learned counsel appearing for private respondent No. 5, i.e. Puja, who has already got admission under this category has relied on a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Khalid Hussain (minor) represented by his father Dr. Akhtar Hussain v. Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Tamil Nadu, Health Department, Madras and others, 1987(4) S.L.R.
598 and on two judgments of this Court reported as Ranbir Singh v. Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala and another, AIR 1988 Punjab and Haryana 51 (DB) and Miss Chetna Sharma v. Union Territory' Chandigarh, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 641 (Full Bench).
Mr. Singla's argument is that merit in the entrance test was to be given pre-eminence vis-a-vis the proficiency in sports and as the private respondent had higher marks than the petitioner in the qualifying entrance test, she was entitled to admission.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel do not advance his argument.
In Khalid Hussain's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court had only observed that in the absence of a criteria laid down by the authorities it would be better if merit in academics was taken as the sine-qua-non for admission to the MBBS Course.
In Ranbir Singh's case (supra) also this Court was not considering the value of the sports gradation certificate vis-a-vis the result of the entrance test and the Court had only filled in a lacuna on account of the vagueness of the criteria.
Miss Chetna Sharma's case (supra) was considered by this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra) and the Full Bench came to the conclusion that admissions under the reserved category of sports could be made by giving some weightage to such candidates in addition to their marks in the entrance test.
Moreover, it will be apparent that the primary argument raised by Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the criteria for admission could not be changed after the issuance of the prospectus.
None of the judgments cited by Mr. Singla have even dealt with this issue.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the clarification Annexure R-3 quashed and a direction issued that the admission under the Sports Category shall be made on the basis of the instructions Annexures P-5 and P-6.
3.
The other contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties are covered by the decision in C.W.P.
No. 7345 of 1998 decided on 2191998 Disposed of in the same terms.