Swatanter Kumar, J - When this regular second appeal came up for hearing for admission, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sat Pal (as his Lordship then was) passed the following order :-  "Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the punishment awarded to the appellant is disproportionate as even in terms of the findings given by the Inquiry Officer, the charge levelled against the appellant was not fully proved.
He further submits that in terms of those findings, though the petitioner had claimed TA for two days but in fact he had not received the payment on account of TA claim.
In view of these facts, issue notice of motion to the respondent for 3031998, only limited question on the quantum of punishment awarded to the appellant."
In response to the notice the State appeared and contested the case.
2.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1983(2) All India Service Law Journal (SC) 324, to contend that the punishment awarded to the delinquent was completely disproportionate to the gravity of the mis-conduct alleged to have been proved against him.
To appreciate the substance of this contention, reference to the basic facts would be necessary.
3.
Plaintiff Kulwant Singh had filed a suit for declaration praying that the order dated 28.5.1991 passed by the General Manager Haryana Roadways terminating his services and the appellate order dismissing the appeal on 1071992 were illegal, arbitrary and violative of the rules.
The suit was contested by the department.
The case of the department was that the enquiry had been conducted in accordance with rules.
It was further the case of the State that the plaintiff had tried to claim bogus claims on account of TA/DA as well as of overtime for the period for which he was on leave.
The learned trial Court found that the enquiry was conducted in accordance with rules and the grounds of pleas taken by the plaintiff were baseless and it decided all the issues against the plaintiff and dismissed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 611997 which was assailed in appeal, of course, unsuccessfully, by the plaintiff.
The learned Ist Appellate Court dismissed the appeal vide its judgment dated 3081997, giving rise to this regular second appeal.
4.
Even during the course of arguments in this appeal, the learned counsel for the appellant has not been able to demonstrate successfully what was the violation committed by the Enquiry Officer or the departmental authorities during the departmental proceedings in passing of the impugned orders.
In any case, it is not even stated anywhere that the appellant suffered any prejudice on account of the alleged violation of principles of natural justice, as understood by the appellant.
In the absence of any definite prejudice having been pleaded in the pleadings, the Court cannot take serious note of such arguments to set aside the concurrent finding of fact.
At this stage, a reference can be made to a judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State Bank of Patiala and another v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) RSJ 41 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
568.
5.
Coming to the contention that punishment of termination is totally disproportionate to the alleged misconduct, it must be noticed at the very outset that learned counsel appearing for the State has produced in Court a copy of the order dated 1821993 wherein the appellant was given a fresh appointment and the said order was passed on a mercy petition filed by the appellant to the Secretary Transport, Government of Haryana.
The appellant has not only accepted the said order but has completely availed the benefit of that order for this period.
He joined the duties in acceptance of the said order.
Another pertinent factor to be noted herein is that the suit was decided by the learned trial Court on 611997 but no steps were taken by the plaintiff-appellant for all this period to amend the plaint and to pray for setting aside the order dated 1821993.
On the other hand, by his conduct and otherwise the appellant would be deemed to have accepted the order dated 1821993 without prejudice.
As such, he would be disentitle to challenge the correctness of the order dated 1821993 and, consequently, his present appeal.
For the reasons aforestated, I find no merit in this regular second appeal.
The same is dismissed without any orders as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.