VK Bali, J (Oral) - Ramesh Chander, Senior Assistant in the Punjab Civil Mini Secretariat, Chandigarh through present writ filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to consider and promote him as Superintendent Grade II with effect from the date when persons, junior to him, were promoted.
The facts from which the relief asked for stems, need a brief mention.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Clerk in the Punjab Civil Secretariat on 2121969 and was promoted as Assistant on 1721997.
He was further promoted/redesignated as Senior Assistant and confirmed as such in the year 1988.
In the seniority list of Senior Assistants, which cmae into being in the year 1993, he was placed at Serial No. 139 and respondent No. 3 (Gurmeet Singh), was shown at Serial No. 141 in the said seniority list.
In the year 1995, petitioner was allowed a proficiency step-up also.
However, vide impugned order dated 1481996 (Annexure P-3), respondent No. 3 scored over the petitioner in the matter of further promotion on the post of Superintendent Grade-II.
It is this order which has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
Primary contention of Mr. Girish Agnihotri, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that on the date when the Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) met to consider the cases of officials, including the case of the petitioner, for promotion on the posts of Superintendent Grade-II, nothing at all was pending against the petitioner which could debar him for further promotion even for the time being.
So far as the Government instructions dated 2011994 (Annexure P-2) are concerned, it is specifically stated therein that the Government could stall promotion in the following eventualities only :-  "(i) Government employees being under suspension; (ii) Government employees in respect of whom charge-sheet has been issued and disciplinary proceedings are pending; and (iii) Government employees in respect of whom prosecution for a criminal charge is pending."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further contends that though FIR No. 321 of 1991 came to be registered against the petitioner on 18111991, no further steps were taken in the matter and so much so even challan has not been put up to the Court.
This, therefore, could not become the ground so as to put the case of the petitioner under sealed over and to ignore him for promotion on the date when DPC met for the purpose on 1381996.
For his aforesaid contention, Mr. Girish Agnihotri, counsel for the petitioner places reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court rendered in Union of India and others v. KV Jankiraman and others, 1991(5) S.L.R.
602 : 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC), wherein it has been observed :-  "On the first question, viz, as to when, for the purposes of the sealed cover procedure, the disciplinary/criminal proceedings can be said to have commenced, the Full Bench of the Tribunal has held that it is only when a charge-memo in disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a criminal prosecution is issued to the employee that it can be said that the departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is initiated against the employee.
The sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only after the charge-memo/charge-sheet is issued.
The pendency of preliminary investigation prior to that stage will not be sufficient to enable the authorities to adopt the sealed cover procedure."
5.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed by Mr. AG Masih, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2, though it has been admitted that the petitioner is senior to respondent but, on account of the Government instructions dated 2011994 (Annexure P-2), the petitioner was not promoted and his case was kept under sealed cover.
The case of the respondents is that a criminal case FIR No. 321 of 1991 under sections 420, 467, 468, 471, 447, 448 and 120-B, Indian Penal Code, and sections 13(1) and 8, Prevention of Corruption Act, came to be registered against the petitioner on 18111991 at Police Station, Division No. 5, Ludhiana, and sanction for prosecution of the petitioner was also given on 781996.
It is, therefore, made out from the reading of the written statement as also the contentions raised by Mr. AG Masih, AAG, Punjab, that the only ground, on which the petitioner was not promoted and his case was kept under sealed cover, is that a criminal case came to be registered against him.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and gone through the records of the case.
In the Government instructions dated 2011994 (Annexure P-2), the caption is as follows :-  "Promotion of Government employee against whom disciplinary/court proceedings are pending or whose conduct is under investigation - Procedure and guidelines to be followed."
7.
It is well made out from clause (iii) of paragraph 4 of the Government instructions dated 2011994 (Annexure P-2), as reproduced in the earlier part of this order, that it is only when a charge is framed, which is obviously when a report under section 173, Criminal Procedure Code, is prepared and put up to the Court that the said clause (iii) shall come into operation.
Mere registration of a case, by virtue of an FIR coming into existence, would not attract clause (iii) of paragraph 4 of instructions Annexure P-2.
The caption of instructions Annexure P-2 also makes it abundantly clear that it is only when the matter is in the Court that the "sealed cover procedure" can be adopted.
In the present case, a period of more than six years have gone by and the case has not been put up to the Court.
We are, therefore, of the view that clause (iii) of paragraph 4 of Government instructions dated 2011994 (Annexure P-2) was wholly inapplicable to the case of the petitioner.
That being the position, we quash the impugned order dated 1481996 (Annexure P-3) vide which the name of the petitioner was put under sealed cover, and direct respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as per his record that was in existence on the date when the Departmental Promotion Committee met, i.e., 1381996, and if, on the basis of the said record, the petitioner deserves to be promoted, the appropriate orders shall be passed.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.