HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Diploma Course in the respondent-Institute in the discipline of Industrial Production Engineering and completed the same in August 1997.
As the petitioner had cleared the course within the requisite chances, he was entitled to be considered for promotion by vertical entry to the Degree Programme in Mechanical Engineering or with specialisation in either Manufacturing or Welding Technology.
The respondent-Institute issued a brochure for the entrance test for the year 1997 for various courses run by it, including the Degree Programme and it was inter alia provided therein that there would be vertical mobility of 50% of the students admitted to the Diploma Course to the Degree Course and 30 seats in all were reserved for vertical entry by promotion in the field of Mechanical Engineering with specialization in Welding Technology and Manufacturing Engineering.
It is the petitioner's case that as 125 students had been admitted in the diploma course held in various trades in the year 1995, 50% of this number were entitled to seek promotion by vertical entry to the Degree programme - that is 63 seats in all.
It is the petitioner's grievance that instead of filling in the aforesaid number of seats, the respondent-Institute had filled in only 58 seats and if the requisite quota of 50% was filled up, the petitioner would be entitled to admission.
The petitioner has in addition pleaded that respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had been granted admission to the degree course despite the fact that they were not entitled to admission as they had not cleared the diploma course within the permissible number of chances.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
The stand taken is that the petitioner was not entitled to admission as he was at serial No. 20 and the two candidates who were at serial Nos. 18 and 19 had a prior right to admission.
Reliance has also been placed on Rules 513 and 9 of the Admission Brochure to argue that the 50% quota envisaged for vertical entry had to be determined on the number of students actually admitted in the lower module and not on the basis of the sanctioned strength and, in that eventuality, the petitioner's case would not deserve consideration.
It has finally been pleaded that as 31 candidates had got admission in the diploma course in 1995 in the trade of Welding Technology, 16 students could claim admission by vertical entry in the degree course and as this number had gained admission, no further seat was available.
3.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that from a reading of the brochure it was evident that 125 candidates had been admitted in the diploma course and, as such, 63 seats, in all, were available to be filled in by vertical entry in the Degree Course and as only 58 such students had been granted admission, the petitioner was entitled to admission against the remaining five seats.
In this connection, he has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 15393 of 1997 (Pawandeep Kaur Birk and another v. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology through its Director) decided on 26th November, 1997.
Mr. Waraich, the learned counsel for the respondent-Institute, had however placed reliance on decision in C.W.P.
No. 15922 of 1997 (Rajneesh Kumar v. Sant Lonqowal Institute of Enquireering and Technology Longowal, Distt.
Sangrur through its Director and another) decided on 12th January, 1998, another Division Bench of this Court, in which it had been held that the number of seats in the higher module were to be determined not by the number of the sanctioned seats in the lower module but by the actual number of students who had gained entry in the lower module.
He has pointed out that the petitioner was not entitled to admission on this account.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the petitioner's case if fully covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Pawandeep Kaur Birk's case (CWP No. 15393 of 1997).
In this case the Court observed that seats left vacant in a particular diploma degree course would not be in the larger public interest.
The Court further went on to say that even if the seats in a particular diploma degree course in a particular trade had been filled up by vertical entry to the extent of 50% the other seats available could be filled up irrespective of the trade involved, and the practice followed by the respondent-Institute was justified.
Mr. Waraich's reliance on Rajneesh Kumar's case is misplaced as in this case the main question posed was as to whether the admission was to be made against the sanctioned strength of the lower module or against the students actually admitted in that module.
It bears notice that in Rajneesh Kumar's case the sanctioned strength in the Diploma course was 30, but, 28 students had been admitted with the result that only 14 students were granted admission to the degree course by vertical entry.
This action of the respondent-Institute was challenged but was upheld by this Court on the reasoning that the actual number admitted to the lower module and not the sanctioned strength was the sine qua non for determining the number of seats to be filled in for the higher module by vertical entry.
In the case before me today (as in Pawandeep Kaur Birk's case as well) the number of seats available for being filled is not in issue as admittedly five seats still remain vacant against which the petitioner could be granted admission.
5.
The question now arises as to the relief that is to be granted to the petitioner.
In this connection Mr. Waraich has argued that the petitioner had sought admission for the course starting in 1997, and the petitioner was therefore not entitled to relief by lapse of time.
In is evident from the record that the petitioner had come to Court soon after the admissions had been made and if delay had occurred for reasons beyond his control, he cannot be penalised for it.
6.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant admission to the petitioner for the degree course in Welding Technology against a seat that had been left vacant in the year 1997.
The petitioner will be deemed to have joined in the first year.
No costs.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.