Swatanter Kumar, J - The Government of Haryana with an intention to remove stagnation of its employees of Group `C' and Group `D' categories formulated special schemes for employees aimed at mitigating the frustration amongst these employees who were not able to seek any promotion despite being members of the regular cadre for a considerable period.
In order to implement its laudable decision the Finance Department of the State issued instructions and guidelines to all the Heads of the Departments on 1451991 for grant of additional increment at 10th and 20th years point in time scale to all group `C' and `D' employees.
Where these circulars were advantageous to the employees, there they were entitled to introduce incentive oriented policy of the State.
For better performance of its employees, these circulars had specified some conditions, upon the satisfaction thereof alone, an employee would be entitled to receive the benefits of the increments prescribed under this scheme.
Besides satisfying the prescribed period of regular service under the Government, the employee was to satisfy the competent authority that he was otherwise eligible to receive the benefits and his claim was not barred by any of the eligibility clauses of the scheme.
The benefits under the 1991 scheme were available to the eligible employees of groups `C' and `D' upon completion of 10th and 20th year of service.
But the Government opted to alter its policy vide circular dated 1781992 which reduced the period to 8 and 18 years of regular satisfactory service in the respective group from and 20 years prescribed under the earlier 1991 policy.
It also elucidated other criteria.
2-3.
It was not long that the Government again replenished its policy of 1992 vide interdiction of another policy dated 821994.
Under this policy the concept of grant of additional increment at 8th or 18th year of service was substituted by higher standard pay scale and was made effective with effect from 111994.
Captious queries from various departments of the State led to further clarification of these policies which were effective from a date to a date spelled out in the circular.
These clarifications were issued to elucidate the various expressions used in the policy and the meaning or connotation in which they could be understood and implemented to achieve the objects of the State Policy.
To add to these clarifications, the pay scales were revised with effect from 111996 which became the material date in question for all purposes and intents.
4.
The various clarifications issued by the Finance Department of the State and its ramifications on the matters in controversy, we will shortly proceed to discuss.
Suffice at this stage to note that clarifications materially effecting the implementation of the State policy were issued on 29.12.1995 and 2081996.
5.
All the petitioners in these petitions have approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents commanding them respondents to grant to the petitioners, increments upon completion of 8 and 18 years or 10 and 20 years of service and also for grant of higher pay scale, as the case may be, in terms of the State policy, upon counting the "work charged service" rendered by them in the same department where their services were regularised.
6.
The respondents have declined to accept the request of the petitioners and have rejected their claim.
In support of such rejection, the respondent-State has mainly relied upon the following submissions :-  (i) Work-charged service is not a regular service under the State and is also not continuing service.
As such the same cannot be reckoned for the purposes of granting the relief under the scheme.
(ii) The work-charged employees are not appointed in a manner in which regular members of the cadre to the same post are appointed.
They do not from part of the regular cadre and are controlled by a separate code and the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court (State of Haryana and others v. Ravinder Kumar and others, CA No. 5740-5741 of 1997) is per incuriam and as such is not applicable to the facts of the present cases.
(iii) These are beneficial schemes and must be construed strictly in their application.
The petitioner do not satisfy the basic condition of the policy and as such are not entitled to the relief.
7.
In the light of the afore-referred Government instructions and conditions raised on behalf of the State, the learned counsel of the petitioners, during the course of arguments, on 822002, had made a statement which reads as under :-  "Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners contends that the only question that is raised for consideration of the Court and decision in this writ petition is :- "Whether the service rendered by the petitioners on various posts on work charge basis and subsequently their services were regularised in continuation, such service should be counted towards the period of 8/18 and 10/20 under the schemes for grant of additional increments or higher pay scale under the policy of the Government issued in the years 1992 and 1994 respectively or not ?"
"Counsel for the petitioners also submit that their eligibility keeping in view other restrictions stated in the policies may be left open to be determined in individual cases by the competent authority, if the petitioners succeed in this petition."
8.
Thus, the controversy to be examined in this bunch of writ petitions is a very limited one and does not call upon the Court to decide any other controversy.
The learned counsel appearing for the State, during the course of arguments, fairly conceded that once this question is answered either way by this Court, the reliefs are consequential and would have to be considered on merit depending on the facts of each petition/petitioner.
With this background and before we consider the merits of these contentions reference to basic facts in CWP Nos. 16317 of 2001, 3990 of 2001, 2461 of 2002 and 2609 of 2002 would be necessary.
9.
The petitioners were appointed in service on work charge basis in regular pay scales.
They were issued letters of appointment on different dates during the period commencing from 15121970 till 171990.
Services of all the petitioners were regularised in continuation of their work-charged services, again on different dates, for the period varying from 15111983 till 141993.
The details of appointment of each of the petitioners and date of regularisation have been stated by the petitioners in Annexure P/1 to the petition.
10.
As already noticed, the Government of Haryana had issued instruction in the year 1991 and then in 1992, 1994 and clarifications of 1995 giving benefit of 8/18 or 10/20 years and higher pay scale to the employees to obviate the hardship being caused to them as a result of stagnation in groups `C' and `D' employees of the State of Haryana.
The benefit of these policies was not given to the petitioners as according to the respondents the service rendered on work-charge basis was not countable towards the total Government service required for completing the required period of 8 and 18 years or 10 and 20 years, as the case may be.
According to the petitioners various writ petitions were also earlier filed in this court.
Some of them were allowed.
The Special Leave Petitions preferred by the State against such judgments were dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Court, but despite attaining such finality, the respondents are still not granting benefits to the petitioners thus the petitioners have been compelled to approach this Court for redressal of their grievances.
11.
We may notice at this stage that number of writ petitions were listed for hearing before us and some of them were even heard at the admission stage itself without issuing notice to the State, while in others notice to the State had been issued and replies on behalf of the State had been filed.
In other cases, upon notice, the State did not file a reply and adopted their written statement filed in other two cases as the stand was common in all the cases.
Thus, by this judgment in fact we would be disposing of the entire bunch of writ petitions No. 18834 of 1997; 3336, 3491, 7578 and 17406 of 1998, 11737 of 1999; 3964, 3989, 3990, 3991, 3992, 3993, 3994, 3995, 3996, 3988, 4268, 12261, 13586, 13600, 13601, 13603, 13894, 16377, 16379, 16317, 16394, 19329, 17825, 17829, 18032, 18048, 18049, 18054, 18057, 18060, 18218, 18546, 19186 and 19196 of 2001; 776, 790, 874, 1117, 1840, 2097, 2157, 2317, 2333, 2461, 2463, 2466, 2470, 2472, 2473, 2476, 2479, 2487, 2497, 2504, 2526, 2528, 2533, 2540, 2541, 2675, 2588 and 2609 of 2002 which were listed for hearing before us on 822002.
12.
The respondents have not disputed the facts as stated in the writ petitions.
Emphasis have been laid mainly on the ground that work charge employment is not a regular employment under the State and method of recruitment is totally different and distinct.
The two services i.e. work- charge service and regular service are not comparable and as such similar benefits cannot flow in favour of the employees equally when they are otherwise unequal.
It is conceded that the Hon'ble Apex Court had dismissed the Special Leave Petition in Ravinder Kumar's case (supra), preferred by the State, but that judgment is stated to be not applicable on the principle of per incuriam.
It will be relevant to refer to some extracts of the written statement filed by the respondents, as under :-  "5.
That in reply to para No. 5 of the petition, it is submitted that grant of same pay scale to a work charge employee vis-a-vis regular employee is of no consequence as regards grant of additional increments and standard pay scale as these are governed under special scheme to remove stagnation in the regular cadre of government employees.
The nature of work charge staff being employed/engaged against particular work/project is temporary.
Even the mode of recruitment of the two categories is different."
14.
Reliance was placed by the State on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association and another, 2000(4) SCT 664 (SC) : JT 2000(10) SC 561 to support the contention that such service is not countable for the purpose of granting relief to the petitioners.
Reference was also made to the clarifications issued by the Government on 29.12.1995 wherein it was clarified to all the departments of the Government that no benefit of work charge service is to be given for the purpose of grant of highest pay scale as well as adhoc service is not to be counted for granting the same benefits.
As this was the policy of the Government according to the respondents, it should be strictly adhered to and the petitioners be denied the relief asked for.
15.
We may, at the very outset of our discussion on the merits of these petitions, note that it is an admitted position before us that all the petitioners were appointed in service on work basis; they were given regular pay scales of the cadre; their services have been regularised without any break in service and if the period of work-charge service is added to the total required service rendered by the petitioners, they would satisfy the basic condition of 8 and 18 years or 10 and 20 years of service and would be entitled to receive the benefits under these schemes.
It is also admitted before us that the work charge service is being counted for the purposes of giving pensionary and other benefits available to the incumbents of the regular cadre.
These undisputed facts clearly indicate that persons appointed on work charge basis, whose services are required in continuation, are entitled to the benefit of the said services for pension, seniority and other benefits under the rules of service governing the cadres of groups `C' and `D'.
16.
The main plank of arguments on behalf of the State is that under the instructions issued, the State is obliged to count only the regular service is defined in clause (6) of the circular of the Government dated 821994.
The said clause reads as under :-  "6.
`Regular Satisfactory Service' means actual continuous service under Haryana Government or erstwhile Punjab Government before re-organisation on regular basis in the present cadre to be reckoned within the same Group and assessed fit for promotion as per procedure prescribed for promotion cases, Inter-district transfers on a corresponding cadre within the same department, and the service of an employee on different posts in the same cadre carrying the same pay scale will be treated as continuous service in relation to these instructions.
Non-grant of higher standard pay scale on account of unsatisfactory service record will not be considered as a punishment under the Punishment and Appeal Rules."
17.
As the petitioners do not satisfy the continuous regular service under the State for 8 and 18 years or 10 and 20 years, they are not entitled to the benefit of increment the higher standard pay scale.
The argument of the State in fact already stands rejected by the highest Court of the land and that too repeatedly.
We will shortly proceed to discuss the various judgments directly answering the controversy in issue, but before that it is inevitable for us to mention that the State itself issued instructions on 2081996 stating that even the ad hoc service followed by a regular service, shall also be taken into consideration for grant of such benefits.
We may refer to the decision of the State which reads as under :-  "In the light of these developments, the matter was reconsidered and it has been decided that the period of adhoc service, which was followed by a regular appointment under the State Government shall be taken into consideration while calculating the prescribed length of service under the scheme."
18.
On our view, by issuing instructions from time to time the State itself has diluted the stringent meaning now sought to be given to the expression "regular service" and "continuing service".
Dilution of the meaning has certainly resulted in an interpretation favourable to the petitioner.
These expressions have been given a wider meaning in matters or nature of the service directly relatable to the facts of the present case.
The adhoc service cannot be placed at a higher pedestal than the work charge service which is later on regularised in continuation thereto.
The method of recruitment is duly codified under the Government code for making work-charge appointments.
These are not the appointments which are for few days or months.
These appointments carry on for years together as the Government work in those departments continues indefinitely.
The employees get a regular pay scale and their service conditions are duly controlled under the Government Code/Manual for regulating this aspect of the service.
Another aspect of the matter dealing with somewhat similar situation was answered in favour of the petitioners by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, Recent Services Judgments, 1950-1988 Vol. 1 Page 433 wherein it was held as under :-  "In the light of the above, let us examine the validity of Rule 317(ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II.
This rules says that the period of service in a work-charged establishment shall not be taken into account in calculating the qualifying service.
After the service of a work- charged employee have been regularised he becomes a public servant.
The service is under the Government and is paid by it.
This is what was precisely stated in the Industrial Award dated June 1, 1972, between the Workmen and the Chief Engineer, P.W.D.
(B and R) Establishment Branch, Punjab, Patiala, which was published in the Government Gazette dated July 14, 1972.
Even otherwise, the matter was settled by the Punjab Government Memo No. 14095-BR(3) 72/5384 dated 6th February, 1973 (Annexure P7) where it was stated that all those work- charged employees who had put in ten years of service or more as on 15th August, 1972, their services would be deemed to have been regularised.
Once the services of a work-charged employees have been regularised, there appears to be hardly any logic to deprive him of the pensionary benefits as are available to other public servants under rule 317 of the Rules.
Equal protection of laws must mean the protection of equal laws for all persons similarly situated.
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness because a provision which is arbitrary involves the negation of equality.
Even the temporary or officiating service under the State Government has to be reckoned for determining the qualifying service.
It looks to be illogical that the period of service spent by an employee in a work-charged establishment before his regularisation has not been taken into consideration for determining his qualifying service.
The classification which is sought to be made among Government servants who are eligible for pension and those who started as work-charged employees and their services regularised subsequently, and the others is not based on any intelligible criteria and, therefore, is not sustain at law.
After the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised, he is a public servant like any other servant.
To deprive him of the pension is not only unjust and inequitable but is hit by the vice of arbitrariness, and for these reasons the provisions of sub-rule (ii) of Rule 317 of the Rules have to be struck down being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In relaxation of Rule 317(ii) of Rules by the respondent-authorities, the service of sixteen work-charged employees was counted for pensionary benefits and gratuity vide Government of Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power (Irrigation Branch) Memo No. 2/5/81-IB(6)/16411, dated 7th November, 1982 (Annexure P2) which read as under :-  "Sanction of the Government of Punjab is accorded in relaxation of Rule 317 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II for counting of previous work-charged service towards gratuity in respect of 16 work-charged employees of Nangal Workshop mentioned in the enclosed statement subject to the conditions that no terminal benefit is/has been given to these work-charged employees at the time of regularisation of their service.
Sanction of the Governor of Punjab is also accorded to the counting of service of these 16 work-charged employees towards pension as a special case provided no benefit has already been drawn by them in lieu of pensionary benefits."
If respondent No. 1 has granted exemption from rules in certain cases, we do not find any justifiable reason for excluding others from the grant of pension and gratuity benefits.
For this reason, too, we find rule 317(ii) is bad at law, as it enables the Government to discriminate between employees similarly situated.
In fairness to Mr. Bedi, the learned Additional Advocate-General, the submission made by him may be adverted to.
It was contended that (i) a work- charged employee is engaged for a particular purpose upon completion of which his services come to an end, (ii) no order has been passed by the State Government confirming the petitioner against the post on which his services are regularised, and resultantly he does not fulfil the conditions entitling a Government servant for pension, as envisaged by rule 312 of the Rules.
The counsel also tried to justify the Government action by placing reliance on rule 14 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. 1.
It was further contended that P.W.D.
(B and R) Establishment Branch is not an industry and in support of this submission he relied on State of Punjab v. Kuldip Singh, ILR 1982(2) Punjab and Haryana 544 and Om Parkash v. The Management of M/s Executive Engineer, S.Y.L.
Division, Kurukshetra, ILR 1984(2) Punjab and Haryana 215.
His first submission is devoid of any merit.
In para 3 of the petition, it is specifically averred that the petitioner had regular service, without any break of a single day, right from 1951 to the Date of his superannuation in the year 1971.
In the corresponding para of the written statement, this assertion has not been denied but the only plea taken is that his qualifying service for pension and gratuity starts from 15th August, 1972, i.e. the day from which he was brought on regular cadre; and that his service in the work- charged establishment does not count for pension under rule 317(ii) of the Rules.
The plea that he has been in continuous service has not been denied.
It appears that on the completion of one project, the petitioners were engaged in another project either with break in service or without any break.
Every plea raised in a petition has to be specifically denied and in the absence of a specific denial, the assertions made in the petition will normally be deemed to have been admitted or atleast the Court can proceed on the basis that it is an uncontroverted fact.
Since there is no denial by the respondents that the petitioner has been in continuous service from 1951, it would be presumed that he has been in continuous service till the date of superannuation.
The second contention that no order has been passed by the State Government confirming the petitioner against the post on which his services were regularised, and so on, is also without merit.
The regularisation of services must be against a particular post, and the petitioner will be deemed to have been made permanent on the post against which his services have been regularised.
This precisely appears to be the purport of the Punjab Government Memo (Annexure P7) and the award of the Industrial Tribunal dated June 1, 1972 published in the Government Gazettee dated July 14, 1972, referred to earlier.
In the award, it was specifically held that the work-charged employees who had put in three years of continuous service are entitled to be made permanent and to be confirmed after having put in the five years service as demanded by the workmen.
The award may bind the workman in and the management of P.W.D.
(B and R) Establishment Branch, Technically speaking it may not be binding on other branches of the P.W.D.
Once the services of a work-charged employee are regularised, he will be deemed to be entitled to the benefit under rule 317 of the Rules."
19.
In the light of the above observations of the Full Bench of this Court we are of the considered view that these work charged employees have been serving for a considerable period in their respective departments.
They were getting the regular pay scales as provided under the rules.
This class of employees was also exposed to hostility of stagnation.
Thus, to decline the benefit of providing increments under the schemes would patently be unfair and unjust.
The physical reality that emerges in the recent time is that these employees are also the regular employees of the State of Haryana and have been continuously serving the State for more than the prescribed period.
The mere fact that some part of their service is on work-charged basis, though under the conditions stipulated in the code, would not divest them of a legitimate right which otherwise accrues in their favour.
20.
In the case of Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court was concerned with a difference proposition of law whether adhoc service of an employee who has been subsequently appointed on regular basis, after a break, through the Commission can be counted for grant of such increments.
The proposition was answered by their Lordships in the negative, but that has no bearing on the facts of the present case.
We need not devolve on this proposition any further as their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of Ravinder Kumar (supra) expressed this view which we are merely following.
21.
At this stage it will be appropriate for us to notice that three Judges Bench of Hon'ble Apex Court while accepting the appeal of the State and disturbing the view taken by another Bench of this Court, in the case of Rakesh Kumar, segragated the cases from the Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association's case (supra), for the following reasons :-  "Along with these matters, sixteen other cases (CA Nos. 540-41/97, 6070/97, 24/98, 5833/98, 444/99, 808/99, 1461/99, 2649-2653/99, 1143/98, 844/2000, 1887-88/2000, 4487/2000, and S.L.P.
(Civil) Nos. 9767/98, 19091/98, 5425/98 and 5424/(99) had also been tagged on but in those cases the employees were initially appointed on work-charged basis and later on, their services stood regularised and one of the contentions of the respondents is that the period rendered on work-charged basis count for seniority, increment and pension.
In this view of the matter, those cases are delinked and would be listed afresh for hearing."
22.
All the cases along with Ravinder Kumar's case were then placed before same Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court and their Lordships while granting benefit to the respondents and dismissing the appeal of the State, held as under :-  "Delay condoned in SLPs.
These batch of cases were delinked while hearing an another batch of appeals from the same State, which were disposed of by us by judgment dated 19th Sept, 2000.
It is conceded by the ld.
counsel appearing for the State that in these cases we are concerned with employees who had been engaged initially on work charge basis and later on they were regularised and brought into the cadre of the service.
It is also not disputed by the Id.
counsel appearing for the State that this period which the employees has rendered as work charge basis count for the purpose of the increment in the cadre as well as the qualifying service for the pension.
We, therefore, see no justification in not counting their period for the purpose of giving additional increment on completion of 8 and 18 years of service as well as 10 and 20 years of service for getting higher scale as per the Government Circular, which obviously are intended to avoid stagnation in a particular grade.
In that view of the matter, we see no justification for our interference with the impugned order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
These appeals and SLPs, accordingly stand dismissed."
23.
It is admitted before us that after the above order, the State filed review application before the Hon'ble Apex Court against this order dated 31102000, which was also dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
24.
Further, it will be useful to notice that another Division Bench of this Court following the above Full Bench in Kesar Chand's case (supra) granted relief to the petitioners similarly placed like the petitioners of the present case and directed the respondents to consider their service on work-charge basis towards computing total service of 8/18 years for grant of benefit under these schemes.
The order passed by the Division Bench in CWP No. 18429 of 1996, titled as Banta Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 621997, attained finality.
25.
Similar relief was also granted by a Division Bench of this Court following Banta Ram's case in the case of Babu Ram v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 2225 of 1997, decided on 2941997, and the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State in the case of Babu Ram was also dismissed by the Hon'ble Apex Court on 21.1.2002.
In view of the above settled position of law, thus, we conclude that the respondents are obliged to count the service rendered by the petitioners on work-charge basis under the State itself if the said service is otherwise satisfactory.
Consequently, we answer submissions No. 1 and 3 afore-noticed, against the State.
26.
Then it was seriously contended on behalf of the State that the present petitions suffer from the defect of unexplained delay and laches.
It is true that a writ Court may, in its discretion, decline to grant the relief to the petitioner, if there was unexplained and unreasonable delay in approaching the Court.
But in the present cases, the petitioners could come to the Court only after they had completed minimum of 8/18 years of service as that was the condition precedent to the grant of concession by the State.
The cause of action in favour of the petitioners would arise only thereafter.
Now for a considerable period, the State has rejected the claim of the petitioners and persons similarly situated.
Despite the fact that numerous judgments were pronounced against the State by this Court including the Full Bench and the Special Leave Petitions were dismissed by the Apex Court as already noticed.
At least from 1997 where the precedents of 1998 were followed, the State has no jurisdiction, whatsoever, for denying the relief to the petitioners much less the State can raise the plea of delay and laches against the petitioners.
It is obligatory on the part of the State to implement the law enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Ravinder Kumar's case was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 31102000 putting an end to all the pleas of the State.
Thus, on any equitable grounds the State can hardly be permitted to take the plea of delay and laches against the petitioners.
In fact most of the persons similarly situated like the petitioners are getting the benefit of the schemes.
That itself is sufficient to reject the plea of the State.
If the State has erred in not granting benefit after rejection of the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State before the Apex Court, it would be impermissible for the State to use the plea of delay to the disadvantage of the petitioners.
27.
Lastly, we have to consider the contentions raised on behalf of the State that the judgment of the Apex Court in Ravinder Kumar's case (supra) is per incuriam.
The doctrine of per incuriam is attracted only as exception to the rule of precedence.
The High Court must follow the precedent laid down by the Apex Court and even the judgment of a larger Bench and even equi-Bench of the High Court, unless the judgment is contrary to law or does not decide the matter in controversy.
It is true that application of rule of precedence necessarily implies that a previous judgment is applicable to the subsequent case on ratio decidendi.
This principle is fully satisfied in the present case.
The petitioners in the present case are similarly situated like the petitioners in Ravinder Kumar's care and other cases referred above.
The reliefs claimed in both the cases are indentical and the controversies arising for determination before this Court are similar.
The various pleas taken up by the State in the Special Leave Petition even founded in Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association's case were considered and rejected by the Hon'ble Apex Court while dismissing the appeal of the State in Ravinder Kumar's case (supra) and the review application i.e. CA No. 808 of 1997 on 352001.
As far as this fact is concerned, the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ravinder Kumar are pending and they squarely apply to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
28.
The learned counsel for the State has not been able to demonstrate as to how after orders of the Apex Court and Larger Benches of this Court, the judgment in Ravinder Kumar's case can be said to be per incuriam.
In our humble view, the judgment does not offend any law nor in contrary to the statute.
The instructions issued by the Government are no way contrary.
In fact the Government itself accepted in interpretation given to the word regular service in the Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand (supra) as they amended the rules accepting the said verdict.
In these circumstances the principle of precedence must prevail.
At this stage we can usefully refer to the following observations of a Full Bench of this Court in another case titled as Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 931 (P&H) CWP No. 14050 of 1990, decided on 1312.2001, in regard to binding precedent :-  "The principle in regard to following of precedents has been subject matter of various pronouncements even before the Hon'ble Apex Court, wherever the view of the Hon'ble Apex Court are at variance the view of the larger Bench would be binding upon the High Court as afore-noticed.
But even there were equi- Benches of the Apex Court, taking divergent views, the High Court has to follow the view which is more appropriate/applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case and not avoid judgments on the merits of the case.
In the case of M/s. Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd. and another v. Shramik Sena, 2001(1) SCT 827 (SC) : JT 2000(7) SC 567, the Hon'ble Court took the view that requiring the parties, by the High Court, to seek clarification from the Supreme Court, is not the appropriate course of action and even if there are diametrically apposite interpretation of the judgment of the Apex Court, still the High Court is expected to decide the matter on merits.
Emphasising the need for receipt to the law of precedence, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of SI Rooplal and another v. Lt.
Governor through Chief Secretary, Delhi and others, 2000(1) SCT 630 (SC) : AIR 2000 Supreme Court 594, held as under :- "Precedents which enunciate rules of law form the foundation of administration of justice under our system.
This is a fundamental principle which every Presiding Officer of a Judicial Forum ought to know, for consistency in interpretation of law alone can lead to public confidence in our judicial system.
This Court has laid down time and again precedent law must be followed by all concerned; deviation from the same should be only on a procedure known to law.
A subordinate Court is bound by the enunciation of law made by the superior Courts.
A coordinate Bench of a Court cannot pronounce judgment contrary to declaration of law made by another Bench.
It can only refer it to a larger Bench if it disagrees with the earlier pronouncement."
"We are indeed sorry to note the attitude of the tribunal in this case which, after noticing the earlier judgment of a coordinate Bench and after noticing the judgment of this Court, has still thought it fit to proceed to take a view totally contrary to the view taken in the earlier judgment thereby creating a judicial uncertainty in regard to the declaration of law involved in this case.
Because of this approach of the latter Bench of the tribunal in this case, a lot of valuable time of the Court is wasted and the parties to this case have been put to considerable hardship."
The decisions of the Court which are not part of the ratio decidendi are classed as obiter dicta and are not authoritative.
Precedents sub silention and without argument are of no moment.
When the matter is argued at length and is decided normally, it should not be permitted to be re-opened (Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, Judgments Today 1988(4) SC 11).
But doctrine of ratio decidendi would apply with complete force when the judgment provides reasoning and conclusions on a controversy arising of somewhat similar circumstances which arise in subsequent case.
The decisions pronounced on litigated facts and necessary questions decided would operate as precedent in similar circumstances so as not to unsettle the settled law.
A deliberate and solemn decision of court made after argument on question of law fairly arising in the case, and necessary to its determination, is an authority, or binding precedent in the same court."
29.
The controversies being the same in the present cases, as raised in the afore-noted case, the principles settled, thus, must squarely apply to the facts of the present cases.
The judgment in Ravinder Kumar's case (supra), therefore, cannot be rendered inapplicable on the plea of exceptions of per incuriam or sub silentio, to the rule of precedence, in the facts of the cases in hand.
The points raised by the State were considered in the earlier judgments and even if not specifically mentioned in the judgment would be deemed to have been considered and rejected by the Courts.
More particularly the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition of the State in Babu Ram's case and rejection of view petition in Ravinder Kumar's case leaves no scope for this Court to accept any of the pleas raised by the State in these petitions.
30.
In view of above detailed discussion, we allow these writ petitions and direct the State not to exclude the period of work-charged service rendered by the petitioners under the State of Haryana towards counting the total service of the petitioners for the purposes of granting the reliefs under the schemes afore-referred.
However, the petitioners would be entitled to the consequential reliefs only for a period of three years immediately preceding the filing of these petitions, if otherwise due.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.