Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as a constable on April 20, 1989.
He was discharged from the police force on September 16, 1991.
Alleging that a copy of the order had not been supplied to him, he approached this court through Civil Writ Petition No. 6241 of 1993.
During the pendency of this writ petition and under the directions of the court, the respondents produced the order of discharge with an affidavit of Mr. Anil Dawra, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Hissar on November 5, 1993.
It is stated that the writ petition was rendered infructuous.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed the present writ petition so as to impugn the order of discharge which had been actually passed on September 16, 1991.
It is alleged that the order is punitive as it has been passed on account of a specific allegation.
Even otherwise, the petitioner maintains that the order is arbitrary.
He prays that the order be quashed.
2.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that the petition suffers from the vice of delay and laches.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had got sanctioned two days' casual leave from the Station House Officer, Police Station, Ratia.
While going, he did not "hand over his arm and ammunition" to his Incharge or any official or guard.
On August 24, 1991, it was recorded that the petitioner was absent and there was no information about the arm and ammunition entrusted to him.
He had reported back for duty on August 26, 1991 to 1030 AM.
It has been admitted that the cartridges had been left by the petitioner in the box of constable Angrez Singh.
He had locked the box and kept the keys.
On these facts, it has been averred that the petitioner was "unlikely to prove an efficient police officer".
The respondents, thus, pray that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
This case had come up for hearing on November 6, 1997 before a Bench of this Court of which one of us (Jawahar Lal Gupta, J) was a member.
It was stated on behalf of the petitioner that his daughter was born with a congenital deformity.
She had undergone surgery.
On August 24, 1991, the petitioner was informed that the stitches had been damaged.
He had to rush to take care of his daughter.
After getting the needful done, he had reported for duty within two days.
Even with regard to the weapon and ammunition, it was explained that these had been left with one of the colleagues.
On this basis, it was prayed that the petitioner who is a youngman deserved to be allowed to continue in service.
The case was adjourned to enable counsel for the respondents to obtain instructions as the Bench felt that the Director General of Police, Haryana should reconsider the matter.
4.
The case has finally come up for hearing today.
Mr. Bishnoi states that the respondents want the matter to be decided on merits.
We have, thus, heard the counsel for the parties.
5.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been urged that he was not guilty of any wilful misconduct.
He had not absented himself from duty.
There was no adverse report against him.
As such, no cause for any action was made out.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had remained absent and was, thus, not likely to prove an efficient police officer.
6.
It has been specifically alleged by the petitioner in paragraph 4 that he had proceeded on two days' casual leave as his daughter who was about three and a half years of age (in the year 1991) "was born with a deformity and her feet pointed backwards......She was operated upon in August 1991.
The petitioner was informed that the stitches on the feet of his daughter have broken and thus, the petitioner proceeded on two days' casual leave which was duly sanctioned."
This factual position has not been denied.
In reply, it has only been averred that the petitioner had "managed to get sanctioned 2 days' casual leave....." The leave having been duly sanctioned, it cannot be said that the petitioner was absent from duty.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had left the arm and ammunition with one of his colleagues viz. constable Angrez Singh.
These were kept in a box which was locked.
The petitioner had taken the precaution to carry the keys himself.
Ultimately, nothing was lost.
The sequence of events clearly negatives any suggestion of misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
Still further, it is not denied that during the period of service, he had not been conveyed any adverse remarks.
In fact, it has been admitted that the petitioner had been awarded many commendation certificates.
The specific averment in para 3 that the commendation certificates had been awarded for "exceptional good work in maintenance of law and order during the anti- reservation agitation...." has not been denied.
More than that, the child's condition was virtually precarious.
Any parent would have been upset on getting an adverse news.
The petitioner could not be blamed for having requested for two days' leave or for proceeding to take care of his daughter after his request had been accepted.
7.
When the circumstances are cumulatively considered, it cannot be said that there was any material on the basis of which a reasonable person could have come to the conclusion that the petitioner was not likely to prove an efficient police officer.
Thus, the very basic requirement of Rule 1221 under which the impugned order was passed is not satisfied in the present case.
8.
It is undoubtedly correct that the jurisdiction to take a view on the facts is vested only in the Superintendent of Police.
It is also true that the writ court is normally reluctant to interfere with an apparently innocuous order of discharge passed against an employee.
However, the writ court also has a duty to reach injustice wherever it occurs.
In the present case, we feel satisfied that it would be unjust to keep the petitioner out of service especially when he was thrown out at a very young age.
In view of the above, the order of discharge is set aside.
The petitioner should be reinstated forthwith.
However, in the circumstances of the case, we hold that he shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary for the intervening period.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.