TS Doabia, J - Counsel heard.
2.
Petition dismissed.
3.
With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
4.
The order of transfer annexure "A" contains the name of the petitioner and other persons, who have been transferred to different places.
This order pertains to about 70 persons.
The petitioner challenges this order on the ground that in winter season, he cannot be transferred.
According to him, he can be transferred only in terms of the criteria indicated in Annexure "C".
This criteria is as under :  "District Development Commissioners, Leh and Kargil will furnish lists of employees due for transfer from Ladakh by 31st December to Ladakh Affairs Departments.
These lists will be forwarded by Ladakh Affairs Department to the Administrative Departments concerned upto 15th February and notices to their substitutes shall be issued by Administrative Deptts.
in February every year.
Their lists will be sent to Ladakh Affairs Department shall constitute two Central Medical Boards separately for Kashmir and Jammu Divisions and in such case any eligible employee pleads illness, such employee or his/her spouse/children be got examined through Ladakh Affairs Department by the concerned Medical Board upto 15th April so that lists of transfer to Ladakh are finalised by or before 30th April by the concerned Deptts.
and posting orders are issued latest by end of April every year."
"The date wherefrom the tenure of posting in Ladakh will reckon shall continue to remain as 30th of June by or before which Govt. employees transferred to Ladakh must report over there."
5.
It has been consistently observed that the transfer in a Government Service is an ordinary concomitant and incident of service, an employee who is appointed in a particular carde of transferable posts his transfer from one place to another is an ordinary incident of service and it does not result in alteration of any conditions of service to his disadvantage.
The transfer is a normal feature in service and no one has a right to remain at a particular post or for a particular period.
The norms or the policy is for the guidance of the officers authorised to effect and regulate the transfer.
Immunity against transfers would amount to gagging the right of the administration to administer and right of the employers to get work at the time and place of his choice and according to the administrative exigencies of the employer which he wants to meet.
The above observation find support from a decision of Supreme Court of India roported as R Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka and others, (1986) 4 SCC 133.
6.
Again in Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta, 1992(1) SCT 161 (SC) : (1992) 1 SCC 306, it was observed:-  "There can be no doubt that ordinarily and as far as practicable the husband and wife who are both employed should be posted at the same station even if their employers be different.
The desirability of such a course is obvious.
However, this does not mean that their place of posting should invariably be one of their choice, even though the preference may be taken into account while making the decision in accordance with the administrative needs.
In the case of All India Services the hardship resulting from the two being posted at different stations may be unavoidable at times particularly when they belong to different services and one of them cannot be transferred to the place of the other's posting.
While choosing the career and a particular service, the couple have to bear in mind this factor and be prepared to face such a hardship if the administrative needs and transfer policy do not permit the posting of both at one place without sacrifice of the requirements of the administration and needs of other employees.
In such a case the couple have to make their choice at the threshold between career prospects and family life.
After giving preference to the career prospects by accepting such a promotion or any appointment in an All India Service with the incident of transfer to any place in India, subordinating the need of the couple living together at one station, they cannot as of right claim to be relieved of the ordinary incidents of All India Service and avoid transfer to a different place on the ground that the spouses thereby would be posted at different places.
No doubt the guidelines require the two spouses to be posted at one place as far as practicable, but that does not enable any spouse to claim such a posting as of right if the departmental authorities do not consider it feasible.
The only thing required is that the departmental authorities should consider this aspect alongwith the exigencies of administration and enable the two spouses to live together at one station if it is possible without detriment to the administrative needs and the claim of other employees."
This view was again followed in Union of India v. SL Abbas, (1993) 4 SCC 357 and it was observed that Courts are not to interfere unless and until the order of transfer is vitiated by malafide consideration.
7.
It is true that transfer causes lot of difficulties and dislocation in the family set-up of the concerned employee, but this cannot be made a ground to interfere with an order of transfer.
Interference can be made only if it is shown that the order of transfer has been made for an oblique purpose or for wrecking vengeance against an employee.
Rajindra Rao v Union of India, JT (1992) 6 SC 732.
8.
A transfer which is an incidence of service is not to be interfered with by the courts unless it is shown to be clearly arbitrary or vitiated by malafide or infraction or any professed norm or principle governing the transfer.
Shri Abani Kanta Ray v. State of Orissa, (1995) 7 JT 167 : 1996(1) SCT 22.
In this regard reference may also be made to another decision reported as NK Singh v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 98 : 1995(1) SCT 269, wherein similar observations were made.
9.
The question of hardship is something to which administrative authorities are to address themselves.
It is for them to mitigate hardship in interest of good and efficient administration.
The courts are, however, not expected to interdict the working of administrative system by transfer of officers to proper places.
State of MP v. SS Kourav, JT (1995) 2 SC 198.
10.
However, where an order of transfer is passed by an authority not competent to pass the same then it may be possible for the court to interfere.
Thus in the case of Dr. Ramesh Chander Tyagi v. Union of India, JT (1994) 1 SC 530 where the order of transfer was made by an authority who was not competent to do so then that order was treated as non est.
As a mater of fact even the second order of transfer which was founded on an earlier order was held to be bad by observing, since the order was invalid it obviously did not exist in the eye of law and the second order of transfer founded on it could not stand.
11.
Another exception can be, where the order is vitiated by mala fide consideration.
As a matter of fact any administrative act which is actuated by mala fide consideration cannot be permitted to stand.
However, any body who seeks to invalidate or nullify any act or order must establish the charge of bad faith, an abuse of misuse of powers while the indirect motive or purpose or bad faith, or personal ill-will is not to be held established except on clear proof thereof.
It is obviously difficult to establish that a person in position or power apparently acting in the legitimate exercise of power has in fact acted mala fide in the sense of persuing an illegitimate aim.
However, a person against whom allegations of mala fide are made is to be a party to the proceeding.
Partap Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964 Pb.
72.
12.
Reference be made to another decision of the Supreme Court of India in case reported as Director of School Education, Madras v. O Karuppa Thevan, (sic) 1996 (SC) 402.
In the above case, it was observed:-  "Although there is no such rule, we are of the view that in effecting transfer the fact that the children of an employee are studying should be given due weight if the exigencies of the service are not urgent.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant was unable to point out that there was such urgency in the present case that the employee could not have been accommodated till the end of the current academic year.
We, therefore, while setting aside the impugned order of the Tribunal, direct that the appellant should not effect the transfer till the end of the current academic year."
From the decisions noticed above, it becomes apparent:-  (i) Transfer is a normal feature of service and no one has right to remain at a particular post or for a particular period.
(ii) Immunity against the transfer would amount to gagging the right of employee.
(iii) If there is some policy decision then the attention of the authorities can be drawn to the policy decision, but no writ can be issued with a view to compel the employer to keep a particular employee at a particular place.
(iv) That the order of the transfer would be bad if it is made by an authority who is not competent to pass the order.
(v) The order of the transfer would again be bad, if it is actuated by mala fide consideration.
In the decisions referred to above, even where there was policy decision to accommodate husband and wife at one place and even though there were other guidelines indicated in other cases, yet the Supreme Court of India left the matter to be dealt with on the administrative side by the State authorities.
Observations made in the above case are to the effect that in transfer matters there has to be least interference by the courts on the judicial side.
13.
As such, this petition is disposed of with a direction that the respondent-State would take notice of its policy decision, copy whereof is Annexure "C" to this writ petition.
If it is not possible to adjust the petitioner, steps may be taken by the respondents.
If it is not possible to do so, it may take such action as is permissible under the Law.
Let appropriate decision be taken as early as possible.
The operation of the order of transfer shall remain in abeyance, till the respondents take a decision.
This is, however, subject to the condition that the order passed by this Court today alongwith a copy of the writ petition and annexures thereof are made available by the petitioner to the respondents/Administrative Department of the petitioner within a period of ten days.
In case this is not done then the interim directions contained in this order shall stand vacated automatically.
Petition disposed of.