GS Singhvi, J - These appeals under Clause X of the Letters Patent are directed against order dated 15.10.1992 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
16414 of 1991-Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(1) SCT 782 (P&H).
vide which he quashed order dated 9101991 issued by the Government of Punjab converting the promotion of the writ petitioner on the post of Professor from regular to ad hoc.
2.
After obtaining the degree of MBBS, Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal (appellant in L.P.A. No. 81 of 1993) joined Punjab Civil Medical Service in the year 1972.
During the service, he passed Master of General Surgery in January, 1974 and M.Ch.
(Urology) in January, 1986.
He was appointed as Registrar (Urology) in January, 1977.
In August, 1979, He was promoted as Senior Lecturer.
He was then promoted as Assistant Professor (Urology) against leave vacancy w.e.f.
2191981 and on regular basis w.e.f.
1381985.
3.
Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel joined service as ad hoc Medical Officer on 21.3.1975.
He was appointed as Medical Officer on regular basis vide order dated 31.10.1975 issued by the State Government on the recommendation of the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short, the Commission).
During the service, he passed Master of General Surgery in 1981 and M.Ch.
(Urology) in 1985.
He was appointed as Assistant Professor (Urology) on temporary basis against direct recruitment quota order dated 2071985 and on regular basis vide order dated 2071990.
He was further promoted as Professor (Urology) on provisional basis against promotion quota vide order dated 1481991, but after less than two months, the State Government issued order dated 9101991 treating his promotion as ad hoc for a period of six months or till the acquisition of teaching experience by Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal.
4.
Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel challenged order dated 9101991 by filing the writ petition which was registered as C.W.P.
16414 of 1991.
He alleged that the impugned order had been passed by the government with an oblique motive of helping Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal, who was not qualified to be appointed as Professor against the vacancy which had become available on 1.10.1990 due to retirement of Dr. Kuldeep Singh Khera, Professor (Urology), Medical College, Patiala.
He averred that as on 1.10.1990, Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal did not have 5 years teaching experience as Assistant Professor (Urology) after obtaining requisite post graduate qualification and, therefore, he was not entitled to be considered for promotion on the post of Professor (Urology) under the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I) Rules, 1978 (for short, the Rules), more-so because he had not been regularly appointed on the post of Assistant Professor (Urology).
He relied on the instructions issued by the government vide circular letter No. 4/18/81-IPC/5594 dated 2241982 on the issue of determination of eligibility for promotion to the higher post from the date of occurrence of the vacancy and pleaded that the eligibility of Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal had to be seen as on the date of occurrence of the vacancy i.e. 1.10.1990 and not on 1481991 as was sought to be done.
He also made reference to the proceedings initiated against Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal on the charge of having disobeyed order dated 20.2.1986 and claimed that in view of the order passed by the government not to regularise the period of absence from duty i.e. 1361986 to 891987, he was not entitled to be considered for the post of Professor.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 through Shri V.K.
Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary, Health, it was averred that Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal had been promoted as Assistant Professor (Urology) on purely temporary basis w.e.f 2191981 against short term vacancy and later on, he was adjusted against promotion quota post w.e.f 13.8.1986 subject to the approval of the Commission which was awaited.
Respondent No. 1 admitted that Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal had remained absent from duty and had been placed under suspension on 13.6.1986.
According to it, Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal had become eligible for promotion in January, 1991 because he had done M.Ch.
in 1986 and if the period of absence from duty was excluded, then he could be considered eligible on 191991.
6.
In his written statement, appellant-Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal had pleaded that he was senior to the petitioner, but without taking into considering his case, the State Government had arbitrarily promoted Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel and when correct facts were brought to the notice of the concerned authorities, order dated 1481991 was revised and his promotion was treated as ad hoc.
He also averred that the period of his alleged absence from duty could not be excluded from consideration for the purpose of counting of experience because vide order dated 2361988, the government had regularised the period by granting leave without pay, earned leave and half pay leave.
7.
After considering the respective pleadings and hearing the arguments, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and quashed order dated 9101991.
He held that (i) the eligibility for promotion had to be considered on the date of vacancy in terms of the instructions issued by the government vide circular letter dated 2241982 and the judgments of the Full Bench of the High Court in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, AIR 1990 Punjab and Haryana 117 and Kerala High Court in Verghese and others v. State of Kerala and others, 1981(2) S.L.R.
253; (ii) for the purpose of promotion to the post of Professor (Urology), experience had to be counted after obtaining the qualification of M.Ch.
; (iii) the period of absence from duty had to be excluded from the service/experience of Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal because the same had not been regularised and if that period was excluded from the total service rendered by him on the post of Assistant Professor after obtaining the qualification of M.Ch., he could not be considered eligible to be promoted to the post of Professor; and (iv) the modification of order dated 1481991 vide which Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel had been promoted was brought about in a clandestine manner apparently due to influence exerted by Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal.
8.
Dr. Balram K Gupta, counsel for Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal argued that the learned Single Judge has committed a serious illegality by reading the requirement of 5 years teaching experience as Assistant Professor after M.Ch.
as a condition for promotion to the post of Professor because the Rules do no contain any such requirement.
Dr. Gupta referred to Appendix `C' attached to the Rules to show that the qualification of M.Ch.
was not required for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor, Associated Professor or Professor till September 23, 1985 and argued that the requirement of 5 years teaching experience after M.Ch.
cannot be read in the Rules by implication.
He further argued that the expression "after the requisite post graduate qualification" used in the amended Appendix `C' is not relatable to post graduate qualification of M.Ch.
and it is sufficient that a person has got such experience on the post of Assistant Professor (Urology).
He then submitted that the degree of Master of General Surgery was correctly treated by the government as post graduate degree in the speciality concerned i.e. Urology for the purpose of promotion to the post of Assistant Professor and Professor (Urology) because none of the Universities in the country had been awarding degree of MS (Urology) or similar other qualifications.
Dr. Gupta referred to the admission brochure issued by the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh to show that Master of General Surgery is the requisite qualification for admission to M.Ch.
(Urology) and submitted that M.Ch.
is a post-doctoral qualification and not a post graduate qualification.
In the last, he argued that the experience gained before obtaining the requisite post graduate qualification is as good as experience gained after obtaining such qualification and, therefore, the distinction sought to be made between two types of experience should be treated as illusory and the learned Single Judge committed a seriously legality by insisting on the requirement of 5 years experience after the post graduate qualification.
In support of his arguments, Dr. Gupta relied on the decisions of this Court in Dr. Avtar Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(8) S.L.R.
1 : 1992(2) SCT 644 and of the Supreme Court in Union of India and another v. Lalita S Rao others, 2000(2) S.L.R.
633 : 2001(2) SCT 1010 (SC).
9.
Shri NDS Mann, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab adopted the arguments of Dr. Gupta and submitted that the requirement of 5 years experience after M.Ch.
cannot be treated into the Rules for the purpose of promotion to the post of Professor (Urology).
10.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, Senior Advocate appearing for Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel supported the impugned order and argued that the view taken by the learned Single Judge on the issue of entitlement of appellant-Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal to be considered for promotion is based on a correct interpretation of the Rules.
He strongly relied on the judgment of this Court in Dr. Pyare Lal Garg v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(3) SCT 188 and argued that Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal cannot take benefit of experience gained by him before passing M.Ch.
because Master of General Surgery is not a post graduate degree in the speciality of Urology.
He also referred the booklet titled "Recommendations on the qualifications required for appointment of persons to the posts of teachers in Medical Colleges and attached hospitals for Undergraduate and post graduate teaching" (1983 Edition) to show that Medical Council of India had treated DM./M.Ch.
as post graduate qualifications for higher specialities i.e., for all teaching appointments to posts higher than tutor in higher specialities i.e. Cardiology, Neurology, Thoracic-Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic-Surgery, Urology and submitted that as the Rules has been amended vide notification dated 2391985 keeping in view the recommendations made by the Medical Council of India, the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by reading the requirement of 5 years teaching experience after M.Ch.
as a condition for promotion to the post of Professor (Urology).
11.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
For the purpose of deciding the issues raised in the appeals, it will be useful to refer to Rules 2(e), 3, 4, 7(2) and Appendix C (unamended and amended).
The same read as under :-  Rules 2(e),3,4, 7(2) and Appendix `C' (Unamended and Amended) 2.
Definition.
- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires :- (a) to (d) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (e).
Department means the speciality as listed in Appendix `A'.
3.
Constitution of Service.
- There shall be constituted a service to be known as the "Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I)" consisting of persons recruited to the Service under rule 9 after the commencement of these rules : Provided that the persons holding the posts specified in Appendix `B' to these rules immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be appointed to the service in accordance with the provisions of these rules on the designation, grade and any scale laid down in Appendix `B' to these rules or the grade or pay scale for which they duly exercised their option.
4.
Number and Character of Posts.
- The Service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix `B' to these rules : Provided that nothing in these rules shall affect the inherent right of Government to add to or reduce the number of such posts or create new posts with different designation and scale of pay, whether permanently or temporarily.
7.
Age and qualification.
- (1) xx xx xx xx (2) No person shall be recruited to the Service by direct appointment, promotion or by transfer unless he possesses the qualifications and teaching experience as is specified in Appendix `C'."
APPENDIX `C' (Unamended) Professor or Additional Professor Post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned, MD, MS, PhD, MSc, DSc, FRCS, MRCP Teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned, for five years in a Medical College after requisite post-graduate qualifications.
Associate Professor As above Assistant Professor (Clinical) viz. Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics, T.B., Psychiatry, Skin and VD, Cardiology, Neurology, Gastro-Enterology, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Radiology, Ear, Nose and Throat (Qte- Rhino- Laryn geology) Ophthalmology, Thoracic-Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic- Surgery, Genite Urinary Surgery, Paediatric-Surgery.
Post graduate degree in the Speciality concerned, MD, MS, PhD, MSc, MRCP etc. Must possess 3 years teaching experience in the Speciality after post graduation in a medical college as Senior Lecturer, Lecturer/Registrar, Research Officer.
Out of this 3 years experience however, 2 years experience in main speciality is essential, remaining 1 year may be in a subject allied to general medicine/Surgery.
Assistant Professor (Non-Clinical) viz. Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology, Forensic Medicine, Pharmacology, Bio-Chemistry, Microbiology Social and Preventive Medicine.
Post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned : MD, MS, Ph.
D, MSc, F.R.CP., MRCP etc. Three years teaching experience whether is it prior to post graduation or subsequent thereto -  Note.
- The teaching experience as Assistant Registrar or Assistant Demonstrator would not be countable.
Assistant Professor Pharmacy 1.
PhD in any of allied subject of Pharmacy 2.
3 years teaching experience as Demonstrator or Lecturer in Pharmacy.
"APPENDIX C" (Amended) Name of Post Qualifications Teaching experienced required.
(1) Professor of - (i) Anatomay, Physiology Pathology including Clinical Pathology; Pharmacology, Biochemistry, Microbiology, Social and Preventive Medicine, Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynalcology, Paediatrics, Tuberculosis, Psychiatry, Skin and VD, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Ear, Nose and Throat, Ophthalmology, Pharmacy: MDMS, PhD, DSc, FRCS, MRCP, in the speciality concerned.
Should have teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned for a minimum period of five years in a Medical College, after the requisite Post-graduate qualifications.
(ii) Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Gastro-Entrology, Endocrinology, Clinical Haematology; DM.
Should have teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned for minimum period of five years in a Medical College, after requisite Post-Graduate qualifications.
(iii) Paediatric Surgery, Urology, Cardiothoracic Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic-Surgery; M.Ch.
Should have teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned for a minimum period of five years in a Medical College after the requisite post-graduate qualifications.
(2) xx xx xx xx xx xx xxx xx xx xx xx xx + + (3) Assistant Professor of - (i) Surgery, Medicine, concerned., Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics, T.B., Skin and VD, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Ear, Nose and throat: MD, MS, PhD, FRCS, MRCP in the speciality Should have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in the speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post-graduation in Medical College.
(ii) Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Gastro-Enterology, Endocrinology and Clinical Haematology: DM.
Should have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in the speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer or Lecturer after post-graduation in Medical College.
(iii) Paediatric Surgery, Urology, Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic-Surgery: M.Ch.
Should have teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in the speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer after Post- graduation in a Medical College."
specialities of Anatomy, Physiology, Bio-Chemistry, Pharmacology, Pathology including Blood Bank, Clinical Pathology, Microbiology, Social and Preventive Medicine, Forensic Medicine, Medicine, Paediatrics, T.B.
and Chest Diseases, Skin and VD, Psychiatry- Surgery, Plastic-Surgery, Urology, Paediatric- Surgery, Gestro-Enterology Orthopaedic, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radiology, Anaesthesia and Pharmacy.
Appendix `B' specifies the number of posts of Professors, Additional Professors, Associate Professors and Assistant Professors in various departments including Urology.
12.
A reading of Rule 7(2) which is couched in negative form and Appendix `C' (unamended) shows that up to 2391985, no person could be appointed as Professor or Associate Professor either by direct recruitment or by promotion unless he possessed post graduate degree in the speciality concerned with 5 years teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned in a Medical College after obtaining requisite post graduate qualification.
Likewise, an person could be appointed as Assistant Professor in the specialities, like Medicine/Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Tuberculosis, Psychiatry, Sking and VD, Cardiology, Neurology, Gastro- Entrology, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Radiology, Ear, Nose and Throat, Ophthalmology, Thoracic-Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic-Surgery, Genite Urinary Surgery (Urology), Paediatric-Surgery unless he possessed post graduate degree in the speciality concerned with 3 years teaching experience in the speciality as a Senior Lecturer/Lecturer/Registrar/Research Officer.
13.
Appendix `C' was amended by the rule-making authority keeping in view the recommendations made by the Medical Council of India that for all teaching appointments to posts higher than tutor in higher specialities i.e. Cardiology, Neurology, Thoracic-Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic-Surgery, Paediatric-Surgery and Urology, a candidate must possess post graduate qualification in the speciality concerned i.e. DM./M.Ch.
approved by the Council from time to time and the existing alternative qualifications i.e. MD/MS and an equivalent qualification with two years special training in a recognised training centre in the speciality concerned, shall cease to the sufficient qualifications for appointment to aforesaid teaching posts.
As per amended Appendix `C' read with Rule 7(2), no person can be appointed as Professor in the specialities of Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology including Clinical Pathology, Pharmacology, Biochemistry, Microbiology, Social and Preventive Medicine, Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Tuberculosis, Psychiatry, Skin and VD, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Ear, Nose and Throat, Ophthalmology, Pharmacy unless he possesses the qualification of MD, MS, PhD, DSc, FRCS, MRCP in the speciality concerned with 5 years teaching experience in a Medical College as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned after the requisite post graduate qualification.
For the specialities of Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Gastro-Enterology, Endocrinology, Clinical Haematology, the prescribed qualifications are DM.
with 5 years teaching experience in a Medical College as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned after requisite post graduate qualification.
Likewise, for the specialities of Paediatric-Surgery, Urology, Cardio-thoracic Surgery, Neuro-Surgery, Plastic- Surgery, the qualifications are M.Ch.
with 5 years experience in a Medical College as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned after the requisite post graduate qualification.
This shows that by adopting the recommendations made by the Medical Council of India, the rule-making authority has prescribed different qualifications for the post of Professor in the general specialities, like Medicine etc. and higher specialities, like Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology including Urology.
For the first category, the qualifications of MD/MS in the speciality concerned have been retained, but in the second category, the qualifications of DM.
and M.Ch.
have been prescribed as essential qualifications.
Similarly, for the post of Assistant Professor in the general specialities, like Surgery, Medicine etc., the old qualification of MD, MS., PhD, FRCS, MRCP in the speciality concerned have been retained, but in the higher specialities, like Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Urology etc., the qualification of DM.
and M.Ch.
have been prescribed as essential qualifications.
14.
The above analysis of the Rules leads to the conclusion that after 2391995, no person can be appointed to the post of Professor (Urology) unless he possesses the qualification of M.Ch.
with 5 years teaching experience in a Medical College as Assistant Professor (Urology) after obtaining the requisite post graduate qualification.
15.
Dr. Gupta's argument that the expression "speciality concerned" appearing in unamended Appendix `C' under the heading "Professor" or "Additional Professor" is referable to MD, MS, PhD, MSc, DSc, FRCS, MRCP in general and not the particular branch and that the same expression appearing in Column-3 of amended Appendix `C' cannot be read as relatable to the qualification of M.Ch.
is misconceived and deserves to be rejected.
In this context, it is important to bear in mind that as per Appendix `A' and Appendix `B' which are referable to Rules 2(e), 3, 4, 12 and 13 of the Rules there are separate departments in various specialities including Urology.
Therefore, the expression "speciality concerned" must derive its colour from the particular department or branch.
This means that a person who does not possess post graduate qualification, like MD, MS etc. in the particular speciality cannot be appointed as Professor in general specialities i.e. Medicine, Surgery etc. and the one who does not hold the degree of DM./M.Ch.
cannot be appointed as Professor in higher specialities which include Urology.
In other words, for the post of Professor (Urology), the expression "speciality concerned" has to be treated as M.Ch.
in Urology and not the qualification of MD, MS etc.  16.
A question almost similar to the one raised in these appeals was considered by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli and another, AIR 1973 SC 811.
The facts of that case were that respondent No. 2, who possessed the degrees of MBBS and FRCS awarded by the University of Edinburgh, was appointed as Professor (Orthopaedic Surgery) resulting in the reversion of respondent No. 1 who had the qualification of MBBS from Bombay University, FRCS of the Edinburgh University and M.Ch.
(Orthopaedics) of the Liverpool University and also FRCS of England.
She challenged the appointment of respondent No. 2 on the ground that the latter did not possess the qualifications prescribed under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963.
The Delhi High Court quashed the appointment of respondent No. 2 on the ground that she was not qualified to be appointed as Professor (Orthopaedic Surgery).
In the appeal, it was argued that the degree of FRCS awarded by Edinburgh University was equivalent to a post graduate degree in the concerned speciality, i.e., Orthopaedics and, therefore, the appointment of respondent No. 2 was in order.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court interpreted the expression "concerned speciality" appearing in the Second Schedule appended to the Central Health Service Rules, 1963 and held that respondent No. 2 was not qualified.
The relevant portions of the decision of the Supreme Court, which have direct bearing on the case in hand, are extracted below :-  "The case raises the question of interpretation of the Central Health Service Rules, 1963, as amended in the years 1966 and 1968.
These rules are made under Article 309 of the Constitution.
In the earlier stages the categories into which the various posts in the Central Health Service were divided, were fairly simple.
In 1966 pursuant to regulations framed by the Indian Medical Council the Government amended the rules creating the category of Specialists.
In 1968 further amendments were made in items 2 and 3 of Annexure 1 to the Second Schedule requiring "a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality mentioned in Part A of Annexure II or equivalent" for the post of a Professor, Reader or Lecturer.
The promotion in question having been made thereafter, the rules as amended in 1966 and 1968 will govern the qualifications necessary for this post.
The post in question is one which falls under Supertime Grade II in rule 4 of the Central Health Service Rules.
According to Rule 8(3) fifty per cent of the vacancies in Supertime Grade II shall be filled by the promotion of (i) General Duty Officers, Grade I with not less than 8 years of service in the category, in the ratio of 2:3 on the recommendation of Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of merit and seniority of the officer concerned.
Provided that no person shall be eligible for appointment to any such post unless the possesses the qualifications and experience requisite for appointment to such post.
The question then is : what are the qualifications and experience requisite for appointment to the post of Professor of Orthopaedics ?
There is no dispute that according to the Second Schedule, which deals with selection by the Union Public Service Commission a Professor in a medical college or teaching institution should have a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality mentioned in Part A of Annexure II or equivalent.
It is not necessary to refer to the other qualifications because they do not arise for decision in this case.
In Annexure II to that Schedule against Item 7 (Orthopaedics), the qualifications mentioned are MS, MCH (Orthopaedics) (Liverpool) FRCS The 1st respondent, as already mentioned, has got the degree of M.C.H.
(Orth.)
(Liverpool).
The 2nd respondent is an FRCS If FRCS mentioned therein can be considered to be a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality, Orthopaedics, the first respondent's petition cannot obviously succeed.
It to seems us that the qualification of FRCS cannot be deemed to be post graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
Are we then to take it that because the Annexure II has the heading List of Post-Graduate Qualifications and FRCS is found beside the item 7 (Orthopaedics), that for the purpose of the rules it is deemed to be a qualification in Orthopaedics though FRCS is certainly a post graduate qualification ?
(sic) As pointed out by the High Court, FRCS (Edn.
), which is the qualification the second respondent possesses, is in General Surgery.
The Edinburgh University awards FRCS in three specialities but not in Orthopaedics.
FRCS (Canada) exists in specialities including Orthopaedics.
Before the growth of specialised qualifications surgeons obtaining the FRCS in General Surgery to specialise in Orthopadedics and other specialities either by doing a diploma in Orthopaedics or simply by practice and experience.
The regulations framed by the Medical Council require that in addition to the general FRCS a surgeon must have a diploma in Orthopaedics before he could be appointed a Professor, Reader or Lecturer in Orthopadedics.
That regulation has been accepted by the Government.
Though the validity of the appointment to the Central Health Service does not have to be tested by reference to the regulations framed by the Indian Medical Council for teaching staff in medical colleges, those regulations and their acceptance by the Government give an indication of what is considered to be a post graduate degree in the concerned speciality.
Before the High Court on behalf of the Government it seems to have been contended that the amendments made in the Central Health Service Rules give effect to the regulations framed by the Indian Medical Council.
Part of the difficulty in this case has arisen because Annexure II was not amended when the relevant portion of Annexure I was amended in 1968.
But that does not take away the force of the argument that FRCS as such cannot be deemed to be a post graduate qualification in the concerned specialty of Orthopaedics.
To hold otherwise mean that a person who has the qualification of FRCS could be deemed to be a Specialist in Tuberculosis and Orthoapedics, although he is also a Specialist in General Surgery.
The various entries in Annexure II would have to be interpreted in a reasonable manner.
Otherwise how could MD, MRCP, FRCS and MS all be considered to be specialised qualifications in Tuberculosis, or a mere MD or MRCP and FRCS connote a post graduate qualification in the speciality of Paediatrics.
It stands to reason that these degrees must be in the subject of paediatrics if the holders of those degree are to be considered specialists in Paediatrics.
As amended earlier, FRCS (Canada) has many specialities.
MD also can be in many specialities as indeed Annexure II itself shows.
So also MS We are, therefore, in complete agreement with the view of the learned Judges of the High Court that FRCS by itself cannot be said to be a post graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
The mere fact that a degree is mentioned against speciality of Orthopaedics does not make it a post graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
Admittedly the second respondent does not possess the qualification of FRCS in Orthopaedics.
In the circumstances the fact that FRCS is also shown against the entry "Orthopaedics" in Annexure II is not an answer to the question whether it is a post graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
It was urged that FRCS examination has an orthopaedics content.
In that sense the holder of every medical degree knows something of every subject in medicine or surgery.
Nobody can contend that a mere MBBS is a degree in surgery or ophthalmology because it has a content of surgery or ophthalmology.
We therefore hold that the 2nd respondent does not hold a post graduate degree in the concerned speciality, Orthopaedics."
17.
In Dr. Pyare Lal Garg's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court interpreted the provisions of the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class II) Rules, 1979 in the context of challenge to the eligibility of respondent No. 2-Dr. Ashok Kumar to be appointed as Senior Lecturer, Paediatric-Surgery on the ground that he did not possess post graduate qualification in the particular speciality.
After making reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli (supra), the Division Bench held that the expression "post graduate qualification in the particular speciality" means the particular branch/speciality/department in which the degree of MS, MD or FRCS is awarded and a person who does not have post graduate qualification in the concerned speciality cannot be appointed as Senior Lecturer merely because he holds the post graduate degree, like MS (General Surgery) or MD (Medicine).
The relevant extract of the order passed in Dr. Pyare Lal Garg's case (supra) is reproduced below :-  "A perusal of Rules 1(3), 2(c) and 4 and extracts of Appendix `A' and `B' shows that the posts of Senior Lecturers are in 17 different departments, some of which require qualifications in the field of Surgery while others require the qualification in the field of Medicine.
Therefore, post graduate qualification of MS or FRCS or MD is referable to the particular departments for which the post of Senior Lecturer is advertised and by no stretch of imagination, it can be said that the person is eligible to be appointed as Senior Lecturer in the particular speciality even though he may not possess post graduate qualification in the concerned speciality or that the person holding the qualification of MS or FRCS or MD etc. would be eligible to be appointed as Senior Lecturer in all the specialities/departments.
A persual of the publication of the Medical Council of India, titled as "Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956" (as amended up to August, 1996) shows that degrees of MS, MD are awarded by the Universities listed in the First Schedule in different branches.
To be precise, the degree of Doctor of Medicine, i.e., MD is awarded in the specialities of Pathology, Physiology, Paediatrics, Pharmacology, Obst.
and Gynae., Medicine, Pathology and Bacteriology, Dermatology, Biochemistry.
Anesthesiology, Radio-therapy, Microbiology, Forensic Medicine etc. by different universities.
Likewise, the degree of Master of Surgery, i.e., MS is awarded by different universities in the specialities of Anatomy, Obst.
and Gynae., Anesthesiology, Ophthalmology, Paediatric Surgery, Plastic Surgery, Thoracic Surgery, Neuro Surgery etc.
The degree of FRCS is awarded by Royal College of Surgeons of England, Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow which have been enlisted in the Second Schedule of the 1956 Act.
Likewise, the degree of MRCP is awarded by Royal College of Physicians of London, Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, Royal College of Physicians of United Kingdom and Royal College of Pathologists, London.
The FRCS and MRCP may be in the different branches of Medicine and Surgery.
Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that the expression "post graduate qualification in the particular speciality" appearing in sub- clause (i) of Clause 1 of Appendix `C' menas the particular branch/speciality/department in which the degree of MS or MD or FRCS is awarded and a person, who does not have post graduate qualification in the concerned speciality, cannot be appointed as Senior Lecturer simply because he holds the post graduate degree like MS (General Surgery) or MD (Medicine)."
The judgement of the learned Single Judge in I>Dr.
Avtar Singh v. State of Punjab (supra) was considered by the Division Bench in Dr. Pyare Lal Garg's (supra) and it was observed that the view taken by the learned Single Judge was contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli's case (supra) and, therefore, the same cannot be relied upon for accepting the plea of the respondents.
18.
We also do not find any merit in the argument of Dr. Gupta that the expression "after requisite post graduate qualification" appearing in Column-3 of amended Appendix `C' should not be interpreted with reference to the qualification of M.Ch.
and it is sufficient that a candidate has gained required teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the concerned speciality after doing MD, MS, Ph.
D, DSc, FRCS or MRCP In our opinion, the use of the word "requisite" between the words "after" and "post graduate" in Column-3 of Appendix `C' is clearly indicative of the intention of the rule-making authority that for the post of Professor in higher specialities, the candidate must have gained 5 years teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned after acquiring the post graduate qualification i.e. DM./M.Ch.
Therefore, the expression "after requisite post graduation" appearing in column-3 against Entry 1(iii) of the amended Appendix `C' will have to be read in conjunction with the qualification of DM./M.Ch.
This would necessarily mean that after 2391985. for promotion to the post of Professor (Urology), a person must possess qualification of M.Ch.
with 5 years teaching experience as Assistant Professor in the speciality concerned in a Medical College after obtaining the qualification of M.Ch.
This becomes further clear from Entry 3(iii), a perusal of which shows that as per the amended Appendix `C', a person is eligible to be considered for appointment as Assistant Professor (Urology) if he possesses the qualification of M.Ch.
with 3 years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as Senior Lecturer after post graduation in a Medical College.
The use of different expressions in different entries of Appendix `C' in the context of the requirement of experience clearly shows that while a person with the qualification of M.Ch.
is eligible for appointment as Assistant Professor (Urology) if he/she has 3 years teaching experience in the concerned speciality as Senior Lecturer after doing post graduation (not necessarily in the same speciality), for appointment as Professor, the candidate must possess not only the qualification of M.Ch., but also have 5 years teaching experience after obtaining the post graduate qualification i.e. M.Ch.
Any other interpretation of the expression "after requisite post graduate qualification" would render the word "requisite" redundant and we do not find any compelling reason for adopting such an interpretation.
19.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in AK Raghumani Singh and others v. Gopal Chandra Nath and others, 2000(2) S.L.R.
633 : 2000(2) SCT 465 (SC) on which reliance has been placed by Dr. Gupta is clearly distinguishable because the Manipur P.W.D/Irrigation and Flood Control/Public Health Engineering (Superintending Engineer (Civil)/Superintending Surveyor of Works) Recruitment Rules, 1977 which were interpreted by the Supreme Court did not contain a provision similar to the one embodied in Column-3 of Appendix `C' attached to the Rules.
The Manipur Rules provided that the post of Superintending Engineer shall be filled up by promotion from Executive Engineer (Civil/Mech.)
and Surveyor of Works possessing Degree in Civil/Mechanical Engineering or its equivalent from a recognised institution with 6 years regular service in the grade.
Their Lordships held that the requirement of regular service embodied in the rules cannot be interpreted as service rendered after acquiring particular qualification and the total service rendered before or after obtaining the qualification had to be taken into consideration for determining the eligibility for promotion.
Even in MB Joshi and others v. Satish Kumar Pandey and others, 1992(5) S.L.R.
611 : 1993(2) SCT 72 (SC); N Suresh Nathan v. Union of India, 1992(2) SCT 466 (SC) : 1992(6) S.L.R.
143; D Stephen Joseph v. Union of India and others, 1997(4) S.L.R.
465 : 1997(2) SCT 662 (SC) and Anil Kumar Gupta and others, 2000(1) S.L.R.
303 to which reference has been made in AK Raghumani Singh's case (supra), the rules which came up for interpretation before the Supreme Court did not contain the requirement of experience after obtaining particular qualification.
Therefore, the judgment in AK Raghumani Singh's case (supra) cannot be made basis for holding that the experience gained, if any, before acquiring the qualification of M.Ch.
could be considered for treating the appellant-Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal eligible for promotion to the post of Professor.
20.
Before parting with this aspect of the matter, we deem to proper to mention that the Medical Council of India had also recommend that the requirement of possessing a post graduate degree qualification in the concerned higher speciality shall not be applicable for higher appointments in the case of existing teachers holding regular teaching posts whose appointment was initially made on the basis of two years special training in the speciality after the requisite MD/MS However, while amending the Rules, the competent authority did not incorporate this proviso.
Moreover, it is not the case of Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal or the State of Punjab that he had been appointed as Assistant Professor (Urology) on the basis of two years special training in that speciality after obtaining the qualification of MS (General Surgery).
Therefore, nothing would turn on the second part of the recommendations made by the Medical Council of India.
21.
In view of the above discussion, we hold that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error in taking the view that for promotion to the post of Professor (Urology), a candidate must possess the qualification of M.Ch.
and 5 years teaching experience in Medical College as Assistant Professor (Urology) after obtaining the qualification of M.Ch.
22.
We also agree with the learned Single Judge that eligibility for promotion to the post of Professor had to be considered on the date of occurrence of vacancy and that Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal could be considered eligible for promotion on the date Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel had been promoted.
While dealing with this issue, the learned Single Judge took notice of the averments made in the pleadings and the judgments of this Court in Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case (supra) and of Kerala High Court in Verghese's case (supra) and observed as under :-  "The post under contention admittedly fell vacant on the retirement of Dr. Kuldip Singh Khera w.e.f.
30.9.1990.
The crucial questions, thus, to be seen are as to whether respondent No. 2 under the 1985 Rules had requisite teaching experience after doing his M.Ch.
on the said date and also as to whether it is on the date when the post falls vacant that the eligibility criteria of respective persons has to be considered or that the crucial date is the actual date of appointment or promotion.
Further it has to be seen as to whether the teaching experience of respondent No. 2 prior to amendment of the Rules can be taken into account.
Dealing with point as to which is the crucial date, I am of the considered opinion that the law laid down by the Apex court and the Full Bench of this Court apart, the instructions issued by the Punjab Government vide letter dated 2741982 were binding upon the Government.
While dealing with the matter, in the instructions aforesaid (Annexure P-9) it has been clearly mentioned that promotion cases of certain employees are sometimes deliberately delayed with a view to allow sufficient time to the concerned individual(s) to acquire necessary qualifications/experience prescribed for the relevant higher posts.
Such a (sic) prompts the individual(s) to have the promotion cases delayed to become entitled for consideration for promotion.
Resultantly, higher posts remain vacant and this fact necessitate a consideration whether at all there is need to fill up the higher post(s).
Besides, this practice militants against the rights of individuals who are eligible for promotion on the date of occurrence of vacancy in higher posts.
After giving careful consideration, the Government decided as follows :- "That in future the date of occurrence of vacancy shall be taken as the relevant date of determining eligibility for promotion to higher post(s).
The other aspects of the subject will continue to be covered in terms of Punjab Government letter No. 8401-4GS-61/33117 dated 8/11.9.1961 and Punjab Government letter No. 6256-SII(3)-71/29750 dated 12.11.1971.
A Full Bench of this court in Punjab State Electricity Board Patiala v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, AIR 1990 Punjab and Haryana 117, while dealing with the similar situation held as follows :-  Different conditions of eligibility have been prescribed for diploma-holders and non-diploma holders lineman, the fulfilment of which alone qualifies them to be promoted as Line Superintendent on the basis of seniority, and to be reckoned on the date when the post in which the promotional cadre falls vacant.
Suppose a Lineman, be he a diploma-holder or a non-diploma holder, acquires eligibility for promotion when no promotional post is available, he inevitably has to wait for one becoming available.
He should normally get it the day it falls vacant.
But despite that he is not promoted, for one reason or the other.
AND in the meantime another Lineman, be he a diploma holder or a non-diploma-holder becomes eligible.
The question then inevitably will crop up, who should get the promotional post, should it in these circumstances go to the senior out of the two, even though the senior acquired eligibility later than the junior, or should it go to be one who acquired eligibility first.
In this situation, seniority per se cannot be intended to be taken as the basis for promotion as otherwise it would lead to undesirable results.
If it is to be dealt otherwise, it would lead to breeding of manipulation, mechination, calculations and caprice.
Designedly the case of promotion of the first eligible can deliberately be kept delayed with oblique motives so as to let suitable rivals come in and in this manner his acquired eligibility can be frustrated by someone senior acquiring eligibility far late.
In similar circumstances, a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Verghese and others v. State of Kerala and others, 1981(2) Service Law Reporter 253, held as follows :-  It is the time of occurrence of vacancy that should be relevant for determination of the question of promotion and not the time the order of promotion is passed.
The relevant date must be definite and not depending upon the violation (valition ?)
of the authorities, as otherwise, the determination would be arbitrary.
If it were to be the date of promotion that is to be relevant for determining the title to such promotion the rule is capable of arbitrary exercise.
Even if it is honest exercise that would be arbitrary because the fate of service career will depend in each instance upon the time taken by the concerned authority in passing the order of promotion.
On the other hand, there is definiteness in treating the date of occurrence of the vacancy as that which would determine the title of the person to be considered for promotion.
There is no need to mention all the case law on the point as it is by now well settled that it is the date of occurrence of vacancy that is relevant and the persons, who do not have the requisite qualifications or experience on the said date cannot be considered even though the consideration may be done later in point of time.
No judgment taking a contrary view has been brought to my notice by the learned counsel for the respondents.
The petitioner having had already teaching experience of five years after doing M.Ch.
was rightly promoted to the post of Professor.
Insofar as respondent No. 2 is concerned, admittedly, he had done his M.Ch.
on 28.1.1986 and on the relevant date i.e. 30.9.1990 he had teaching experience after doing his M.Ch.
of a period of 4 years 8 months and 4 days.
He was suspended from 13.6.1986 to 791987 and the said period was declared as not spent on duty vide letter dated 2921987.
Again the period from 15.2.1986 to 1261986 was treated as leave without any pay vide order dated 22.6.1988.
In this manner, a period of one year six months had to be deducted from a period of 4 years 8 months and 4 days and, thus reducing the same to 3 years 1 month and 26 days.
No review of the earlier order was permissible.
The request of respondent No. 2 to treat the said period as spent on duty was rejected vide Annexure P-5 dated 2921987 and stand of respondent No. 2 that the moment the period of suspension is converted into leave, it has the effect of vacating the order of suspension and that it will be deemed not to have been passed at all, appears to be a clear attempt on his part to protect the order (Annexure P-7) and, therefore, cannot be given any credence.
There is vast lot of difference between earned leave and half pay leave which is sanctioned under Rules 8.133 and 8.133A of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part I, where period of leave is counted towards spent on duty and the leave of kind due are sanctioned under Rule 8177(b) of the Rules aforesaid, which period cannot be counted towards spent on duty.
I do not want to go any further into the matter as it is clearly made out from Annexure P-5 that request of respondent No. 2 to treat the said period as spent on duty was specifically rejected and the said order has attained finality.
In view of the order (Annexure P-5), the respondents cannot successfully plead that the said period can be treated as spent on duty.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that even by counting the period, mention of which has been made above, respondent No. 2 did not have teaching experience of five years after doing M.Ch.
when the post under contention fell vacant.
There is absolutely no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that teaching experience of the respondent No. 2 prior to amendment of the Rules had also to be taken into consideration.
It is the Rules which are prevalent at the time when the post falls vacant prior to the amendment of the Rules, then some meaningful argument could be advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents, but in the present case 1978 Rules were amended in 1985 where technical experience of five years after the post graduate degree, like MD, MS etc. was replaced by five years teaching experience after doing M.Ch.
Respondent No. 2 did his M.Ch.
after amendment of the Rules i.e. in the year 1986 and when the post fell vacant in 1990 by no logic whatsoever respondent No. 1 could count his teaching experience after doing the post graduate qualifications, i.e. MD/MS etc.
The contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents on that behalf is totally devoid of any merit."
23.
The learned counsel for the appellants could not advance any meaningful argument to justify reversal of the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge that Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal was not eligible to be considered for promotion.
Moreover, after having independently considered the issue, we are convinced that if the period of absence and suspension is excluded from the total experience gained by Dr. Raj Kumar Jindal after doing M.Ch.
then he cannot be treated eligibility on 1481991.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties show that he was posted as Assistant Professor (Urology) at Medical College, Amritsar vide Punjab Government's order dated 22.2.1986, but instead of joining duty, he proceed on leave w.e.f.
2521986.
His leave was rejected by the government and he was directed to report for duty, but he did not comply with the order.
Due to this, he was placed under suspension vide order dated 13.6.1986.
After one year and three months, he was reinstated vide order dated 4/791987.
At one stage, the application submitted by him for treating the period of suspension as spent on duty was rejected, but latter on, following leave was sanctioned vide order dated 2361988 :-  "1.
Leave without pay 25286 to 12.6.86 108 days.
2.
Earned Leave 13.6.86 to 23.9.1996 103 days.
3.
Half pay leave 23986 to 10.6.87 260 days.
4.
Leave without pay 11687 to 8.9.87 90 days."
If the period of absence and suspension excluded, then he cannot be treated eligible even as on 1481991 i.e. the date on which Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel was promoted as Professor (Urology).
24.
We are also in agreement with the learned Single Judge that the manner in which the State Government had suo motu revised the promotion of Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel shows that it was done due to extraneous reasons.
25.
We may add that order dated 9101991 was also liable to be quashed on the ground of violation of rules of natural justice because it is an admitted position that before altering/modifying the nature of promotion of Dr. Avinash Kumar Goel, the government did not give him action-oriented notice and opportunity of hearing.
In other words, he was condemned unheard and this could, by itself, be treated as sufficient for quashing order dated 9101991.
State of Orissa v. Dr. (Mrs.) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269, Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597 and Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.