BSA Swamy, J - In this writ petition this Court is called upon to decide whether the teaching staff working in an educational institution under a private management can be transferred to a school that is being run by another private institution.
2.
The petitioner, who is a post graduate in Zoology, seemed to have been appointed to teach the subject of Zoology in the Degree College as well as Junior College maintained by Hithakarini Sangham, Rajahmundry intermittently since 1992.
The petitioner initially filed this writ petition seeking regularisation of her services as Junior Lecturer in Zoology in the aided vacancy that has arisen consequent upon the absorption of Smt. K Usharani, who was working in that post till then in the Dr. Melkote Memorial Women's Junior College, Hyderabad as per the orders of 2nd respondent in his Procedure Rc.
No. I/JC8-3/95, dated 26696 by taking into consideration the services rendered by her in all the 3 colleges maintained by the Hithakarini Samaj under GOMs.No302, Education, dated 2381991.
3.
Though the writ petition was admitted on 1821996, no interim orders were given by this Court.
Subsequently, within 4 days thereafter the 2nd respondent by relying on a Government Memo No.2202/CE II-I/88-I, Education Department, dated 16.1.89 transferred Smt. M.V.L.
Rani, who was working as Junior Lecturer in Zoology in GVM Junior College, Bhimavaram, West Godavari District, and posted her in the vacancy that has arisen in the 3rd respondent College due to absorption of Smt. Usharani.
Aggrieved by the said orders, the petitioner filed two applications WPMP 18201/96 to bring Smt. M.V.L.
Rani as a 4th respondent in the WP and WPMP 18202/96 seeking suspension of the order of 2nd respondent dated 22796 transferring Smt. M.V.L.
Rani to the 3rd respondent College.
On 1.8.1996 while ordering the impleaded petition, I passed an order in WPMP 18202/96 directing the 3rd respondent to continue the petitioner in the post in which she was working if 4th respondent has not joined till that date and there will be stay of the order dated 22796.
Now it transpired the Court Master seemed to have written the order in WPMP 16985/96 which was filed along with the writ petition seeking a direction for her continuance in the post, which was not acceded to by this Court.
Thereafter, the Counsel got the WPMP posted for being mentioned and by order dated 6896 a positive direction was given to continue the petitioner in the post in which she was working as on 2271996.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed another WPMP 18432 of 1996 seeking amendment of the prayer in the writ petition and sought a declaration that the transfer of 4th respondent to the 3rd respondent College is illegal and arbitrary and hence a direction may be given to Respondents 1 and 3 to regularise her services as junior lecturer in Zoology in the 3rd respondent College or in the alternative to fill up the aided vacancy in accordance with law.
4.
In view of the importance of issue that has to be adjudicated, I have taken up the hearing of the writ petition itself and the matter underwent several adjournments to enable the Counsel to get information on one aspect or the other.
It came to light that the amendment petition was not ordered till then.
Having ordered the amendment petition, I have given time to the respondents to file their counters and the Government as well as the contesting respondents filed their additional counters also.
Though the petitioner initially tried to press her claim for regularisation, subsequently she has given up that plea and addressed the arguments on the power of 2nd respondent in transferring 4th respondent, who is working as a Junior Lecturer in Zoology for a long time in GVM Junior College, Bhimavaram to the 3rd respondent College.
It is her contention that the educational institutions maintained by a particular educational agency are treated as a unit by themselves for purpose of appointment, promotion, seniority, transfer etc. under the provisions of AP Education Act and the rules made thereunder.
As such, a teacher working in an institution under the management of one educational agency cannot be transferred to the educational institutions maintained by another educational agency.
It is also her case that the 2nd respondent while giving permission to absorb Smt. Usharani, the incumbent in the post, forwarded a copy to the 3rd respondent in which he has categorically stated that "he is requested to take necessary steps to fill up the aided vacant post in the College".
By giving such a direction, it has to be presumed that the 2nd respondent negatived the request of 3rd respondent College for transfer of a teacher working in an aided post in any of the Colleges to their College to meet the exigencies of the work vide Ref.
No. Nil/A/VIJC/95 dated 31795.
As such, the 2nd respondent is not justified in transferring the 4th respondent to the institution in question by relying on the said letter nearly after one year.
Thirdly, she contended that though she cannot have any right over the post to get absorbed by virtue of her temporary service, had the respondents followed the recruitment procedure prescribed under GOMs.
No12, dated 1011992 she would have also participated in the selection and the 3rd respondent College would be in a position to appoint the best among the candidates appeared for the interview.
5.
The learned Government Pleader as well as the contending respondents strenuously contended that the petitioner has no locus standi to file this writ petition.
It is the case of the official respondents that under Section 3 of the Education Act, the 2nd respondent in exercise of the powers of superintendence and control over all the educational institutions in the State is fully justified to effect the transfer of 4th respondent on humanitarian considerations and in fact the Government issued instructions in that regard vide Memo 2202/CE-II dated 1611989.
Acting on that memo, the 2nd respondent issued the impugned proceedings.
It is the case of the Government, in the two counters filed on 4th October, 96 and 10th September, 97 that the instructions are meant for absorption of the teachers who are found surplus in a particular institution elsewhere, where there is a need, and under Section 3 of the AP Education Act, the 2nd respondent is empowered to effect the transfer of an employee from one institution to the other.
The Counsel for the 4th respondent contended that the transfer of his client was effected only after obtaining no objection certificate from the 3rd respondent as well as consent letter from the College where she was working as required under Government Memo dated 1611989.
Hence, the transfer of his client to the 3rd respondent Unit is fully justified.
6.
The other contentions raised by the 4th respondent relate to the temporary service rendered by the petitioner and they are intended to contend that no legal right or vested right is accrued in favour of the petitioner.
I have already held that the petitioner cannot claim regularisation of her services by virtue of the temporary service rendered by her in the institutions maintained by Hithakarini Samaj and as I am not examining the issue from that angle I am not referring to the other arguments advanced by the 4th respondent.
7.
Coming to the issue of locus standi of the petitioner in filing the writ petition, it is true that no rights have been accrued to the petitioner to claim regularisation of her services but it is now well settled principle that though no individual can claim appointment as a matter of right, he/she is definitely entitled to claim consideration of his/her case for appointment in accordance with rules.
Such a right is guaranteed under Article 15 of the Constitution of India.
In the event the Court comes to the conclusion that the transfer of 4th respondent is vitiated, the only course open to the respondents would be to issue a public notification inviting applications from all the eligible candidates and consider the appointment of the best among the candidates that are going to participate in the process of selection.
Further, under GOMs.
No. 12, dated 10011992, the Government prescribed the procedure for filling up the teaching posts by the private managements in Degree as well as Junior Colleges.
In the said GO the posts of Junior Lecturers have to be filled up by direct recruitment and the rule of reservation for SCs, STs and BCs including women has to be followed as per the rules in vogue, treating each College as a unit.
From this it is evident that as and when a notification is given by the 3rd respondent College to fill up the vacancy, she can also apply for the post and participate in the selection along with others.
Hence, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is having the locus standi to question the transfer of 4th respondent from GVM College, Bhimavaram to the 3rd respondent College.
Even assuming that the petitioner has no locus standi to file this writ petition, I would like to take up this case as a public interest litigation keeping the importance of the issue to be decided in this case and its effect on the teaching staff working in private education institutions.
8.
Coming to the second contention that the 2nd respondent in exercise of the powers of superintendence as empowered to transfer 4th respondent, it is useful to refer some of the statutory provisions, both under the Act and the rules made thereunder.
Under Section 3 of the Education Act, the Government has to appoint one or more Directors for the State for general education and a Director for Technical for the purpose of exercising the powers conferred on and performing the functions entrusted to each of them under the Act.
From this it is evident that the 2nd respondent is entrusted with the exercise of the powers conferred on him specifically under the Act.
9.
Then the question to be considered would be whether the Director is empowered to transfer a teacher from one private educational institution to another private educational institution which are treated as different and distinct units for the purpose of appointment, promotion, retrenchment etc.  10.
Section 2 of the Act deals with definition.
An approved school is defined under it and under sub-clause (4) a school under the management of any other management (emphasis supplied) recognised as such under the Act is also defined as an approved school under it.
College includes a junior college recognized by or affiliated by the AP Board of Intermediate Education.
Under Clause 27, management is defined as the managing committee or the governing body, by whatever name it is called, of a private institution to which the affairs of the said institution are entrusted.
11.
Under Clause 35, a private institution is defined as an institution imparting education or training, established or administered or maintained by a body of persons and recognised as an educational institution by the Government and includes a college, a special institution and a minority education institution but does not include the institutions established and administered by the Central Government or the State Government or the local authority or the University.
12.
Clause 43 defines "teacher" as any member of the teaching staff in an educational institution appointed to give instruction in that institution.
13.
Section 20 deals with permission to be given by the competent authority for establishment of an educational institution.
Under Clause 2, a notification has to be given by the competent authority inviting applications from educational agencies for establishment of the educational institutions.
A local authority or registered body of persons intending to establish an institution imparting education is at liberty to make an application seeking permission.
Under clause 3, the educational agency applying for permission shall satisfy the competent authority before the permission is granted among other things about the appointment of qualified teaching staff according to the rules made by the Government on that behalf.
Under Section 78(1) of the Act, the Government is empowered to constitute educational service for any officer or class of officers or any teacher or class of teachers by issuance of a notification.
Under Clause 2, after such a notification is issued, the Government shall have the power to make rules to regulate the classification, methods of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowance and discipline and conduct of the members of the educational service.
The jurisdiction in relation to such service may vest in the Government or in such authority/authorities as may be prescribed under the rules.
14.
Admittedly, till this date no educational service is constituted for the teachers working in private aided institutions and no statutory rules have been framed governing any of the aspects referred above except framing statutory rules for purpose of disciplinary rules and conduct rules.
In those rules the power to take disciplinary action is conferred on the management.
But, the Government went on giving executive instructions indicating the procedure for selection of lecturers/junior lecturers in private degree/junior colleges by the respective/educational agency in exercise of its executive power under Article 162 of the Constitution of India.
15.
Both sides agreed for the appointment of these lecturers are governed by GOMs.
No. 12, Education (CE I-2) department, dated 10011992.
As per this GO, the managements of private colleges have to notify the vacancies to the employment exchange, professional and executive officer, Hyderabad and within 15 days thereafter the management of the private colleges has to notify the vacancies in two daily newspapers (local and national) indicating the roster point calling applications from the eligible candidates without waiting for the sponsoring of the candidates by the employment exchange.
As far as junior lecturers are concerned, candidates with a minimum of 50% marks in post graduation in the concerned subject are eligible to apply for the post of junior lecturer in junior college.
The role of reservation for SCs, STs and BCs including the representation for women have to be followed as per the rules in vogue treating the college as an independent Unit.
The concerned managements have to prepare merit list faculty-wise and the managements have to invite candidates in the ratio of 1:5.
In the selection committee constituted for conducting interviews, the Correspondent/Secretary of the educational institution is the Chairman.
The other members constituted in the selection committee need not be referred to at present as that was not the issue to be adjudicated in this writ petition and the selection committee has to prepare the list of selected candidates in order of merit and the list of selected candidates needs to be placed before the Management Committee for approval before the actual appointment orders are given to the selected candidates.
From the statutory provisions, and the terms of the above GO referred above, it is seen that the institutions administered by each of the private managements are treated as separate entities for purposes of appointments, seniority, disciplinary control etc., and one has nothing to do with the other and the post of junior lecturer has to be filled up only by direct recruitment after following the procedure prescribed for selecting the candidates for appointment.
It is also seen that each college run by the private management is being treated as a separate unit for observation of the rule of reservation.
Though various department officers are associated with the process of selection, ultimately the power of appointment vested in the management committee of the institution.
Except this, the Counsel appearing for the respondents could not produce any evidence to show that any other method of appointment is being followed or permissible in the institutions maintained by the private managements.
In other words, the order referred above does not provide filling up of the vacancies of junior lecturers by transfer by the Government from one private aided institution to another.
16.
Under Chapter XIV of the Education Act, payment of salaries and allowances and disciplinary action against the employees of the private institutions were dealt with.
While the power of holding disciplinary enquiry and pass orders like imposing both minor and major penalties vested in the management, the only limitations placed on the management are:  (1) When a major penalty like dismissal, removal or reduction in rank is imposed prior approval of an authority or officer as may be prescribed for different classes of private institutions, has to be obtained before giving effect to the decision taken by the Managing Committee.
(2) An appeal is provided to a Government officer or authority.
17.
Under Section 80 of the Act, the delinquent employee is given the opportunity of preferring an appeal against the order imposing a major penalty to the competent authority within 30 days of the receipt of a copy of the order by him.
A second appeal is provided to the Government by the management or the employees aggrieved by an order passed by the competent authority passed, under Section 82 of the Act within a period of 30 days from date of the receipt of a copy of the order.
18.
Section 83 deals with retrenchment of employees.
When retrenchment of an employee is rendered necessary either by the management or the competent authority consequent upon any change relating to education or course of instruction or to any other matter, such retrenchment may be effected with the prior approval of the competent authority or the next higher authority as the case may be.
19.
In Section 2(27), the word used is the management which was defined as the managing committee or the governing body, by whatever name called, of private institution which is looking after the affairs of the said institution.
Likewise, a private institution was also defined in Section 2(35).
'Private institution' means an institution imparting education or training, established or administered or maintained by a body of persons and recognised as educational institution by the Government.
20.
From this it is crystal clear that the educational institution maintained by each educational agency/private institution are treated as different and distinct institutions and they have nothing in common.
In fact, while applying permission to establish an education institution, the educational agency is expected to send a copy of the bye-laws of the Society/Trust, "whereunder the aims and objectives for which the institution is established are enumerated.
It is also not in doubt that each educational agency may come forward to establish an educational institution with different aims and for achieving different objectives.
Further Section 83 of the Act clearly deals with the retrenchment of the employee is unavoidable.
The statute did not provide accommodation of the retrenched employees of one private educational institution in another educational institution maintained by another educational agency.
When the statute itself did not envisage the absorption of a retrenched employee of one educational agency to another educational agency, to my mind, it appears that the Legislature did not choose to make such a provision in the statute deliberately not to give any scope for litigation between the private educational agencies on one hand and the teaching staff on the other hand when the statutes do not provide such a contingency, the respondents cannot contend that in exercise of the power of superintendence vested in the 2nd respondent, he can issue any proceedings as he likes at his whims and fancies.
In fact, a reading of Section 3 makes it abundantly clear that the Director and other officers appointed by the Government are expected to exercise only those powers conferred on them and perform the duties entrusted to each of them by or under the Act.
When the statute itself does not contemplate accommodation of a retrenched employee of one educational institution by another educational institution, the question of issuing orders in exercise of powers of superintendence by the 2nd respondent does not arise.
Further a delegate cannot have more powers than the delegator himself.
21.
Further a look at Section 99 of the Act also makes it clear that the Government is not empowered to make any rules, for absorption of the retrenched employees of one private institution until and unless an educational service is constituted under Section 78 of the Act.
The Government framed Statutory Rules AP Private Institutions Employees (Disciplinary Control) Rules in GOMs.
No. 467, Edn.
(R), dated 3rd November, 1983.
Under Rule (2), these disciplinary rules are applicable to the employees of all private educational institutions.
Under Rule 6, the management may by order delegate these powers to impose any of the penalties specified in Rule 5 to the Manager of the institution.
Under rule 7 no employee shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank by an authority subordinate/inferior to the management of the private institutions.
22.
In the light of the foregoing discussion with regard to the statutory provisions the disciplinary rules and GOMs.
No12, dated 10011992, there is no difficulty in holding that the 2nd respondent is not competent to issue the impugned proceedings and the same suffers from inherent lack of jurisdiction.
As such the order has to be declared ab initio void.
23.
I am fortified in my view by a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in GV Narasimham v. The Govt. of AP, 1996(3) ALT 567 (DB).
In almost similar circumstances, this Court held that under GOMs.
No. 233, dated 20101993, each private aided oriental college is treated as a separate unit for purpose of seniority and filling up of the post of principal, and the decision of the Government to abolish STRNSS Kalasala in GO Rt.
No401, dated 01.11.1994 does not empower the Government to direct the other private aided oriental college to absorb the staff working in the closed institution against existing vacant posts, even if there is workload for absorption.
Their Lordships further held that as the Government did not modify the GO Ms. No203, it should be held that the same to be operative on its own force.
24.
Secondly, the respondents traced the power of the 2nd respondent in issuing the proceedings dated 22071996 to Memo No2202/CE-II/1/88-1, Education dated 16011989 and contended that the 2nd respondent transferred the 4th respondent after obtaining no objection from the 3rd respondent to admit the 4th respondent in their college and after obtaining the consent letter from the GVM Junior College, Bheemavaram to relieve her in the event of her absorption in the 3rd respondent college, and it has to be sustained in law.
The memo is extracted hereunder :-  "Government of Andhra Pradesh Education Cell Dept., Memo No2202/CE-II-1/88-1, Edn., dated 16011989.
Sub :- Private Colleges - Aided S.K.B.R.
College, Amalapuram, East Godavari District - Request of Kum.
C Rama Nars Lecturer in Botany for transfer to D.R.
Goenka Women's College, Tadepalli Gudem, in West Godavari - Reg.
Ref :- From the DHE's letter Rc.
No. 2624/DC4-3/88, dated 91288.
With reference to the letter cited, the Director of Higher Education, is informed that such proposals need not be referred to Government.
She may however consider such transfers keeping in view the following guidelines :  1.
Written consent of the lecturer and both the institutions to be obtained.
2.
There should be no financial commitment to Government.
3.
Transfer should be within each six-point formula Zone only.
4.
Reservation for SC, ST and BCs is not affected.
5.
The lecturer should be qualified to hold the post to which he/she is being transferred.
6.
The prescribed workload have to be adhered to.
(PK Dorai Swamy) Principal Secretary to Government."
25.
From this it is seen that if both the educational agencies agree for the transfer of an employee working from one institution to the other the Government directed the 2nd respondent to consider such proposals subject to the conditions stipulated thereunder i.e. (1) no financial commitment, (2) the transfer should be within the 6 point formula (3) reservation for SC, ST and BC should not be effected (4) the lecturers seeking transfer should be qualified, and there should be workload to accommodate the incumbent.
Now, it is the case of the respondents that as both the managements agreed for the transfer of the 4th respondent to 3rd respondent institution, the petitioner cannot question the same as she has no legal right or accrued right over the post that is going to be occupied or filled up with the respondent.
In support of their contention, the respondents relied on a letter said to have been addressed by the 3rd respondent in reference No.Nil/VTJC/95, dated 31071995, Therein he informed the Director that the managements have no objection to appoint a junior lecturer in Zoology Department working in another aided college in view of the urgency involved in the matter and to see that the curriculum of the students is not effected.
In other words, he categorically stated that after Usha Rani's transfer to Dr. Melkote Memorial Junior College on 25071995, there was a total dislocation of the work for 4 sections in the subject of Zoology as it being a single person department, the laboratory was even closed as there is no other junior lecturer in Zoology in the department.
Subsequently, the management of Dr. Melkote Memorial Women's Junior College expressed his willingness to absorb Usha Rani in their college on permanent basis and the 2nd respondent while acceding to the request of the said management in his Proceedings Rc.
No. I/JC8-3/95, dated 26061996 marked a copy of the correspondence to the 3rd respondent, whereunder he was directed to take necessary steps to fill up the vacant posts in the college immediately."
26.
From this it is evident that the said proceedings were issued almost one year after the 3rd respondent made a request to allot a junior lecturer in Zoology for appointment in their college and in those proceedings the 2nd respondent categorically directed the correspondent college and the question of giving consent does not arise.
Further, on her own admission that her husband is working as Principal in a Government Junior College at Samalkot, 40 kilometers away from Rajahmundry and it is open to him to seek a transfer by stating all these grounds to Rajahmundry as he could be appointed in any of the Government Junior Colleges in Zone-II as per the rules.
27.
Whatever sympathy I may have for the family problems of the 4th respondent, I cannot uphold the transfer of the 4th respondent to 3rd respondent college from GVM College, as the same violates the statute and the instructions given by the Government from time to time.
28.
Mr. Seetha Ramu Murthy, Counsel appearing for 4th respondent strenuously contended that the petitioner suppressed the fact that she is working as a Junior Lecturer on regular basis in Luthern Junior College, Rajahmundry since 1992 and suppressing that fact she filed the present writ petition.
On that ground itself, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
29.
Except an oral assertion, no material is placed to substantiate the above contention.
Even assuming without admitting that she is working in that college on permanent basis she is not precluded from applying to the post in question when the 3rd respondent advertised the post and stand in queue along with other candidates for selection.
As the relief initially sought for by the petitioner seeking a direction to the 3rd respondent College to regularise her services as a junior lecturer in Zoology was given up, I find no sufficient force in this contention of the 4th respondent also.
30.
In the light of the above discussion, none of the contentions raised on behalf of the respondents merit consideration and accordingly they are rejected.
31.
For all the above reasons, a writ of mandamus shall issue setting aside the impugned proceedings dated 22071996, transferring and posting the 4th respondent from GVM College to 3rd respondent college as the same is illegal and without jurisdiction.
A consequential direction is given to the 3rd respondent to fill up the vacancy of junior lecturer in Zoology as per the procedure envisaged in GOMs.
No. 12, dated 10011992 written three months from the date of receipt of a copy of the order.
Till then the interim arrangement made during the pendency of the writ petition will be continued so that the educational interests of the student community will not suffer adversely.
Orders accordingly.