HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed the Giani examination in the year 1986 from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
He thereafter took the BA Part-II and Part-III examinations in English in the years 1988 and 1989, respectively, of the Panjab University, Chandigarh, under Regulations 22 at page 95 of the Panjab University Calendar, Volume II, for the year 1989.
He also cleared the additional subject of philosophy in April, 1990 and obtained the BA degree in that year.
Respondent No. 2 issued an advertisement in the Tribune dated November 1, 1995, inviting applications for admission to the one year Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication Course.
The petitioner believing himself to be a graduate of the Panjab University, applied for admission to the course and was admitted to respondent No. 2 College on the basis of his BA degree and the other classes w.e.f.
15th November, 1995.
Respondent No. 1 the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, demanded a migration certificate from the petitioner and the same was obtained from the Panjab University and handed over to the said respondent.
The petitioner's admission was, however, cancelled vide Annexure P-5, dated 21121996, on the ground the the BA Course that he had undertaken in the Panjab University Chandigarh, had not been recognized by the Guru Nanak Dev University.
The order Annexure P-5 was challenged by the petitioner in Civil Writ petition No. 3091 of 1996 which was dismissed vide judgment dated 16th October, 1996.
The Division Bench found that the BA degree under Regulation 22 had not been recognized by the Guru Nanak Dev University and as the petitioner was not eligible for admission, his admission had been rightly cancelled on that account.
The petitioner thereafter filed Civil Appeal No. 3709-10/97 in the Hon'ble Supreme Court against the judgment of the Division Bench and that too was dismissed on 17th July, 1997 vide Annexure P-7 with the observation that as the respondent-University had been at fault in giving admission to the petitioner which had resulted in the unfortunate situation that he was facing, it was appropriate that the University should try to find a way out to regularise his admission.
The petitioner accordingly represented to the respondent- University vide Annexure P-12 and R-1/1 and these too have been declined vide Annexures P-13 and R-1/2 dated 1211997 and 2281997, respectively.
It appears that subsequently the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, issued a circular dated 491997, Annexure P-8 to the petition, in which it was intimated that as the University Grants Commission, New Delhi, had recognized the one sitting BA Degree of all the Accredited Universities in India, the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar had also recognized the one sitting BA Degrees.
It is the petitioner's case now that notwithstanding the dismissal of the earlier writ petition, his case was required to be re-considered in the light of Annexure P-8, as the one sitting BA Degree could not be put on a higher pedestal than the BA Degree obtained by the petitioner under Regulation 22 of the Panjab University Calendar.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a written statement has been put on record on behalf of respondent No. 1.
The stand taken in the written statement is that there had been no change in the circumstances after the dismissal of the earlier writ petition and Annexure P-8 pertained only to the recognition of the one sitting BA Degree and not of the BA Degree obtained by the petitioner.
It has also been highlighted (that in accordance with the order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal), the petitioner's case had been reconsidered but though the respondent-University was sympathetic to his cause, it was not possible to grant any benefit in the light of the legal position.
3.
Mr. DS Pheruman, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has sought to reiterate some of the arguments that had been raised before the Division Bench in the earlier petition.
These arguments are not open to the petitioner in the light of the earlier proceedings.
To my mind, the petitioner can, if at all, take advantage of any event that might have come into existence after the dismissal of the Civil Appeal on 17th July, 1997.
4.
Mr. Pheruman has then fallen back on Annexure P-8 to contend that as the one sitting BA Degree had been recognised by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, there was no reason as to why the BA Degree obtained by the petitioner should not also be recognised.
This argument of the learned counsel has been refuted by Mr. Namit Kumar, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University.
5.
I have heard this argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner and find that it lacks merit.
It has now been well settled that it is not open to this Court to go into the question of equivalence of degrees or recognition thereof by the Universities as this is a matter which is within the exclusive domain of the University.
Mr. Pheruman's argument that Annexure P-8 must be stretched to mean that the petitioner must also get the benefit given to the one sitting degrees cannot, therefore, be accepted in the light of the above- said principle.
6.
I am, however, of the opinion that the present case is a very hard one.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court while dismissing the Civil Appeal did observe so and it does appear that the respondents have reconsidered the matter but have given no benefit to the petitioner.
It is also evident from Annexure P-8 that the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, has accorded recognition to the one sitting BA degrees, although for a limited period.
As the petitioner was not at fault at the time when he took admission in the respondent No. 2 College, I think it to be appropriate that the petitioner's case be reconsidered in the light of Annexure P-8 and the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in the Civil Appeal.
This petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition disposed of.