HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Punjab Police as a Constable on 14.10.1986.
On 2361989 i.e. within three years of his employment, he was involved in a case under sections 366 and 376 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, registered against him and others in Police Station City Kharar.
The trial court vide its judgment dated 28.8.1990 (Annexure P-1) however giving the benefit of doubt to the petitioner, acquitted him of the charge.
It appears that soon after the case aforesaid had been registered against the petitioner the Senior Superintendent of Police by virtue of the powers conferred on him under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules') discharged the petitioner vide order dated 2661989 (Annexure P2) with the remarks that his services were no longer required as he was not likely to make a good police officer.
The petitioner represented against the order Annexure P2 and this representation too was dismissed vide order Annexure P.3 dated 1.10.1990.
A further representation taken by the petitioner to the Director General of Police Punjab was also dismissed on 1461991 vide Annexure P4 to the petition.
Aggrieved thereby the present petition has been filed.
2.
Notice issued in this case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents and the stand taken is that the order Annexure P2 had been made on 26th June, 1989 on an overall assessment of the petitioner's case and not on the basis of any particular mis-conduct that had been committed by him.
It was further submitted that the action was fully justifiable under the Rules as the same did not visualise any show cause notice before the order was made.
3.
Mr. Gulati, the learned counsel for the petitioner, argued that though the order of discharge (Annexure P2) under Rule 1221 was in terms of the rules, yet the same being a stigmatic it could not have been passed unless and until the petitioner had been given chance to show cause against the action that was proposed to be taken against him.
In this connection, he has relied on two judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 427 and Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, 1986(3) SLR 78.
He has further pointed out that by the time the two orders Annexures P.3 and P.4 dated 1.10.1990 and 1451991 were passed, the petitioner had also been acquitted of the criminal charge against him and this factor had not been taken into account whatsoever by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and for this additional reason the petition was liable to succeed.
4.
It has however been argued by Mr. Gill, the learned Deputy Advocate General Punjab, that the action under Rule 1221 was to be taken on a purely subjective satisfaction of the authority concerned and as the Senior Superintendent of Police had taken an overall view in the matter and not confined himself only to the question of rape, the order was fully justified.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record.
It is true, as has been contended by Mr. Gulati, that the two judgments cited by him do require that before an order under Rule 1221 which is often a stigmatic one is made, an opportunity to show cause must be given to the delinquent.
In State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that in case the Superintendent of Police found that a Constable was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, he could discharge the said officer simpliciter from service, but for recording such a finding there must be an anterior record and the Superintendent of Police must objectively consider it and come to a conclusion in that behalf but if he records a finding after considering the record which would be stigmatic on the career of the police officer, the principles of natural justice would require that an opportunity be given to such an officer before recording any finding adverse to the officer's conduct which would disentitle the officer for any future employment or would be a blot on his career.
The Court accordingly held that the order impugned in that case that as the police officer was a habitual absentee, he was not likely to make a good police officer was stigmatic which required that he be given an opportunity to show cause before the order was made.
Rajinder Kaur's case (supra) also pertained to a similar case.
In this case the order passed was as under :-  "Lady Constable Rajinder Kaur No. 732 is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
She is, therefore, hereby discharged from the police force under PP 1221 with effect from today (991980).
Issue orders in OR and all concerned to notice and necessary action."
It would be noticed that this order corresponds exactly to the order which has been passed in the case before me today and which is also reproduced below :-  "Constable Kabal Singh No. 1108/R is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
He is, therefore, discharged under PPR 12.21 w.e.f.
2661989 (FN).
Book the order."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajinder Kaur's case accordingly observed as under :-  "On a consepectus of all these decisions mentioned hereinbefore, the irresistible conclusion follows that the impugned order of discharge though couched in innocuous terms, is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal from service on the ground of misconduct.
This order has been made without serving the appellant any charge-sheet, without asking for any explanation from her and without giving any opportunity to show cause against the purported order of dismissal from service and without giving any opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses examined, that is in other words the order has been made in total contravention of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The impugned order is, therefore, liable to be quashed and set aside.
A writ of certiorari be issued on the respondents to quash and set aside the impugned order dated 991980 of her dismissal from service.
A writ in the nature of mandamus and appropriate directions be issued to allow the appellant to be reinstated in the post from which she has been discharged.
The appeal is thus allowed with costs.
The authorities concerned will pay all her emoluments to which she is entitled to in accordance with the extant rules as early as possible in any case not later than eight weeks from the date of this judgment."
6.
In the light of the above observations, the argument of Mr. Gill that the order Annexure P2 being non-stigmatic was to be sustained loses all meaning.
I am also of the opinion that a look at the order Annexure P.3 clearly brings out that the stand taken by the respondents in the written statement that the petitioner was discharged on an overall view of his record is erroneous as the only material against him was his involvement in the rape case.
It is true that an order under Rule 1221 is not appealable or revisable and is, in fact, a final order but once some material has come on the file which betrays the manner in which the authorities had applied their mind, the mere fact that the order Annexure P2 was not appealable or revisable would be of no consequence.
It is also significant that when the order Annexure P.3 and P.4 had been made, the petitioner stood acquitted in the criminal case.
7.
The question now arises as to the relief which is to be granted to the petitioner.
It has been argued by Mr. Gulati that the petitioner should be reinsistated in service and after having been given a show cause notice, a fresh order should be passed.
I am, however, of the opinion that in the light of the background of the case an order in these terms cannot be justified as a fresh order of discharge would be operative from that day, making the petitioner entitled to his salary for the period that he has remained out of service.
It would be noted that a mother and daughter Gurdev Kaur and Balwant Kaur had been raped in Police Station Kharar and Gurdev Kaur who was the primary witness with regard to the involvement of the petitioner had been declared hostile as she had resiled from her police statement in which the petitioner had been named as one of the culprits.
It is, thus, true that the petitioner has got the benefit of the doubt and has been acquitted of the criminal charge, but I am of the opinion that the petitioner is a person who should not be put back into the police force but at the same time some order which is reasonable and fair to him should be made.
It was then put to Mr. Gulati, the learned counsel for the petitioner that a lumpsum payment of Rs. 1 lac could be ordered for the petitioner which would satisfy all his claim against the respondents.
Mr. Gulati took a short break and after consulting his client who was present in court, returned and stated that the petitioner was willing to accept the said arrangement.
The petitioner has also filed an affidavit to the above effect.
I am of the view that such an order would be appropriate under the writ jurisdiction as being equitable to both sides.
8.
This petition is accordingly dismissed with a stipulation that the State of Punjab will pay a sum of Rs. 1 lac to the petitioner in lumpsum within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order and this payment will satisfy the petitioner's claim in this petition.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.