SJ Mukhopadhaya, J - The respondent-Superintending Engineer, Saran Circle, Road Construction Department, Hajipur issued one order No. 457 dated 21.4.97, by which the promotion earlier granted to the petitioner in the super-time scale of accounts clerk has been cancelled and respondent-Uday Shankar Mishra has been granted promotion to such super-time scale.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid order of reversion dated 21.4.97.
2.
The relevant facts to adjudicate the matter show that the petitioner was initially appointed as junior accounts clerk in the year 1971.
Subsequently, the posts of junior accounts clerk and senior accounts clerk were merged on 18.2.81.
On such merger, the petitioner was provided with pay of senior accounts clerk and the designation was changed as accounts clerk since merger.
Subsequently, the petitioner has been promoted to senior selection grade scale of accounts clerk with effect from 141981 by one order dated 161289.
So far as respondent-Uday Shankar Mishra is concerned, he was appointed as junior accounts clerk on 1181961 and then promoted as senior accounts clerk on 30101965.
He was also granted senior selection grade scale with effect 1481.
When the seniority list was published on 23885, admittedly the name of the respondent No. 7 was placed above the petitioner.
No objection has been raised by the petitioner against such seniority granted in the senior selection grade scale.
After recommendation of Vth Pay Revision Committee, super-time scale was provided to 25% of the cadre post.
Accordingly, one post of the cadre of accounts clerk was provided with super-time scale.
Initially, one Surendra Prasad Singh was granted super-time scale with effect from 111989, who retired on 31.1.92.
After his retirement, the petitioner was granted super-time scale by one order dated 21.9.92, applying the roster relating to reservation.
Admittedly, the petitioner is a member of Scheduled Caste category whereas the respondent No. 7 belongs to general category.
The petitioner is also junior to the respondent No. 7.
However, the promotion to super-time scale was granted in favour of the petitioner applying the rules of reservation.
3.
Earlier, respondent No. 7 being aggrieved, moved before this Court against the order dated 21.9.92 in C.W.J.C.
No. 10837/92.
During the pendency of the said writ petition, the State Government issued one letter on 7795 cancelling the earlier reservation policy made by one order dated 6.7.92, in pursuance of which the petitioner was promoted to super-time scale on 21.9.92.
In the light of the aforesaid circular, the writ petition was disposed of on 15.2.96 and remitted the matter to the respondents to consider the case of respondent No. 7.
Subsequently, in pursuance of decision of this Court and the Supreme Court, the respondent-State issued one order on 30497 and ordered that the single post, if sole vacant prior to 10295 is liable to be filled up, in accordance with earlier roster system.
Appointment/promotion made before 10295 will not be affected.
When the petitioner came to know that the respondents had taken step to cancel the earlier order of promotion, on remand of writ petition, which was preferred by respondent No. 7, moved before this Court in C.W.J.C.
No. 9088/95.
However, the said writ petition was withdrawn on 131295.
Thereafter the respondents issued the impugned order dated 21.4.97 reverting the petitioner in lower grade and granting promotion in favour of respondent No. 7 to super-time scale.
4.
According to the Counsel for the petitioner, the super-time scale post is a solitary post.
Even if it is a single post, the policy of reservation is applicable.
Earlier, the vacancy having been filled up from general category person, the second time vacancy should have been filled up from amongst reserved category person and following the said reservation policy, he was rightly promoted on 21.9.92.
He relied on Supreme Court decision in the case of Union of India and another v. Madhav and another, 1997(2) SCC 332 : 1997(1) SCT 399.
The Counsel for the petitioner also placed reliance on State Government's circular dated 30497 and submitted that the promotion having been granted prior to 10295, the same should not have been cancelled by the respondents.
5.
Initially, I found that the submission made on behalf of the petitioner is attractive.
However, I find that there is a fallacy in argument.
The post which has been provided with super-time scale in the cadre of accounts clerk cannot be stated to be a solitary post in the cadre.
It is one of the posts of the total strength of the cadre, which has been provided with higher grade.
6.
Now it is a settled law that grant of promotion to selection grade scale in the cadre is not at all promotion in the eye of law.
A person though provided with higher grade is not provided with other benefits like status and higher rank.
In fact, a person remains in the same cadre and is being granted only higher grade.
As for the purpose of grant of higher grade in the same cadre, for selection the procedure of promotion is being followed, the term `promotion' is loosely used for the purpose of grant of such higher selection grade scale.
7.
Accordingly, I hold that the rules for reservation is not at all applicable in the matter of grant of selection grade/super-time scale in the same cadre being not promotion.
In view of the aforesaid finding, as the rule of reservation is not applicable, the petitioner cannot derive any benefit of decision of Supreme Court as given in the case of Union of India and another (supra), nor the petitioner can derive any benefit out of guidelines for reservation.
Admittedly, the respondent No. 7 being senior to the petitioner, has been rightly granted super-time scale and I find no illegality in the impugned order.
There being no merit in the writ petition, I dismiss the same.
8.
However, on the facts and circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.