GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the order dated 17.8.1987 passed by the learned Single Judge directing the respondents No. 1 to 3 regularise the services of the writ petitioners (now respondents No. 4 and 5) on the posts of Assistant Foreman Electrical from the date of regularisation of the services of their juniors and to grant them consequential benefits like promotion, arrears of salary, fixation of pay, seniority etc. on the assumption that their services were regularised on the posts of Assistant Foreman Electrical and not on the posts of Electrical Chargeman.
2.
On 121974, the Commissioner & Secretary, Government of Haryana, Public Health Department conveyed the Governor's sanction for grant of various service benefits to the existing employees including conversion of 450 work- charge employees of Public Works Department, Public Health Department into regular cadre and regularisation of work-charge employees.
The relevant extract of the memo No. 329-PW-III(4)-74/3105 dated 1.2.74 reads as under :-  "From  The Commissioner & Secretary to Govt.  Haryana, Public Health Department.
To  The Chief Engineer, Haryana  PWD Public Health Branch,  Chandigarh.
Memo No. 329-PW-III(4)-74/3105 dated 1.2.74.
Subject : Regularisation of the work charged employees of the Haryana State PWD Public Health Branch.
..  Reference your memo No. 16/71/T.A........11134 dated 3.10.73 on the subject noted above.
xx xx xx xx  xx xx xx xx  Sanction of the Government of Haryana is also conveyed to the conversion of 450 work charged employees of P.W.D.
Public Health Department as shown in the enclosed statement of regular cadre on the basis of seniority subject to the following conditions :-  (a) A work charged employee has put in more than 5 years service in the work charged capacity and his seniority will be kept in view.
(b) His antecedent will be verified and he will also undergo medical examination for fitness before he is brought on regular Estt.
(c) Every work charged employee will be placed on probation for one year.
During probation period his antecedents will be verified and medical examination conducted.
In case during the year of probation, it was found that the antecedents or Health of any employee was not satisfactory he would not be regularised.
Sd/- Deputy Secretary for Commissioner & Secretary to  Govt. Haryana Public Health Deptt.
Copy of Endstt.
No. 16-71/TA/459-86-PH/GA/IV.
dt. 20484 from the Chief Engineer, Haryana PWD Public Health Branch Chandigarh.
xx xx xx xx  FOR SUPERINTENDING ENGINEERS AMBALA CANTT.
ONLY  He is requested to please issue necessary orders for the regularisations of work charged employees as per instructions contained in para 5 of the Govt. letter immediately under intimation to this office.
Receipt of this letter may be acknowledged."
3.
In compliance of the instructions issued by the government, the Superintending Engineer, P.W.D.
Public Health Circle, Ambala Cantt.
passed orders dated 2131975 and 1651974 regularising the services of the respondents Krishan Lal and Piare Lal on the posts of Chargeman Electrical.
The relevant extract of these orders are also reproduced below :-  "Order dated 2131975  Officer Order No. 4055  Office of the Superintending Engineer, P.W.D.
Public Health Circle, Ambala Cantt.
Dated : Ambala Cantt.
2131975.
OFFICE ORDER In continuation of this office order No. 9621-40/E.
dt. 16.5.71, 9576-9604/E, 9692/E, 9634-62/E and 9606-37/E dated 16574, the following work charged officials who have completed five years service at the present post are hereby brought on the regular establishment in the interest of Public Health Services with effect from 1651974 subject to the following conditions.
This will without prejudice to the seniority of officials, who have not completed five years in present post, regarding which the clarification has been sought from the Chief Engineer, Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Chandigarh.
xx xx xx xx  xx xx xx xx  Sr. No. + Name of Official Present Designation Gr.
Post as received Regular post to which now appointed Place of Posting Rk.
3.
+ Electrical Chareman Krishan Lal T/C Electrical charge Rs. 140-6-170-8-210/10-300 Regular Chargeman Electrical  P.H.
Div.
(Const.)
Faridabad 4.
The above orders are based on the seniority list in this office regular employee various divisions available in this office.
However, any discrepancy in the above orders found at any stage, these orders will be subject to reconsideration on appeal and therefore does not confer permanent rights to the persons on the regular posts.
Sd/-  Superintendent Engineer  P.W.D.
Public Health Circle Ambala Cantt.
xx xx xx xx  xx xx xx xx  Order dated 1651974  OFFICE ORDER  NO. _____________ OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER  PWD PUBLIC HEALTH CIRCLE AMBALA CANTT.
DATED AMBALA CANTT.
THE 16th May, 1974  OFFICE ORDER<<CENTER< center>>P> Under the authorities of the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt., Haryana PWD Public Health Branch Chandigarh memo No. 329-WII(iv) 74/3105 dated 1.2.74 addressed to the Chief Engineer, Public Health Branch, Chandigarh and copy received vide Chief Engineer, Haryana PWD, Public Health Branch, Chandigarh Endst.
No. 16-71/AA/459-86-PH/GA-IV dated 20.2.74 the following work charged officials who have completed five years service at the present post are hereby brought on to regular establishment in the interest of Public Service with immediate effect subject to the following condition.
This will be without prejudice to the seniority of officials, who have not completed five years in present post regarding which the clarification has been sought from the Chief Engineer, Haryana, PWD, Public Health Branch, Chandigarh.
xx xx xx xx  Sr. No. Name of official Present Designation Grade of post as received Regular post to which now appointed Place of posting Remark.
1.
Sh. Piare Lal W.C. Chargeman Electrical Rs. 140-6-170/8-210/10-300 Regular Chargeman Electrical Public Health Division No. 2 Gurgaon.
5.
The above orders are based on the seniority list of work charge/regular employees of various divisions available in this office.
However, if any discrepancy in the above orders found at any stage, these orders will be subject to reconsideration on appeal and therefore does not confer permanent rights to the persons brought on the regular post.
Sd/-  Superintending Engineer,  Ambala Cantt.
6.
On 2751980, the government sanctioned conversion of the work charged posts into regular posts and regularisation of the services of work-charged employees, who had completed 5 years service.
For implementing this policy decision of the government, the Commissioner & Secretary, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Haryana issued instructions vide memo No. 3/126/80-PH(2) dated 1471980.
The relevant extract of this memo is reproduced below :-  "From  The Commissioner & Secretary to Govt.  Haryana  PWD Public Health Branch.
To  The Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana  PWD PH Branch, Chandigarh  Memo No. 3/126/80-PH(2)  Dated Chandigarh the 14th July, 1980.
Sub : Regularisation of work charged employees.
....
Please refer to your memo No. 74-86/7/(7)/372-H/GI dated 9580 and Sh. Rajeshwar Lal's DO letter No. 413-PH/GI dated 8.7.80 on the subject noted above.
It has already been decided by the Govt. with the concurrence of the Finance Department (a copy of the Finance Deptt.
advice already sent to you vide this Department endorsement No. 3/136/80-PH(2) dated 27580 for taking further action) the service of the work charged employees who have completed 5 years of continuous services on 31.12.78 should be regularised.
It has been decided by the Govt. that Sub Division/Division-wise strength of the employees should be fixed in order to ensure that as a result of regularisation of work charged employees to the extent beyond the number of work-charged employees made regular.
xx xx xx xx."
7.
In pursuance of these instructions, the services of the appellants who were working in Hissar, Karnal and Ambala circles respectively were regularised on the posts of Assistant Foreman.
After 2 years of the issuance of the instructions for regularisation of the services of work-charged employees who had completed 5 years service, the Superintending Engineer circulated on 29.10.1982 a list of regular Foremen, Assistant Foremen, Chargemen H Duty and Foremen Electrical.
On 621984, Krishan Lal Nangia (respondent No.
4.)
served notice upon the department claiming seniority and promotion from the date S/shri Mohabat Rai, Ram Kumar and Hardit Singh had been regularised on the higher posts of Assistant Foreman Electrical.
After another 2 years, he and Piare Lal instituted C.W.P.
No. 1740 of 1984 for issuance of a writ to quash memo dated 121974, orders dated 2131975 and 1651974 and for issuance of a direction to the respondents No. 2 and 3 to regularise their services on the posts of Assistant Foreman Electrical from the date of completion of 5 years service in the work-charge capacity.
They also prayed for issuance of seniority list on the basis of the deemed date of regularisation of their service.
An alternative relief claimed by the writ petitioners was for directing the official respondents to promote them as Assistant Foremen Electrical from the date their juniors were so promoted.
8.
The respondents No. 4, 5, 7 and 8 (including three appellants) contested the writ petition on the ground that the petitioners do not have any right to seek regularisation of their services on the higher posts of Assistant Foreman Electrical because they had not completed 5 years service on that post.
They also challenged the locus standi of the writ petitioners to seek quashing of the memo issued by the government for regularisation of the services of the work-charge employees.
The respondents relied on the order dated 2521982 passed by a Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 6809 of 1981 `Parkash Singh and anr. v. State of Haryana and ors.', in support of their plea that the petitioners are entitled to relief.
9.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and issued the impugned directions.
10.
The first contention of Shri GP Singh is that the learned Single Judge has seriously erred in overlooking the unexplained delay of 9 to 10 years in the filing of the writ petition in the context of the challenge made by the writ petitioners to the legality of the memo dated 121974 and the orders dated 1651974 and 2131975.
He submitted that the writ petitioners should not have been given any relief in the petition filed after almost one decade of the issuance of the orders by which their services were regularised as Chargemen Electrical.
Shri Singh further submitted that after having taken advantage of the orders regularising their service, the writ petitioners should not have been allowed to question the legality thereof.
Learned Deputy Advocate General supported the contention of Shri Singh.
However, Shri US Sahni argued that the delay itself could not have been made a ground to deny relief to the writ petitioners and as such, the direction given by the learned Single Judge should not be upset.
11.
We have thoughtfully considered the rival submissions in the light of the facts placed on the record of the case.
Admittedly, vide memo dated 121974 the government had sanctioned conversion of 450 work charge employees of P.W.D.
Public Health Branch.
Although the writ petitioners did not enclose a copy of the statement which formed part of that memo, there is no dispute between the parties that the government had sanctioned only one post of Assistant Foreman Electrical and 9 posts of Electrical Chargeman.
On 121974, Krishan Lal Nangia was working as Chargeman Electrical and not as Assistant Foreman Electrical.
Piare Lal was working as Assistant Foreman Electrical, but he had not completed 5 years service as Assistant Foreman Electrical upto 121974.
Neither of them was eligible to be regularised on the post of Assistant Foreman Electrical.
Both of them were fully aware of their ineligibility to be regularised on the Costs of Assistant Foremen Electrical.
Precisely due to this reason neither of them objected to the regularisation of their services on the posts of Chargemen Electrical by orders dated 1651974 and 2131975.
Rather, they reaped and enjoyed the service benefits as regular Chargemen Electrical.
Neither of them made representation for regularisation of service on the post of Assistant Foreman Electrical.
For the first time Krishan Lal Nangia served notice dated 621984.
The writ petition was filed in April, 1984.
Why the petitioners kept silence for 9 to 10 years after the passing of the orders regularising their services as Chargemen Electrical has not at all been explained.
Therefore, we find considerable force in the argument of Shri GP Singh that the writ petition was highly belated and the learned Single Judge ought not have entertained the same.
12.
Delay and laches are two facets of the same ground on which the writ court should ordinarily refuse to entertain the claim of the petitioner.
Although no period of limitation has been prescribed either in Article 226 of the Constitution or any other provision for filing of the writ petition, the courts have evolved a rule of self-imposed discipline that belated petitions will not be entertained and relief will ordinarily be refused where the petitioner has approached the court after lapse of long period.
No hard and fast rule or strait-jacket formula has been laid down by the Courts about the time period for entertaining the petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, but long and unexplained delay has always been treated as a good ground to non-suit the petitioner.
In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhai Lal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held that a writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution after expiry of the period of limitation prescribed for filing of a civil suit should normally be treated as belated and relief should be refused unless cogent and satisfactory explanation is offered by the petitioner.
A somewhat similar principle has been laid down by another Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in Trilok Chand Moti Chand v. HB Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898.
Similarly, in Kamini Kumar Das Chaudhary v. State of West Bengal & ors., AIR 1972 SC 2069; PS Sadaswami v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53 and Roshan Lal v.
I.A.A.I., AIR 1981 SC 597, the Apex Court has held that the writ jurisdiction should not be exercised in favour of a person who approaches the court after lapse of long period counted from the date of accrual of the cause of action.
13.
In the present case, as already mentioned above, no explanation was offered by the petitioners about the time gap of almost one decade in the filing of the writ petition for quashing memo dated 121974 and the orders dated 1651974 and 2131975.
Therefore, the contention urged by Shri Singh that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches deserves to be accepted.
14.
The second contention urged by the learned counsel for the appellant, which also merits acceptance, is that the learned Single Judge could not have directed the regularisation of the services of the writ petitioners even without the availability of two posts of Assistant Foremen Electrical.
He submitted that only one post of work-charge Assistant Foreman Electrical was converted into the regular post and, therefore, the direction issued by the learned Single Judge for regularisation of the services of both the petitioners is without jurisdiction.
Shri Sahni could not draw our attention to any order or document showing that the Government had sanctioned conversion of two posts of work-charge Assistant Foreman Electrical into regular posts.
Therefore, the direction given by the learned Single Judge for regularisation of service of both the petitioners as Assistant Electrical Chargemen with retrospective effect cannot be upheld.
15.
There is one more reason why the impugned direction cannot be sustained, namely, that neither of the writ petitioners fulfilled the condition laid down in the memo dated February 1, 1974.
Respondent-Piare Lal had not completed five years service.
Krishan Lal was not even working as Assistant Chargeman Electrical.
Thus, their services could not have been regularised on the posts of Assistant Chargemen Electrical in terms of memo dated 121974.
16.
The third contention of Shri Singh is that without quashing the orders Annexures P2 and P3 by which the services of the writ petitioners had been regularised on the posts of Chargemen Electrical, the learned Single Judge could not have ordered regularisation of their services with retrospective effect.
Shri Singh argued that Krishan Lal Nangia could not have been regularised in service as Assistant Foreman Electrical because he was not holding that post on 121974.
On the other hand, Shri Sahni urged that the instructions issued by the government vide memo dated 121974 were misread by the departmental authorities and the learned Single Judge has rightly ordered the regularisation of the services of the writ petitioners on the higher posts of the Assistant Foremen Electrical because persons junior to them were regularised on such posts on the basis of the instructions issued vide memo dated 2751980 and memo dated 1471980.
17.
We have thoughtfully considered the entire issue.
The very fact that the Governor had sanctioned creation of specified number of posts in the regular establishment by conversion of existing work-charge posts shows that the intention of the government was to regularise the services of only those work-charge employees who had completed a particular length of service on a particular post.
In other words, a person who had worked as Chargeman for a period of 5 years could have been regularised on the post of Chargeman and the mere fact that he may have received promotion a few days earlier could to entitle him to claim regularisation of the services on the higher post.
Thus, the essence of the policy of the government was to confer benefit of regular employee upon those work charge employees who had worked for a particular length of time on a specified post.
This is precisely what the Superintending Engineer did when he regularised the services of the writ petitioners as Chargemen Electrical keeping in view the fact that they had completed 5 years work-charge service as Chargemen Electrical.
This aspect has been altogether ignored by the learned Single Judge while directing regularisation of the services of the writ petitioners as Assistant Foremen Electrical.
Therefore, the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.
18.
In Parkash Singh and another v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 6809 of 1981, decided by a Division Bench on 2521982, almost an identical claim made by the petitioner was negatived the Court as would appear from the order of the Division Bench which is extracted below :  "Briefly, the facts are that the petitioners are confirmed electricians and appointed against substantive permanent vacancies.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were working as work charge chargemen.
Respondent No. 3 thereafter was promoted as workcharged Foreman.
It is alleged that respondent No. 9 issued a circular letter dated 3rd July, 1980 (copy Annexure P4) to all the Superintending Engineers in Haryana, P.W.D.
B&R Branch, conveying that the services of all the workcharged employees who had completed five years as work charged employees upto 21st December, 1978 be regularised and to achieve that end necessary number of posts were created on regular basis.
In pursuance of the directions contained in the above letter, the Superintending Engineer, Electricity Circle, PWD B&R, Haryana, Karnal, regularised the services of respondent No. 3 as foreman and of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 as Chargeman which posts were higher than the posts of the petitioners.
It is alleged that the above-said order is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as while confirming respondents Nos. 3 to 8 the petitioners were not considered for these posts by way of promotion as those posts were considered higher posts.
19.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that while confirming respondent No. 3 on the post of workcharged chargeman, the petitioners should have been considered for those posts as they were senior to the respondents.
It is not disputed that respondent No. 3 was working as workcharged Foreman and respondents Nos. 4 to 8 as workcharged chargeman since long.
Later, the Government decided that the services of all workcharged employees who had completed five years of services on 31st December, 1978 be regularised.
The respondents fell within that category.
Consequently, their services were regularised.
The petitioners cannot be allowed to say that the respondents could not be regularised on those posts and they should have been regularised on the lower posts and thereafter the cases of the petitioners and the respondents should have been considered for promotion to the said posts.
In our view, the order does not violative Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as stated by the counsel for the petitioners."
20.
Although the order of the Division Bench was placed before the learned Single Judge, he ignored the same and accepted the claim made by the writ petitioners for retrospective regularisation of their services.
We do not find any legitimate ground to commend the direction given by the learned Single Judge ignoring the order passed by the Division Bench.
21.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the appeal and set aside the order passed by the learned single Judge.
However, keeping in view the fact that the respondent-Krishan Lal Nangia is reported to have retired from service, setting aside of the order of the learned Single Judge shall not adversely affect him in so far as the past benefits are concerned.
Appeal allowed.