B Rai, J - Through this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has sought the quashment of the impugned letter, dated March 29, 1996, Annexure P.3, vide which the petitioner has been disqualified from the examination of Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) and other allied services, 1992, on the allegation that he had disclosed his identity in Hindi and Hindi Essay paper and consequent to that, answer sheets in other subjects were not evaluated, and for issuance of a writ of prohibition directing the respondents not to disqualify the petitioner from the said examination, and also for issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner in the written examination and to allow him to appear in the interview for selection to the post of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) as well as other allied services, or any other appropriate writ, order or direction in the facts and circumstances of the case.
In the month of November 1992, in response to an advertisement given by the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short, the Commission), the petitioner applied for the post of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and other allied services.
The examination was held during October 1993.
The Commission issued Admission Certificate, Annexure P.1.
As per the schedule given in Annexure P.1, the petitioner took the written examination with effect from October 2, 1993 to October 7, 1993 for various subjects.
It is alleged that the petitioner attempted all the questions to the best of his ability and capability and was quite hopeful to get through the written examination securing goods marks to qualify for the interview.
The written examination was held at Chandigarh centre alone and it was conducted in a peaceful and fair manner.
Due to certain unsavoury circumstances and in-fighting between the members and the Chairman of the Commission, the entire examination was scrapped by the Commission vide its order, dated June 24, 1994, Annexure P2, in a casual manner without caring for the future of the candidates and the hardship likely to be faced by them.
Aggrieved by the order, Annexure P2, a number of candidates filed civil writ petitions before this Court, praying for setting aside of order, Annexure P2.
In those writ petitions, certain directions were issued by a Division Bench of this Court.
The matter was taken to the Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition.
The decision of this Court was upheld except for the direction that the Commission was asked to complete the process of selection of the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and other allied services.
In compliance with the orders of this Court and the Supreme Court, the Commission proceeded with the remaining process of completion of selection of the candidates.
On April 13, 1996 the petitioner was informed that he was disqualified and his compulsory paper of Hindi and Hindi Easy had been cancelled on the ground that he had disclosed his identity.
Consequently, the evaluation of other answer sheets of other subjects was also cancelled which resulted into total shattering of the career of the petitioner.
The action of the Commission, according to the petitioner, is illegal, arbitrary and result of non-application of mind and, as such, is liable to be quashed; and the petitioner is entitled for evaluation of answer sheets and declaration of his result so as to be called for interview for selection to the said post.
2.
Vide order, dated May 27, 1996, notice of motion was ordered to be issued for July 18, 1996.
The respondent-Commission was also directed to produce in Court the Hindi paper of the petitioner for perusal.
On July, 18, 1996, the record was not produced and it was ordered to be produced on the adjourned date, i.e., August 22, 1996.
3.
The respondents filed a short written statement and also produced Hindi and Hindi Essay paper of the petitioner in original in a sealed cover.
In the written statement, the Commission has taken the stand that answer sheets supplied to the candidates carried certain instructions fore-warning them not to put any such thing which may tantamount to disclosure of their identity.
The Commission has also pleaded that the learned Judges while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 8485 of 1994 besides giving other directions, were pleased to give the following directions :  "Before sending the answer-books for revaluation, such scripts which disclose the identity of any candidate in any manner shall be excluded, and their papers in that result shall be deemed cancelled."
4.
The respondents referred to question No. 2 of Hindi paper which in English reads as under :  "2.
Write a direction letter on behalf of the Financial Secretary to the Departments of the State Government for reducing the expenditure relating to the different heads.
or Write an application to the Manager of the Branch of the State Bank of India of your town for the sanction of loan for establishing small scale industry along with necessary details."
5.
It is alleged that while attempting question No. 2, the petitioner had disclosed his identity by writing "House No. 43, Sector 17, Karnal", which amounts to disclosure of his identity and on that count, the Hindi and Hindi Essay compulsory paper of the petitioner was rightly cancelled by the answering-respondent.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have carefully perused the original answer book relating to Hindi and Hindi Essay paper of the petitioner after taking out from the sealed cover.
The opening sheet of the answer book carries Don'ts and Do's instructions to candidates and it was warned that the candidates would be penalised for failure to comply with the said instructions.
Instructions 1 to 3 in the column of Dont's read as under :  "1.
Do not put your roll number or name or initials or any other identification mark anywhere else in the answer books or on any loose sheets such as graph papers, maps, etc. Any candidate found guilty of disclosing his identity or making peculiar marks in his answer books for that purpose shall be penalised.
2.
Do not sign the "letter" question in English or language paper by any name or append your roll number to it.
3.
Do not writ anything in the answer books except the answer to the questions."
Other instructions are not relevant for the purpose of this writ petition.
7.
On scrutiny of the answer sheet of the petitioner in respect of Hindi and Hindi Essay paper, we find that the petitioner attempted question No. 2 at page 9 and conclude it at page 10.
Below the word `Bhavdiye', the petitioner wrote Ka Kha Ga and gave his address when read in English as House No. 43, Sector 17, Karnal (Haryana).
What has been written at page 10 as pointed out above, squarely falls within the four corners of Instructions 1, 2 and 3, which tantamounts to disclosure of identity of the petitioner-examinee.
In view of this factual position and particularly when it is also the specific case of the respondents that the petitioner had disclosed his identity in Hindi and Hindi Easy paper and, therefore, his other papers were not evaluated, we need not dilate on other aspects of the matter.
What has been discussed above, unhesitatingly leads us to a conclusion that the petitioner did disclose his identity in Hindi and Hindi Essay paper.
On that ground, his other papers were not evaluated and his examination was rightly scrapped.
8.
In the circumstances, we do not find any merit in the writ petition.
Accordingly the same is dismissed.
9.
The answer sheet in question shall be returned in a sealed cover by the Bench Secretary to Mr. Mehtani, learned counsel for the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Petition dismissed.