Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for a direction to the respondents to issue necessary gradation certificate in the sport of shooting keeping in view his performance.
The petitioner has further prayed for direction to respondent No. 2 to counter-sign the certificate which is to be issued by respondent No. 1.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner represented Chandigarh Rifle Association in All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996 is duly recognised by the National Rifle Association of India, New Delhi.
After having passed 10+2 examination, the petitioner sought admission against a seat reserved for sports person in an Engineering College of the State of Punjab.
It is the case of the petitioner that he has already qualified the entrance examination meant for admission to an Engineering College of the State of Punjab.
3.
The admission for seats reserved for sports person in the State of Punjab are governed by the instructions contained in Memo No. 46/26/835 EDU(5) 1989 dated 481992, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
The relevant portion from the aforesaid instructions is re-producted hereinbelow :  ``GRADE-B Sportsmen/women who have participated in the following : x x x x x x x x x x x x x x National Championships/Inter-State Championships organised by the recognised National Federations.''
4.
In terms of the instructions contained in Annexure P-10, the petitioner approached Chandigarh Administration to issue the necessary gradation certificate, since he had represented Chandigarh Shooting Rifle Association in the All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996.
The request for issue of the said certificate was, however, rejected by the Chandigarh Administration.
It was in these circumstances that the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner in this Court seeking the relief stated hereinabove.
5.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that since the petitioner had represented All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996, which is admittedly recognised by the National Rifle Association of India, he was entitled to be issued the gradation certificate by respondent No. 1 and the said certificate should be countersigned by respondent No. 2, in view of the law laid down by this Court in various judgments.
Some of the judgments cited by the learned counsel are as follow :-  (i) CWP 3827 of 1996, Gagan Deep Singh v. Union Territory, Chandigarh decided by a Division Bench of this Court on 22.5.1996.
(ii) CWP 11787 of 1995, Gurvinder Singh v. State of Punjab, decided on 891995.
(iii) CWP 282 of 1996 Kamaldeep Kaur Gill v. Union Territory, Chandigarh decided by a Division Bench of this Court on 26.2.1996.
(iv) CWP 7729 of 1996 and CWP 8156 of 1996 Kamaldeep Kaur v. Union Territory, Chandigarh and decided by Division Bench of this Court on 2471996.
6.
Ms. Deepali Puri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Chandigarh Administration, however, drew my attention to the policy regarding reservations of seats in admission in Educational/Technical/Medical institution under the control of Chandigarh Administration, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
Relying on this policy, learned counsel submitted that the gradation certificate could be issued to person only in case he/she has represented the Chandigarh Rifle Association in the All India National Championship.
She submitted that since All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996 is not the All India National Championship, as such the petitioner was not entitled to get the gradation certificate.
7.
Mr. Anil Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab appearing on behalf of the State reiterated the submissions made by the learned counsel of Chandigarh Administration.
He further drew my attention to the letter dated 1461996 received by the Director, Sports, Punjab, Chandigarh from Punjab Rifle Shooting Association and submitted that in terms of this letter All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996 but on the contrary it is a pre-national championship.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
9.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that the gradation certificate in question is required by the petitioner for admission to an Engineering College in the State of Punjab.
In view of this, the petitioner is governed by the instructions issued by the State of Punjab, copy of which is Annexure P-10.
As stated in the earlier part of the judgment, under these instructions, the only requirement is that the petitioner should have participated in the national championship/inter-state championship organised by the recognised national federation Admittedly the petitioner has participated in All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996 which is inter-state championship and is duly recognised by National Rifle Association of India.
In view of this, the policy issued by the Chandigarh Administration, copy of which is annexed as Annexure R-1 with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, shall not apply to the petitioner as the petitioner is not seeking admission in any Engineering College situated in the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
All that the Chandigarh administration is required to see is as to whether the petitioner has participated in National Championship/Inter State Championship organised by the recognised national federation Since the petitioner has admittedly represented the Union Territory, Chandigarh in All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996 which is duly recognised by National Rifle Association of India, the respondent No. 1 has to give him a certificate to that effect and he has to be graded on the same basis.
The petitioner's claim will then be considered by respondent No. 2 on the basis of his gradation as sports person.
The view I have taken finds full sport from a judgment of this Court in the case of Gurvinder Singh (supra).
It may be noted here that Letters Patent Appeal filed against this judgment was also dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court and copy of the decision in the Letters Patent Appeal No. 770 of 1995 is Annexure P-14.
10.
The contention of the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab that in view of the letter issued by Punjab Rifle Association (Annexure R-2 filed with the written statement of respondent No. 2), the petitioner is not entitled to the gradation certificate, is without any merit.
It is not disputed that the instructions issued by the Punjab government vide Annexure P-10 still hold the field and these instructions cannot be superseded by a letter issued by the Punjab Rifle Association.
Unless the policy of the Punjab government contained in instructions P-10 is changed, the petitioner is entitled to the gradation list.
In view of the (sic) petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to issue the gradation certificate to the petitioner on the basis of his performance in the sports of shooting in various events including his participation in All India GV Mavlankar Shooting Championship, 1996, keeping in view the instructions of the State of Punjab contained in Annexure P-10.
Respondent No. 2 will counter-sign the said certificate in accordance with the instructions P-10.
It is, however, made clear that the sport gradation certificate, to be issued by the respondent in terms of this judgment shall be used only in the colleges situated in the State of Punjab.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.