VK Gupta, J - The petitioner is an employee of the Indian Airlines, Respondent No. 1 and at the relevant time, i.e. on 2nd January, 1988 was posted as a cashier in the mini-booking office of the respondents at Hotel Hindusthan International, Calcutta.
Another person by the name of Ashok Singh, a traffic assistant of the Indian Airlines was also posted at the same office along with the petitioner.
The dispute in this petition revolves around a punishment awarded to the petitioner on 4th July 1989 whereby the petitioner was inflicted penalty of reduction in time-scale by four incremental slabs on cumulative basis from 4th July, 1989, i.e. the day of awarding the punishment.
The petitioner submitted an application for review against the aforesaid punishment and the appropriate authority vide its order passed on 29/30th May 1990 reduced the aforesaid penalty to reduction in his basic pay in time scale by two incremental slabs on cumulative basis.
Further prayer for review of the aforesaid punishment was rejected by the Regional Director of the Indian Airlines vide his communication dated 27th February/Ist March, 1991.
It is against the aforesaid orders awarding punishment to the petitioner that the petitioner has come up to this court in this writ-petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The brief facts leading to the filing of the petition are that on 2nd January, 1988 when the petitioner was posted at the mini-booking office of Indian Airlines at Hotel Hindusthan International, Calcutta as a cashier and was on duty, he in connivance with Ashok Singh, the traffic assistant of Indian Airlines also posted there, defrauded the Indian Airlines by showing that an amount of Rs. 230/- was received by the Indian Airlines in respect of ticket No. 0582/5605586, (hereinafter ticket, for short) instead of rupees 3600/- as was mentioned in the passenger's coupon of the ticket.
The substance of the charge-sheet indeed makes a very interesting reading.
The ticket was issued in the name of one Mr. M Riyal for the Silchar-Imphal-Silchar sector and the amount of fare shown as Rs. 230/-.
Actually the ticket comprised of four coupons in all.
These are as detailed below :-  1.
Auditor's coupon.
2.
Office coupon.
3.
Passenger/flight coupon No. 1.
4.
Passenger/flight coupon No. 2.
3.
All the coupons forming the composite ticket have red carbons on their reverse sides and if one writes on the first coupon, because of all the coupons having red carbons on their reverse sides, the same writing gets printed automatically upon all the coupons and on the jacket itself.
The auditor's coupon and the office co-upon, after a ticket is completed are retained in the office of the Indian Airlines and the passenger is handed over the ticket containing the passenger coupons.
In the present case the ticket was made in such a way so as to indicate and show that the office coupon and the auditor's coupon contained the passenger's name as Mr. M Riyal, for the sector Silchar-Imphal-Silchar and the fare shown was Rs. 230/- .
This was the amount which was received by the petitioner as a cashier of Indian Airlines and entered as such in the Account Books.
Actually it was later on discovered that both the passenger's coupons, i.e. passenger coupon No. 1 and passenger coupon No. 2 showed that the ticket was issued featuring the passenger by a name other than Mr. M Riyal, namely Md Saleem and the passage was Bombay- Srinagar-Bombay and the fare shown against cash collection was Rs. 3600/-.
I have seen the ticket in original along with all the coupons which was produced before me by the learned advocate for the respondents.
I found, to my entire satisfaction that the office coupon and the auditor's coupon were the same, having same writing and endorsements, as indicated above whereas both the passenger coupons and the ticket jacket were entirely different from the office coupon and the Auditors coupon because, as indicated above they contained different writings and endorsements altogether.
I must clearly note and observe that on a very careful examination of the ticket jacket and all the coupons I found that no erasure or interpolations were noticed by me in any of the coupons, either on their front sides or on the reverse carbon sides or on any other part of the ticket.
4.
The charge against the petitioner was that as a cashier, in compliance with the Standing Orders (discipline and appeal), clause 16 and its various sub-clauses, he was duty bound to collect the cash for the tickets as per auditor's coupon, office coupon and the flight coupons in toto.
As per the aforesaid Standing Orders, it was also the duty of the petitioner as a cashier to see that his initials appeared on all the coupons.
5.
The facts of the case as emerged after the enquiry report as submitted by the enquiry officer was that the petitioner had not collected the cash as per all the coupons and that the petitioner's initials also did not appear on all the coupons.
The enquiry officer found, and I also observed by my own examination of the coupons that whereas the petitioner's initial appeared on the office coupon and the auditor's coupon, his initial was absent in both the passenger coupons and the ticket jacket.
The charge against the petitioner actually was that in connivance with the traffic assistant Ashok Singh, a fraud was played upon the Indian Airlines whereby an amount of Rs. 230/- was shown to have been collected in the office coupon and the auditors coupon but actually the passenger coupons showed the amount of Rs. 3600/- because the flight coupons were shown to be for different sectors.
The attempt and the intention was to deprive Indian Airlines of the difference of amount between Rs. 3600/- and Rs. 230/- by adopting ploy of claiming refund of this amount.
Actually this attempt failed because when the person holding the ticket went to the office of the Indian Airlines at Trivandrum, suspicion arose and it was at this stage that the enquiry began in the matter.
6.
The defence of the petitioner is that erasures are possible in the coupons and that the passenger might have interpolated the coupons.
The defence is without any substance because I have very carefully examined the ticket and found that there is no question of the coupons, on either side, having been interpolated or erased by anyone.
In fact the plea of the learned advocate for the petitioner to have these coupons examined by an expert for finding out about the possibility of any erasure or interpolation was rejected by me as I found it to be untenable for the simple reason that to me it clearly appeared that there is no possibility whatsoever of any erasures or interpolations in the coupons and hence there is no need to ascertain the opinion of any expert in the matter.
7.
I have very carefully gone through the record of the enquiry proceedings and find that enough material was available in the enquiry proceedings to link the petitioner with the commission of the act for which he was charged.
This court while exercising writ jurisdiction with regard to a domestic enquiry does not appreciate or reappreciate the material available on record or the evidence adduced by the parties in order to find out as to whether the result of the enquiry was properly arrived or not.
It is settled principle of law that this court does not interfere with the findings of fact returned and recorded by an enquiry officer.
The interference by this court in a departmental enquiry is permissible only if the findings are perverse or are based on no evidence.
8.
The evidence which was adduced in the enquiry proceedings, both documentary as well as oral does clearly point out that the petitioner and the traffic assistant, Ashok Singh had both joined together and by adopting a dubious mechanism, had evolved a modus operandi to cheat their employer.
The various facts of the alleged transaction do clearly suggest that the petitioner, in league with the traffic assistant devised the plan to deprive the Indian Airlines of the amount which was wrongly shown in the passenger coupons of the ticket.
9.
Learned advocate for the petitioner even though argued the case very vehemently and forcefully and took me through various vital aspects of the matter, could not point out any irregularity or illegality of the enquiry nor could bring any such fact to my notice which could have amounted to vitiate the enquiry proceedings.
The entire thrust of the argument all through the hearing of the case was based upon the appreciation of evidence and the preponderance of possibilities.
I have already observed that this court cannot substitute its opinion with that of the enquiry officer, even if any material on record suggests something contrary.
I have also observed in the present case that the entire evidence points out conclusively to the guilt of the petitioner.
10.
I do not find any merit in this petition.
11.
For the reasons stated above this petition is dismissed but no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.