THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner who belongs to general category was working as Superintendent Grade III in the year 1983.
According to him one post of Superintendent Grade I fell vacant and the said post was filled up by promoting the 3rd respondent temporarily for a period of six months but he has been continued even after the expiry of the said period.
According to him there were four posts and two candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste were working against the quota of reservation for Scheduled Caste.
According to the petitioner he was senior to the 3rd respondent, and, therefore, he should have been appointed as Superintendent Grade I instead of the 3rd respondent.
The petitioner also averred that in Civil Writ Petition 3882 of 1981 this Court held by its Judgment dated 25.5.1982 that for working out the percentage the promotees/appointees in the cadre - whether on the basis of reservation or otherwise - have to be taken notice of and that any promotions of the members of the Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes made beyond the prescribed limit on the basis of instructions of the Government are void and non.
est .
Accordingly, this Court directed the authorities to consider the case of the petitioner in that case for promotion in the light of the observations made by their Lordships.
The Government also clarified this position in their letter dated 27.7.1982 that the reservation for members of the Scheduled Caste is to be made on the basis of overall cadre strength of the posts and not on the basis of points reserved in the roster.
The petitioner had served respondents 1 and 2 with demand notice dated 1081982 inter-alia requesting to treat one post of Superindent Gr.
I against which the 3rd respondent is working as unreserved and fill the same by considering the claim of the petitioner but the authorities did not take any action on the said notice.
Therefore, the petitioner who is senior to the 3rd respondent filed this writ petition to consider his case for promotion to the post of Superindent Grade I in place of the 3rd respondent.
2.
The 3rd respondent filed written statement alleging that in the general category he is junior but in the reserved category he is senior to the petitioner.
He further stated that 20% vacancies are kept reserved for the Scheduled Caste.
3.
I need not to go into the several contentions raised on behalf of the parties in view of the latest decision of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab and other, 1995(4) SCT 417 : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 1189 (SC) wherein considering various authorities their Lordships of Supreme Court held as follows :-  "We respectfully concur with the view in Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan, JT (1995) 7 SC 231 : 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC), that seniority between the reserved category candidates and general candidates in the promoted category shall continue to be governed by their panel position i.e. with reference to their inter se seniority in the lower grade.
The rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, but it does not give the accelerated 'consequential seniority.'
If a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidate is promoted earlier because of the rule of reservation/roster and his senior belonging to the general category candidate is promoted later to that higher grade the general category candidate shall regain his seniority over such earlier promoted Scheduled caste/tribe candidate.
As already pointed out above that when a scheduled caste/tribe candidate is promoted earlier by applying the rule of reservation/roster against a post reserved for such scheduled caste/tribe candidate, in this process he does not supersede his seniors belonging to the general category.
In this process there was no occasion to examine the merit of such scheduled caste/tribe candidate vis-a- vis his seniors belonging to the general category.
As such it will be only rational, just and proper to hold that when the general category candidate is promoted later from the lower grade to the higher grade, he will be considered senior to a candidate belonging to the scheduled caste/tribe who had been given accelerated promoted against the post reserved for him.
Whenever a question arises for filling up a post reserved for scheduled caste/tribe candidate in still higher grade then such candidate belonging to scheduled caste/tribe shall be promoted first but when the consideration is in respect of promotion against the general category post in still higher grade then the general category candidate who has been promoted later shall be considered senior and his case shall be considered first for promotion applying either principle of seniority-cum-merit or merit-cum-seniority.
If this rule and procedure is not applied then result will be that majority of the posts in the higher grade shall be held at one stage by persons who have not only entered in service on basis of reservation and roster but have excluded the general category candidates merely on the ground to their initial accelerated promotions.
This will not be consistent with the requirement or the spirit of Article 16(4) or Article 335 of the Constitution."
The Supreme Court further directed the State Government to consider the case of the appellants and others similarly situated in the light of the said judgment.
In the circumstances of the case, I am also of the opinion that the same direction can be given in this writ petition.
If the petitioner is retired from service by now he can be given proper promotion and the monetary benefits be paid to him on the basis of notional promotion.
4.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.