Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner who is the State General Secretary of HUDA Public Health Karamchari Union has approached this Court with a prayer for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise his services as a Pump Attendant with effect from April 29, 1983.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a Work Munshi on April 29, 1983.
This appointment was on daily wages.
The petitioner alleges that "later on, ----designation was changed to Pump Attendant."
He does not indicate the month or the year in which this change in designation had taken place.
After he had worked for more than five years, the petitioner along with various other employees filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1654 of 1989 with a prayer that the respondents be directed to regularise the services in accordance with the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 72 of 1988 (Piara Singh v. State of Haryana).
This writ petition was finally heard and decided by VK Bali, J vide order dated November 4, 1992.
His Lordship was pleased to observe that "the petition is allowed to the extent that the respondents shall consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in view of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) S.P.J 1 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) and the instructions issued by the State Government in this behalf..........." The petitioner alleges that vide letter dated July 2, 1993, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P-1, the Executive Engineer, HUDA Division No. 2, Gurgaon, recommended his case for regularisation.
No action was taken on this recommendation.
However, in the meantime, the Sub Divisional Engineer called upon the petitioner to explain as to why he was absent from duty on November 29, 1992 from 11 am to 1 pm and the log book was missing.
The petitioner submitted his explanation.
After consideration of the matter, the Sub Divisional Engineer vide letter dated November 27, 1992, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P-2, warned him to be more careful in future.
Thereafter, even though the petitioner continued to attend to his duties, he was not assigned any work till December 31, 1992.
Vide letter dated April 29, 1994, the Sub Divisional Engineer informed him that there was a break of 35 days in his service.
Various employees in whose case the break was ``much more than-----35 days-----" were regularised.
However, in spite of request, the respondents had refused to take any action in his case.
Consequently, he filed the present writ petition with a prayer that the respondents be directed to regularise his services.
3.
This petition was listed for preliminary hearing on May 17, 1995.
The Division Bench had directed the issue of notice of motion for August 14, 1995.
On March 12, 1996, the Bench recorded that ``the counsel for the petitioner wants to amend the writ petition.
On his request adjourned to 23.5.1996."
Consequently, the amended writ petition was filed.
The matter had then come up for hearing on May 23, 1996, when counsel for the respondents had prayed for time to file a written statement to the amended writ petition.
Ultimately, this petition was admitted.
4.
In the amended petition, the petitioner alleged in paragraph 8 that his case ``is covered by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh reported as 1992 L.I.C.
Page 2168 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) especially the policy letter of the Haryana Government dated 641990 quoted in para 21 of the said judgment.
Under category-III relating to daily rated employee, the petitioner is covered under clause (i) and is entitled to regulrisation w.e.f.
2941983."
On this premise, the petitioner prays that his services be regularised as a Pump Attendant with effect from April 29, 1983.
5.
The respondents filed a reply to the amended writ petition.
So far the petitioner's claim in paragraph 8 was concerned, it was not disputed.
However, it was averred that the petitioner had "remained absent from 27.11.1992 to 31.12.1992 = 35 days willingly and deliberately after he had removed the log book of Tubewell No. 2, Sector 17.
He also did not fulfil the conditions laid down by the Haryana Government in its instructions dated 27593 and dated 18394 i.e. Annexure R-I and Annexure R-II by which he ought not to have had a break in service of more than 30 days.
Here, it may also be mentioned that the break in service was not due to any act on the part of the respondents but due to the deliberate and wilful act of the petitioner himself.
The respondents at no stage refused him work but the abstained on his own.
He was issued a warning on 27.11.92 for his absence."
On these premises, the respondents maintain that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief claimed by him.
6.
Mr.
US Sahni, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the action of the respondents in ignoring him for regularisation is wholly illegal and violative of the instructions issued by the Government.
Learned counsel also urges that the services of various other employees who had a break in service having been regularised, the respondents could not have ignored the petitioner's claim.
7.
Firstly, the case as pleaded by the petitioner may be noticed.
It is claimed that the petitioner is entitled to regularisation in view of the instructions reproduced in paragraph 21 of the judgment of the Apex Court in Piara Singh's case.
According to the petitioner, his case falls under Category III clause (i).
8.
A perusal of the decision in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh's case, 1992(4) S.L.R.
770 : 1992(3) SCT 201, shows that the instructions issued by the State Government have been considered by the Court in paragraph 21.
Category III related to causal workers daily rated employees.
The instructions as reproduced by their Lordships inter alia provide as under :-  "Category-III, Casual Workers/Daily rated employees.
With regard to these employees, the following policy will be followed :-  i) Casual/daily rated employees appointed on or before 3091983 shall be treated as monthly rated established employees on a fixed pay of Rs. 750/- (minimum of Class-IV pay scale) or the rates as fixed by the Deputy Commissioner concerned p.m. without any allowance w.e.f.
1.10.88.
They shall be entitled to an annual increment of Rs. 12/- till their services are regularised.
On regularisation, they shall be put in the time scale of pay applicable to the lowest Group `D' in the Govt. and they would be entitled to all other allowances and benefits available to regular Govt. servants of the corresponding grade.
ii) The casual or daily rated employees, who have completed 10 years or more of service on 30988 shall be regularised w.e.f.
1.10.88 on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability ?
A perusal of the above instructions shows that a casual or a daily rated employee who had joined service on or before September 30, 1983, was entitled to be treated as a monthly rated employee at a fixed ay of Rs. 750/- with effect from October 1, 1988.
He was also entitled to an annual increment of Rs. 12/- till his services were regularised.
It is not the petitioner's case that the respondents have not complied with this part of the instructions.
There is no such averment in the petition.
However, so far as the claim for regularisation is concerned, there is no provision in clause (i) which may entitle him to claim the relief as prayed for in this writ petition.
Consequently, the reliance placed on clause (i) is wholly misconceived.
Furthermore, a perusal of clause (ii) shows that the services of only such daily rated employees as had completed at least 10 years of service on September 30, 1988, had to be regularised with effect from October 1, 1988, on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability.
Admittedly, the petitioner had not completed 10 years of service.
Consequently, the instructions relied upon by the petitioner did not confer upon him a right to claim regularisation with effect from the date of his initial appointment viz. April 29, 1983.
9.
This brings me to the second part of the case as argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Mr. Sahni has contended that the petitioner was entitled to the regularisation of his services and that the respondents have erred in rejecting his claim on the ground that there was a break of more than 30 days.
10.
A perusal of the instructions produced as Annexure R-I with the written statement shows that the Government had inter alia provided that ``service of the daily waged employees who have completed five years service on 31.3.92, were in service on 31.3.93 and have rendered service of 240 days in each year ---" could be regularised.
Had this been the only provision, the petitioner would have had some substance in the claim.
However, the instructions further provide that ``there should not be a break of more than 30 days at a time in a year."
This condition is not satisfied in the present case.
It has been categorically averred in the written statement filed by the respondents that the petitioner was absent from duty from November 27, 1992 to December 31, 1992.
Since there was a break of more than 30 days, the petitioner did not fulfil the condition laid down in the instructions dated March 18, 1994.
11.
Mr. Sahni has placed reliance on a Division Bench decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 8715 of 1991 (Anand Kumar v. Haryana Urban Development Authority etc., 1995(1) S.C.T.
677) to contend that the break in service cannot be a valid ground for denying regularisation of services.
Their Lordships had inter alia observed as under :-  "The employer has a right not to provide work to a daily wager.
If a break in service or interruption in service takes place due to the action of the employer, it cannot be treated as break in service for the purpose of circulars issued by the Government of Haryana.
Likewise, if an interruption in service is due to sickness or authorised leave, or accident or a legal strike or a lock-out, such interruption cannot be treated as break in service so as to disentitle an employee the benefit of regularisation in service .------Therefore, we are of the opinion that a break in service or interruption in service of a daily wager which has been brought about on account of circumstances beyond the control of daily wager which has been brought about on account of circumstances beyond the control of daily wager/casual employee cannot be a ground for denying him the benefit of reglarisation in service."
Thus, the ratio of the decision is that if the break is on account of circumstances beyond the control of the employee, the benefit of regularisation cannot be denied.
What is the position in the present case ?
12.
The categorical averment made by the respondents in the written statement is that ``the break in service was not due to any act on the part of the respondent but due to the deliberate and wilful act of the petitioner himself.''
Thus, the respondent were not to be blamed.
It was the petitioner himself who had remained absent.
It deserves notice that the petitioner had not filed any replication to controvert the categorical averment made in the written statement.
That being so, the position as taken by the respondents has to be accepted.
In this situation, the petitioner's claim that he is entitled to relief in view of the decision of the Division Bench in Anand Kumar's case (supra) cannot be sustained.
13.
Lastly, the learned counsel for the petitioner made a faint attempt to contend that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as various persons whose names are mentioned in Annexure P-3 were given he benefit of regularisation.
There is no clear averment in this behalf in the amended petition.
Mr. Sahni submits that an averment had been made in paragraph 12 of the original petition.
So far as the averment in the original writ petition is concerned, the position was explained by the respondents.
It was pointed out that the services of two workmen had been regularised.
However, they had not been allowed to join duty by the respondents in spite of the fact that they had reported for work.
The clear implication is that the break had occurred in case of those employees on account of the action of the respondents.
Their cases are, thus, clearly distinguishable.
Still further, even if it is assumed that the respondents have regularised the service of some employees in violation of the instructions, the petitioner cannot claim that a mandamus be issued for the repetion of the wrong.
The Government cannot be asked to perpetuate any illegality.
14.
It may also be mentioned that the validity of the instructions issued by the Government providing that those employees in whose case break is more than 30 days shall not be entitled to regularisation has not been challenged.
That being so, the action of the respondents in denying regularisaton of service to the petitioner cannot be said either to be illegal or arbitrary.
It does not suffer from the vice of discrimination.
Consequently, it calls for no interference.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.