THB Chalapathi, J - Petitioner was appointed JBT Teacher on September 20, 1962.
He retired from service on Feburary 29, 1992.
While in service, he was not given the benefit of selection grade, which was accepted by the Government on the basis of the report of the Pay Commission.
Consequently, while computing the retiral benefits, the salary drawn by him without the benefit of selection grade alone was reckoned.
Therefore, he has approached this court inter alia praying for the recomputation of retired benefits after extending the benefit arising out of the decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 2143 of 1994 which was extended to him vide Annexure P2 order dated October 26, 1995.
2.
On behalf of the respondents, a detailed written statement has been filed.
Contention taken therein is that even though selection grade was granted to petitioner with retrospective date, he did not actually draw any salary on that basis and, therefore, he is not entitled to recomputation of pension in the light of rule 6.24(vii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II Part I as applicable to Haryana.
3.
JBT Teachers approached this Court by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 2143 of 1994 for a direction to the Government to grant selection grade on the basis of the total cadre strength including permanent and temporary posts with all consequential benefits.
A Division Bench of this Court disposed of that writ petition observing that :  "Under the circumstances, the petitions are allowed and the respondents i.e. the State of Punjab and Haryana are directed to grant the selection grade on the basis of the total strength, including permanent and temporary posts, with all consequential benefits, to the employees in the Education Departments, including the petitioners, who are eligible to the grant of selection grade, subject to the condition that all such employees who are held entitled to the grant of such relief, however, not be entitled to the arrears for the period exceeding three years and two months preceding the filing of the petitions/representation or date of orders.
In the case of all such employees including those who have filed the representation or those who are entitled to the grant of selection grade but have not filed the petitions, the respondents shall determine their rights in the light of the judgments already delivered by this Court from time to time as expeditiously as possible but not later than six months under any circumstances."
4.
Pursuant to the above direction, salary due to the petitioner was refixed as is seen in Annexure P3 order dated January 4, 1996.
Even before the actual computation of the salary under Annexure P3, petitioner was given the benefit of selection grade by Annexure P2 order dated October 26, 1995, with retrospective effect from April 1, 1976.
The effect of Annexures P3 and P4 is that petitioner must be deemed to have been drawing a salary of Rs. 2,040/- in the scale of pay of Rs. 1200-2040/- with effect from April 1, 1990.
On April 1, 1991, his pay with increment came to Rs, 2,080/-.
5.
As directed by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2143 of 1994, final order fixing the salary of the petitioner should have been passed on or before November 25, 1994.
Petitioner, as per that judgment, is entitled to the arrears for the period of three years and two months preceding November, 1994, i.e. he must get the benefit of the enhanced salary from September 19, 1991.
He retired from service on Feburary 29, 1992.
In view of the decision of this Court, petitioner is entitled to arrears of salary for the period from September 19, 1991, to Feburary 29, 1992.
In other words, respondents are to pay arrears of salary for a period of six months.
6.
From April 1, 1991, as per Annexure P3 order, petitioner must be deemed to have been paid Rs. 2,080/- as monthly salary for a period of ten months immediately preceding the date of retirement of the petitioner he must be deemed to have drawn the basic pay of Rs. 2,080/- per month.
On that basis, his retiral benefits should be recomputed.
In other words, pension, gratuity, commuted value of pension, leave encashment, if any, should be recomputed on the basis of the last drawn monthly salary of Rs. 2,080/-.
On the basis of recommuted value petitioner should be paid all benefits, after giving credit to amounts actually paid.
This must be done within four months from the date of receipt of the copy of this judgment.
In case the arrears found legally due to the petitioner as stated above, are not paid within the said period of four months, the entire arrears will carry interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum from the date of expiry of the period of four months till the date of actual payment.
7.
Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
No order as to costs.