NC Khichi, J (Oral) - In this writ petition order dated 1561995 (Annexure P-6) passed by respondent No. 2 declining to make reference under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the `Act'), is under challenge.
2.
It is alleged that the petitioner had joined service with respondent No. 3 as Junior Engineer (Civil) on 191989 and his duty was of maintenance under the supervision of Assistant Engineer, Deputy Chief Engineer and Chief Engineer of the plant.
All the maintenance work was done by the petitioner under the orders passed by the aforesaid superior officers or superior authorities and after the work was done, the matter is reported to them who verify the maintenance held under their supervision.
The petitioner had been performing his duty very sincerely and honestly.
However the petitioner remained victimised in the lands of respondent No. 3 only because of the reason that being a trade Union activist, he was the General Secretary of Khand Mill Mulazim Union (Regd.)
Sugar Mill and had been fighting for the rights of the workmen.
It is further alleged that because of the reason that petitioner's active involvement in the Union activities, respondent No. 3 always tried to find out an opportunity to oust him by all means.
Respondent No. 3 vide order dated 11.10.1993 (Annexure P-1) sent the petitioner on deputation to another establishment i.e. the Budhlada Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Budhlada, a separate entity.
On representation dated 15.10.1993 (Annexure P-2) made by the petitioner, the order sending the petitioner on deputation was cancelled vide order dated 19101993 (Annexure P-3).
It is further alleged that ultimately the respondent-management resorted to illegal way in terminating the services of the petitioner by declaring him surplus, and his services were terminated with effect from 24111993 vide order of even date (Annexure P-4) by paying him advance salary for the preceding month and retrenchment compensation as per section 25-F of the Act.
The petitioner ultimately served demand notice dated 2061994 (Annexure P-5) under Section 2-A of the Act.
However, the Addl.
Labour Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh, respondent No. 2 declined to refer the industrial dispute to the Labour Court vide impugned order dated 1561995 (Annexure P-6) on the ground that the petitioner does not fall within the definition of workman.
It is this order, which is subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
3.
In response to notice of motion, respondent No. 3 filed written statement and controverted the allegations made in the writ petition.
It has been pleaded that the petitioner does not fall under the definition of workman as envisaged under Section 2(5) of the Act because he was engaged as Junior Engineer and that his job was purely supervisory in nature who was responsible to take work from the skilled and unskilled workers and such, the reference was rightly declined for adjudication of the Labour Court.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records of the case.
The question to be determined in this case is whether the respondent No. 3 was justified to decline to refer the matter to the Labour Court for adjudication ?
Order dated 1561995 (Annexure P-6) reads as under:-  ``While inviting your attention regarding your demand notice dated 2061994 as cited an the subject noted above, it is made clear that the demand mentioned in the abovesaid notice is not fit for sending the same for adjudication because the workman does not fall within the definition of workman as given in the ID Act, 1947 and he was a supervisory officer.''
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contented that the function of respondent No. 3 is of administrative nature and it has decided the merits of the case while holding that the petitioner does not fall within the definition of a workman.
There appears to be force and substance in this contention.
In Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  ``It is now well, settled that while exercising power under Section 10(1) of the Act, the function of the appropriate Government is an administrative function and not a judicial or quasi-judicial function, and that in performing this administrative function the Government cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of the lis which would certainly be in excess of the power conferred on it by Section 10 of the Act.''
6.
In the instant case, the dispute is whether the petitioner raising the dispute is a workman or not, the same cannot be decided by respondent No. 3 in exercise of its administrative functions under Section 10(1) of the Act.
This question has to be decided by the Labour Court.
Thus keeping in view all the facts and circumstances of the case, the impugned order dated 1561995 (Annexure P-6) is hereby quashed and a direction is issued to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to make a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act of the dispute raised by the petitioner vide demand notice dated 2061994 (Annexure P-5) within one month from the receipt of a copy of this order from the Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner whichever is earlier.