THB Chalapathi, J.- This writ petition has been filed directing the respondents to grant admission to the petitioner in B.Ed.
Course for the academic year 1995-96 on the basis of his merit in the Entrance Test.
2.
The petitioner has obtained his Bachelor of Arts degree from the Kurukshetra University.
He applied for admission in the B.Ed.
Course in the year 1995.
In the Entrance Test conducted by the University for admission to the B.Ed.
Course, the petitioner secured fifth rank.
According to the prospectus issued by the university, there are six seats of General Category in Group-I Group-I includes the Arts Group also.
It is also the case of the petitioner that he did his Master's Degree in Arts during 1994-95 and the action of the University in denying him the admission amounts to infringement of his fundamental right.
Therefore, he has filed this writ petition seeking a direction to the University to admit him in B.Ed.
(Spl.)
Course.
This writ petition was filed in this Court on August 28, 1995.
A Division Bench of this Court by its order dated October 20, 1995 admitted the writ petition and also directed that the petitioner be given provisional admission against vacant seat if available, in the B.Ed.
Course.
In pursuance of the above directions of this Court, the petitioner was given admission by the University.
It is brought to my notice that the academic year is coming to a close and that the final examinations are likely to be held in May or June, 1996.
As the petitioner secured admission and the course which is only for one academic year which is coming to an end, I do not think that it is proper to disturb the admission of the petitioner which has been granted to him in view of the orders of this Court dated October 20, 1995.
Even otherwise, there is no dispute of the fact that the petitioner secured fifth rank in the Entrance Test; therefore, he is eligible to be admitted into this course.
3.
However, the learned counsel for the University has contended that unless the petitioner secures the required percentage of attendance, he will not be allowed to sit in the examination after completion of the course.
This Court is not concerned with the question whether the petitioner has to be permitted to sit in the examination or not.
If under the Rules, the University can prevent the student from sitting in the examination on the ground of shortage of attendance, it is always open to the University to pass appropriate orders.
That has nothing to do with the initial admission into the Course.
As the admission to this Course was granted by virtue of the orders of this Court on October 20, 1996, I am of the opinion that the admission cannot be disturbed at this stage.
As already stated, it is left to the University authorities whether to permit or not the candidate to sit in the examination on the completion of the course if he has not put in the required attendance of the classes.
4.
Subject to the above observation, Writ Petition is allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.