NK Kapoor, J - This judgment shall dispose of Regular Second Appeal Nos. 1677 and 1976 of 1990 as both these appeals are against the common judgment and decree dated 11.5.1990 passed by Additional District Judge, Rohtak.
2.
Plaintiff was appointed as Chairman of Board of School Education, Haryana, Bhiwani.
He joined on 621980 and resigned w.e.f.
2411983.
Vide notification dated 1261980 the government fixed his pay at Rs. 2500/- per month plus CCA, TA/DA as admissible to officers of Haryana Government.
DA/ADA was not being paid to him though the same was being paid to the Haryana Government employees as well as employees of the Board.
Denial of payment of DA/ADA led to the filing of the suit.
3.
Defendants No. 1 and 2 have filed separate written statements.
Both the written statements are similar.
Preliminary objection with regard to maintainability of the suit; limitation; court fee; estoppel and jurisdiction have been taken.
Other material averments made by the plaintiff have been controverted.
According to the answering defendants, since the notification vide which the plaintiff had been appointed as Chairman of the Board does not mention of DA/ADA, the authorities have rightly declined to grant him the same and so the suit merit dismissal.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to instalments of DA and ADA and as and when these fell due, during the period of 6 Feburary, 1980 F.N.
to 24th January, 1983 FN along with interest @ 12% AN ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD  3.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of Court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD  5.
Whether the Civil Court at Rohtak has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit ?
OPD  6.
Relief.
The trial Court on the basis of evidence and especially relying upon Exhibit P-1 appointment letter held that since this document does not make mention of DA/ADA, resolution of the Board Exhibit P-2 entitling him so yet confers no right upon the plaintiff.
Resultantly, this issue was decided in favour of the defendant and against the plaintiff.
Issues No. 2 and 4 were not pressed and so were decided against the defendant.
Issue No. 3 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Issue No. 5 too was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
5.
In view of findings on Issue No. 1, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as on law.
The Court besides making reference to the appointment letter placed reliance upon letter dated 5.3.1982 Exhibit P-2 letter written by the Secretary, Board of School Education, Haryana to Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Haryana Government Education Department, for allowing the plaintiff instalment of dearness allowance with retrospective effect.
Mention was also made to the resolution of the Board whereby the Board agreed to award DA/ADA to the plaintiff.
It was further held that as the plaintiff was being given other allowances, namely, CCA, TA/DA as well as benefit of contributory provident fund and there being no mention in the order Annexure P-1 that the pay is inclusive of DA/ADA per se suggests that the plaintiff like other employees of the Board is entitled to DA/ADA.
7.
The appeal was thus accepted, decreeing the suit.
8.
Both the counsel representing the appellants in the two appeals have almost made identical submissions.
It has been argued that the plaintiff had been appointed as Chairman of the Board by the Government of Haryana vide notification dated 1261980.
Vide this notification, terms of his appointment had been stated.
A perusal of Annexure P-1 clearly reveals that whereas the plaintiff was entitled to sum of Rs. 2500/- per month, there is no mention of DA or ADA.
Moreover, it is an appointment and so the precise terms of appointment govern the rights of the parties.
Thus whereas the plaintiff has been made entitled to CCA; benefit of contributory provident fund; leave and medical facilities; conveyance allowance; TA/DA etc.; payment of DA/ADA has been specifically excluded, so the Court below has erred in law in granting this relief to the plaintiff.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the appointment letter as well as resolution passed by the Board recommending payment to be made to the plaintiff on account of DA/ADA.
Admittedly, the plaintiff had been appointed as a Chairman of the Board vide notification dated 1261980 and as per terms and conditions of appointment, it makes mention of pay; CCA; contributory provident fund; conveyance allowance; TA/DA; telephone at his residence, almost identical to which is normally granted to the employees of the Board.
Pay as per rule 244 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, means the basic pay, that is the amount drawn monthly by a government employee in the scale of pay of the post held by him or to which he is entitled by reason of his position in a cadre and it includes any other emoluments which may specifically be classed as part of pay by the competent authority.
Thus, such emoluments which a competent authority may class as part of pay is also included in the pay itself.
Salary and other terms, namely to state monthly emoluments which is being paid to an employee has not been defined in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I.
However, in Explanation II of Section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure "salary" means "the total monthly emoluments, excluding any allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisions of clause (i) derived by a person from his employment whether on duty or on leave.
Thus the salary includes all emoluments which a person gets for the service rendered for a month or specified period.
Appointment letter Annexure P-1 whereas makes mention of pay which was fixed in the case of the plaintiff also makes mention of the term salary.
Under caption accommodation, it has been stated that the Board should hire accommodation on rent for him subject to the upper limit of Rs. 1000/- per mensem and charge him 10% of the salary.
Similarly, plaintiff has been given benefit of Board's contributory provident fund scheme from the date he took over charge.
The two provisions pertaining to accommodation and contributory provident fund suggests that the Board intended to treat the plaintiff also to be an employee.
10.
The matter can be examined from another angle also i.e. it has not been specifically stated in the appointment letter as to whether payment of Rs. 2500/- per mensem as pay is inclusive of DA/ADA or say as to whether this amount of Rs. 2500/- per mensem is being paid a consolidated salary.
There is no denying the fact that the TA/DA does not form part of pay till it is ordered by a competent authority.
All the same, specific order is passed for each one of the persons who is entitled.
TA/ADA are normally awarded keeping in view the inflation rate as indicated in the price index.
Invariably as and when a decision is taken a percentage of pay is ordered to be paid in addition to the salary of an employee.
Once this payment is made, the same forms part of the salary.
In the context of the present case, whereas the plaintiff's salary has been fixed at Rs. 2500/- per mensem, he had been granted other benefits of CCA, contributory provident fund etc. and so it is reasonable to infer that the authorities intended to compensate him by awarding DA/ADA on account of rise in the price index.
11.
Accordingly, I find no merit in the appeals and dismiss the same.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.