Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the impugned order Annexure P3 vide which the claim of the petitioner for promotion on the post of Sub Divisional Officer with effect from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted has been rejected and further a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioner as Sub Divisional Officer with effect from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted and pay all consequential benefits with interest at the rate of 12% per annum as directed by this Court while disposing of the earlier petition (CWP 10548 of 1993) filed by the petitioner decided on 23111995.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Apprentice Sectional Officer in the Irrigation Department of Haryana on 31.5.1961, for a period of three months.
After successful completion of the training period, he was absorbed in the department on regular basis as Sectional Officer from 891961.
He was transferred to Rori Division, Sirsa, as Sectional Officer on 1.5.1971 and remained there upto 1741972.
Subsequently, petitioner was transferred from Rori Division to Augmentation Division at Karnal of Ambala Circle.
The personal file and service book of the petitioner were not sent which resulted in non-addition of annual increments in the basic pay of the petitioner from 1972 onwards.
Petitioner made a number of representations to the Executive Engineer, Sirsa Division, Sirsa to send his personal file and service book.
Inter-departmental communications continued but service book of the petitioner was not traced.
As the service book of the petitioner was not traced or reconstructed, petitioner was denied the annual increments since the year 1972 and further denial of pay fixation etc.
In the absence of his service book, he was ignored for promotion to the next higher post.
His junior Zile Singh was promoted.
Having failed to get justice from executive authorities, petitioner filed CWP 10548 of 1993 seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to reconstruct his service book and pay all consequential reliefs and arrears of pay with effect from 1741972 along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum and also to give him promotion from December 1979 on the post of Sub Divisional Officer when his junior Zile Singh was promoted.
A learned Single Judge of this Court recorded a finding that due to negligence of the departmental authorities to trace out/reconstruct the service book, petitioner suffered grave injustice for a period of 23 years as he was denied increments, pay fixation and promotion whenever the same became due.
The writ petition was disposed of by issuing the following directions :-  ``In my considered opinion, the failure of the respondents to reconstruct the service book of the petitioner has resulted in denial of property right to the petitioner and it has also resulted in discrimination for promotion when his junior Zile Singh was promoted on ad hoc basis.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to reconstruct the service book of the petitioner within a period of three months, Within next one month, they are directed to fix the pay of the petitioner in the revised pay scales which have come into force from time to time since the year 1972.
He shall be given benefit of the increments due to him since the year 1972.
The arrears of pay due to such fixation shall be paid to him within next 15 days along with interest @ 12% pa from the date increments became payable to the petitioner in the year 1972.
Within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order, the respondents are also directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted and if the petitioner is found suitable for promotion on the basis of his annual confidential reports etc. then, he should be given retrospective promotion as Sub Divisional Officer/Sub Divisional Engineer with all consequential monetary benefits.
Costs are made easy.''
In spite of the clear cut directions issued, no firm action was taken by the respondents which compelled the petitioner to file COCP 519 of 1996 in this Court.
During the pendency of the contempt petition, a sum of Rs. 2,99,524/- plus the amount credited to G.P.F.
was paid as against the claim of the petitioner to the sum of Rs. 10,05,199/-.
3.
Respondents submitted in the contempt petition that orders of this Court have been implemented qua fixing of the arrears on account of increments and pay fixation and his case for giving promotion with effect from the date his junior was promoted was under consideration.
Impugned order Annexure P3 has been passed denying promotion to the petitioner with effect from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted on the ground that the government prepared a ranking list upto 1992 in which both Zile Singh and Kartar Singh did not find place.
Government was considering the case of reversion of all such Sub-Divisional Officers as their promotion was not in accordance with rules and seniority.
Zile Singh was ordered to be reverted against which he filed CWP 5313 of 1993.
This writ petition was accepted by this Court on 23111995.
Order of reversion of Zile Singh was quashed.
As a result thereof Zile Singh who is junior to the petitioner continued to be Sub Divisional Officer/Sub Divisional Engineer.
Stand taken by the respondents was that promotion of Zile Singh was being withdrawn and, therefore, the petitioner was not entitled to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer.
4.
A positive direction had been issued by this Court in CWP 10548 of 1993, to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted and if petitioner was found suitable on the basis of his annual confidential reports, then he should be given the resultant promotion as Sub Divisional Officer/Sub Divisional Engineer with all consequential monetary benefits.
Reversion orders of Zile Singh have been quashed by this Court in CWP 5313 of 1993 decided on 23111995 with the result that Zile Singh continued to function against the promoted post.
Judgment passed in Zile Singh's case (CWP 5313 of 1993) has not been challenged by the respondents and the same has become final.
Petitioner has been made to suffer by the respondents for no fault of his.
He was denied increments, pay fixation and promotion for a period of 23 years as the service book of the petitioner had been lost and the same had not been reconstructed.
Case of the petitioner for promotion to the next higher post was to be considered with effect from the date his juniors were appointed.
Nothing adverse against the petitioner has been pointed out in the written statement.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is accepted.
A positive direction is issued to the respondents to promote the petitioner forthwith from the date Zile Singh was promoted as Sub Divisional Officer/Sub Divisional Engineer.
As directed earlier, retrospective promotion shall entail all consequential monetary benefits.
Respondents are directed to calculate the monetary benefits of the petitioner consequent upon his promotion with retrospective date and disburse the same with interest at the rate of 12% per annum, within two months on receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.