RS Mongia, J - The petitioners are substantive employee of Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
They are both post-Graduates.
While working as Assistants, both of them were deputed to work as Superintendents w.e.f.
May 4, 1990 and October 5, 1989, respectively.
They were regularly promoted as Superintendents vide orders dated December 21, 1992, and joined as such w.e.f.
December 23, 1992.
2.
There are three posts of Secretaries of Municipal Corporation in the State of Punjab.
The service conditions and the method of recruitment etc. of the posts under the Municipal Corporation are governed by the Rules known as the Punjab Municipal Corporation (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called `the Rules').
Rule 5 of the Rules deals with the method of recruitment to the various posts in the Corporation.
The same is reproduced below :-  "5.
Method of recruitment - (1) Recruitment to the posts in a Service at the time of its initial constitution, shall be made by the appointing authority by absorption of persons already in the service of a Municipal Corporation in a corresponding post at the time of the constitution of the Service, provided they are found fit by an authority appointed by the Government in this behalf for becoming members of the Service after taking into consideration their qualifications and service record.
(2) After filling in the vacancies under sub-rule (i), the remaining vacancies and the vacancies which may occur thereafter shall be filled up in the following manner :-  (i) fifty per cent by direct recruitment; and (ii) fifty per cent by promotion on seniority-cum-merit basis: Provided that if no suitable candidate is available for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion, the vacancy may be filled by transfer or on deputation : Provided further that if no qualifications have been specified in Appendix `B' for the purpose of filling up the same by promotion, the posts in that service shall be filled up by direct recruitment."
Appendix `B' to the Rules lays down the qualifications for filling up the post of Secretary by direct recruitment as well as by promotion, which are as follows : (1) (2) (3) (4) xxx xxx xxx xxx 2.
Punjab Service of Corporation, Secretaries Law Graduate with an experience for a minimum period of ten years on a post not lower than the rank of a Superintendent in a Municipal Committee or a Municipal Corporation or an equivalent post in a Department of Government or has for at least ten years been an Advocate Should be Superintendent with more than five years experience and should be atleast a Graduate or have an equivalent degree.
OrPost-Graduate second division with an experience for a minimum period of ten years on a post not lower than the rank of Superintendent in a Municipal Committee or Municipal Corporation or in a Department of Government.
3.
The case of the petitioners is that out of the three posts of Secretaries, two posts are being manned by the promotees.
Respondent No. 3, Shri Brij Mohan, is a substantive employee of the Municipal Committee, Gobindgarh, where he is working as a Superintendent.
The service under the Municipal Committees is different and separate from service under the Municipal Corporations which are separate autonomous bodies.
In 1992, for the third post of Secretary of the Municipal Corporation, which was to be filled by direct recruitment, no Superintendent was available in the Municipal Corporation Service, who was a Graduate and had five years experience as such.
Accordingly, the respondent- State appointed respondent No. 3 as Secretary, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana on deputation from the Municipal Committee, Gobindgarh, for a period of one year or till the post was filled by direct recruitment, whichever was earlier.
Copy of the order dated December 8, 1992, to that effect has been appended as Annexure P-4, with the writ petition.
Thereafter the period of deputation was extended from time to time and vide order dated November 14, 1994, copy Annexure P-5, the last extension was given for one year w.e.f.
December 15, 1994.
The petitioners claim themselves to be eligible for appointment as Secretaries as per the qualifications.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in granting extension to respondent No. 3 to serve on deputation as Secretary of the Corporation submitted representations in October and November, 1995, copies of which have been appended as Annexure P-7 and P-8 respectively.
Despite this, according to the allegations of the petitioner, the case has been moved for absorbing respondent No. 3 on permanent basis as Secretary in the service of the Municipal Corporation.
According to the petitioners, as per rule 5 of the Rules quoted above, a person can only be appointed on deputation if no person is available to be appointed by the method of direct recruitment or by promotion, as the case may be, by absorbing respondent No. 3 on permanent basis.
The right of the petitioner to be considered for appointment by direct recruitment will be violative and if respondent No. 3 was to be permanently absorbed against a post meant for promotee, even then the right of the petitioners for being considered for promotion to the post of Secretary would be violated.
Eligible persons cannot be ignored for promotion/direct recruitment and the post cannot be filled by deputation on permanent basis.
First the method of direct recruitment/promotion, as the case may be, should be exhausted and if no suitable person is found eligible, only then the method of filling the post by deputation can be resorted to under Rule 5 (supra).
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in SS Sodhi v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 1064, where after considering a similar rule as Rule 5 where the post was required to be filled by promotion and if no suitable candidate was available, then the post was to be filled by direct recruitment/transfer, it was held that first the method of promotion has to be resorted to, failing which the post could be filled by transfer or deputation.
Petitioners also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1500 of 1995 (PC Sharma and others v. State of Punjab) rendered on April 24, 1995, where rule 5 of the Rules came up for consideration.
It was held that the employees should be first considered for promotion for the post as claimed by them in that petition and if found suitable, the deputationist will have to be repatriated.
4.
Separate replies have been filed by all the respondents.
The case of the State Government is that the petitioners were promoted on December 21, 1992, and on the date when respondent No. 3 was given extension, they were not eligible for promotion.
Their previous experience which they got on the post of Superintendent by manning those posts before their regular promotion is not to be counted for purpose of experience.
According to the State Government, the petitioners are not eligible.
Since initially there was no person eligible to man the post of the Secretary, the post was sought to be filled by way of deputation.
For that purpose, the Government invited applications for filling the post on deputation.
Out of the applicants, who had applied for going on deputation, respondent No. 3 was found to be the best person and he was deputed to man the post and later on the extensions were given.
Vide order dated November 15, 1995, copy Annexure R1/4, the last extension was given for one year w.e.f.
December 15, 1995, or till the direct recruit quota post was filled, whichever was earlier.
The extension was granted on the recommendations of the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana, who reported that the work and conduct of respondent No. 3 was exceptionally good.
We had sent for the files pertaining to the appointment of respondent No. 3 on deputation as Secretary, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
The files reveal that there was a representation by respondent No. 3 for permanent absorption on the post of Secretary.
The Commissioner, Municipal Committee, Ludhiana, recommended his case for permanent absorption.
The case was examined at various levels.
Respondent No. 3 had also met Secretary, Local Government, and had requested him that his representation may be decided after giving opportunity of hearing.
After giving hearing, the Principal Secretary, Local Government, vide his note dated Feburary 14, 1994, decided that the plea taken by respondent No. 3 that he may be absorbed as Secretary in Municipal Committee, Ludhiana, where he was appointed on deputation in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 on the post of Secretary had no force, as he was given the grade of Rs. 3000-4500 in violation of the orders of the Finance Minister and Minister of Local Government.
The representation of respondent No. 3 was ordered to be filed.
Another representation was received which was addressed to the Chief Minister on which the then Chief Minister, Shri Beant Singh, ordered "To adjust on permanent basis".
On the same application, the then Minister for Finance and Local Government ordered "Orders of CM be implemented".
On April 13, 1995, the Chief Minister recorded a note that the period of deputation of Shri Brij Mohan (respondent No. 3) as Secretary, Municipal Committee, Ludhiana, had already been extended for another year from December 16, 1994, the question of absorption of Shri Brij Mohan in the service of Municipal Corporation may be examined under the Rules after watching his conduct during this period.
Reference has been made in the noting to rule 21 of the Rules which provides for relaxation of the Rules in case of any class or category of persons.
It was being suggested that the case of respondent no. 3 may be considered for permanent absorption as Secretary by invoking the provisions of Rule 21 by relaxing the rule regarding recruitment.
Opinion of the Legal Remembrancer was also sought.
The legal Remembrancer showed his inability to tender any advice in the matter on the ground that no legal point was involved in the case on which the State Government was to form any opinion.
Thereafter the case was dealt with at the administrative level for absorbing respondent No. 3 by relaxation of rule 21.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that in view of the fact that respondent No. 3 had excellent record in Municipal Corporation as Secretary, there was no harm in considering the case for his permanent absorption by relaxing rule 5 under the power granted under Rule 21.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that this writ petition must succeed.
Rule 5 regarding method of recruitment which has already been quoted above leaves no manner of doubt that the posts in the Corporation are to be filled either by promotion or direct recruitment and it is only in case that by adopting such method, no suitable person is forthcoming that the post can be allowed to be filled by a deputationist.
Initially respondent No. 3 was brought on deputation for a period of one year at a time or till the post was filled by direct recruitment.
This was extended from time to time.
The written-statement on the record does not show that any attempt was made to fill the post by direct recruitment, in which petitioners and all other eligible persons could apply.
In case no suitable persons were forthcoming, perhaps the case could be considered for filling the post on deputation.
Filling the post on deputation is always a temporary arrangement and that is why this temporary arrangement was made by giving the post to respondent No. 3 on deputation.
From the record we find that respondent No. 3 had some access directly to the Chief Minister, who on his application directly-ordered that respondent No. 3 be adjusted permanently as Secretary of the Municipal Corporation.
It is thereafter that efforts had been made in the noting to see that respondent No. 3 is permanently absorbed by invoking provisions of Rule 21 by relaxing the provisions of Rule 5 (supra) pertaining to method of recruitment.
Had it been done in normal circumstances, perhaps nobody could have raised his finger.
Having seen that no efforts were made to fill the post by direct recruitment, the question arises: can the post be allowed to be filled on deputation year after year by giving extensions and whether respondent No. 3 can be absorbed permanently as Secretary, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana ?
To our mind, the answer has to be in the negative.
As held in SS Sodhi's case (supra) by the Apex Court and also by a Division Bench of this Court in PC Sharma's case (supra) where the very rule 5 came up for consideration that first method of promotion/direct recruitment has to be resorted to before filling the post on deputation.
As observed above, deputationists hold the post to man it for the period till the post is filled in by regular method of promotion/direct recruitment.
In a given case when despite efforts having been made repeatedly for filling the post by direct recruitment, no suitable person comes forth, perhaps the power of relaxation under Rule 21 may be resorted to absorb a person who might have worked satisfactorily on deputation for quite some time.
Here we find that the Chief Minister ordered the permanent absorption of respondent No. 3 and then a case was sought to be made to permanently absorb him.
It would have been totally different case if the Chief Minister had ordered that the case for permanent absorption of respondent No. 3 may be considered in accordance with law but here he had almost commanded that respondent No. 3 be absorbed and thereafter the then Finance Minister who was also holding the portfolio of Local Self Government ordered the implementation of the orders of the Chief Minister.
The Chief Minister is as much bound by the rule of law as any other individual.
Under these circumstances, no case for absorption of respondent No. 3 is made out as no efforts have been made to fill the post by the method provided under Rule 5.
If such things are allowed, the persons who may be working in the Department or even a person who may be eligible for direct recruitment may never get a chance to hold that particular post and the person on deputation may get the post by permanent absorption.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to fill in the post of Secretary, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana by the method provided under Rule 5 of the Rules and may not give any further extension to respondent No. 3 to hold the post till the post is filled by the method envisaged by rule 5.
Let this exercise be done within a period of three months of the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner, whichever is earlier.