Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who claims to have served the Indian Army for a period of 15 years and 2 months, has approached this court with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to grant him service pension w.e.f.
141956 with interest at the rate of 18% pa.  2.
The respondents contest the claim of the petitioner on a two fold basis.
Firstly, it has been pointed out that the petitioner was discharged from Army on 3131956.
The writ petition was filed in the year 1991.
It suffers from laches and is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
Secondly, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had initially serviced from 491940 to 671947.
Thereafter, he was re-enrolled on 3121947.
Whenever, former service is required to be counted towards the second spell of service, the individual is required to surrender the gratuity already paid to him.
In this case, there is nothing on record either to establish that he has returned the gratuity amount paid to him, or that there is a notification regarding counting of his former service towards his second spell.
It has been further submitted that after 141956, the petitioner had submitted his first petition "after a lapse of 28 years requesting for his duplicate discharge certificate.........." It was issued.
Based on the duplicate discharge certificate, he had represented for the grant of pension.
The petitioner was requested "to forward the old records available.... as the records pertaining to him have been destroyed being time expired.
In this regard, the individual had admitted that his old correspondence alongwith valuable things have been destroyed by fire and hence he requested for a duplicate discharge certificate....
It was, however, revealed that in his application dated 18101984, for the issuance of duplicate discharge certificate, he had submitted that he had lost the original one issued to him, while travelling in the bus between Ladhran and Samrala on 10101984 which he kept in a bag.
The petitioner also lodged a complaint with the Samrala Police about the loss and the FIR was also enclosed.
The petition submitted by him regarding the loss of discharge certificate on 18101984 and the petition dated 2811987 mentioning that the certificate was destroyed by fire, are contradictory which clearly denotes that he manipulated the entire case only to get the pension on some pretext........." The respondents have also stated that the entire records have been destroyed in accordance with the regulations.
In the absence of the record, the claim made by the petitioner cannot be verified.
On these premises, the respondents have prayed that the writ petition should be dismissed.
3.
The petitioner has filed replication to reiterate his claim.
4.
The counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. BS Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the record clearly establishes that the petitioner had rendered 15 years and 2 months service.
He is, thus, entitled to the grant of pension.
Mere delay cannot defeat his claim.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. SK Pippat, Senior Standing Counsel for Union of India.
He has pointed out that on account of non-availability of the record, it is not possible to verify the relevant facts as required under the regulations.
Still further, the petition being highly belated, the claim deserves to be rejected on that ground.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been discharged from service on 141956.
It is also not disputed that he had not made any claim for the grant of pension prior to 521986, when he had submitted his representation.
A copy of the representation is on record as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
The matter was considered by the authorities.
Vide letter dated 1311987, the petitioner was informed that his "service documents have been destroyed being time expired."
Thus, the office is unable to "look into your case without service documents."
Consequently, the petitioner was asked to forward the "old discharge book to enable the office to consider" his case for granting pension.
The petitioner sent a reply vide letter dated 2811987.
A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P5 with the writ petition.
In this letter, the petitioner, inter alia stated that "unluckily, about 3-4 years back the old correspondence alongwith valuable things was burnt due to fire".
So, no record was left with him and a copy of the discharge certificate for the service from 3121947 to 3131956 was also burnt.
On 3171987, the respondents informed the petitioner that "in the absence of documents we are unable to determine as to why you had not been sanctioned pension".
It was further pointed out that "you had been paid service gratuity to the extent of Rs. 350/- for both the spells.
A doubt, therefore, arises how you accepted service gratuity when you were eligible for pension.
It appears that you had either break in service or non-qualifying service which debarred you in granting pension".
Moreover, "you have represented your case after 31 years of discharge for which no documents have been made available".
Consequently, the claim was rejected.
The petitioner submitted yet another representation.
He also filed a civil suit.
The suit was dismissed on the ground that in view of the provisions of Section 4 of the Pension Act, 1871, the Civil Court had no jurisdiction.
Thereafter, on 141991, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
6.
Sequence of events clearly establishes that the petitioner had taken no steps to claim pension for more than 30 years after his discharge from the Army on 3131956.
In the mean time, the respondents had destroyed the record.
That being so, even facts alleged by the petitioner could not be verified.
Still further, the Army authorities gave the petitioner a chance to produce the documents in his possession.
He could not produce any.
In fact, he took contradictory positions.
On one occasion he stated that the documents had been destroyed in a fire.
On another occasion, he stated that he had lost them while travelling.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the respondents were willing to consider the claim of the petitioner on merits in spite of the lapse of time.
However, they were unable to do so primarily on account of the reason that the documents had been destroyed.
The petitioner had also failed to extend them a helping hand as he did not produce the relevant documents.
In this situation, it is apparent that the respondents have not acted arbitrarily or unfairly in rejecting the petitioner's claim.
7.
Still further, a perusal of the regulations governing the grant of pension also shows that the petitioner's claim for pension cannot be sustained in the circumstances of this case.
Regulation 126 of the Pension Act, permits that the "former service ...........may be allowed by a competent authority to reckon towards .......... pension subject to the fulfilment of the conditions.........." These conditions are reproduced below :-  "1.
Condition No. 1.
At the time of re-employment/re-enrolment, the individual shall have declared his former service and cause of discharge therefrom and elected to count that service towards pension or gratuity.
The election once made shall be final.
2.
Condition No. 2.
After re-employment/re-enrolment the individual shall have completed any consecutive period of three years service without two red ink entries or a court martial conviction.
In case of combatants re- enrolled as such and transferred to the reserve before completing three years colour service since re-enrolment, the period of three years for the purpose of this condition may be either wholly or partly with the reserve.
3.
Condition No. 3.
The individual shall have refunded any gratuity other than war gratuity received in respect of his former service within a period of three years from the date of his re-employment/re-enrolment in not more than 36 monthly instalments from his pay.
The first instalment shall be payable within three months from the date of re-employment/re-enrolment."
The perusal of condition No. 1 as reproduced above, indicates that the competent authority can allow two periods of service to be clubbed together if the individual elects to count his service towards pension or gratuity.
In other words, the individual has to make a choice as to whether he opts for the benefit towards pension or gratuity.
In the present case, there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner had exercised any option at the time of re-employment/re-enrolment that the period of service rendered by him from 491940 to 671947 should be counted towards pension or gratuity.
Factually, he had drawn the gratuity separately for both these spells.
Secondly, it was also to be established that he had completed three years service "without two red ink entries or a court martial conviction".
The petitioner has not even averred that there were no red ink entries or a court martial conviction on his record.
Still further, condition No. 3 makes it incumbent upon an individual that he would refund the gratuity within a period of three years from the date of his re-enrolment in not more than 36 monthly instalments.
There is not even an averment in the writ petition that the petitioner had refunded any gratuity.
Thus, none of the three conditions as stipulated in Regulation 126 of the Act, are satisfied in the present case.
8.
Mr. Sehgal has pointed out that in various decisions, a view has been expressed by this Court that delay cannot defeat the claim for grant of pension.
It is so.
Yet, in the circumstances of the present case, it is apparent that on account of the lapse of time, the relevant record has been destroyed by the Army authorities.
The petitioner has not produced the documents which were in his custody and as a result, the facts cannot be verified.
Even in the petition, it has not been shown that the conditions stipulated in Regulation 126 are satisfied.
9.
Mr. Sehgal submitted that at the time of discharge, the petitioner's character was described as exemplary.
He further submits that an extract from Long Roll has been produced as Annexure P1 with the writ petition.
It is, undoubtedly, so.
Yet, the conditions as stipulated in Regulation 126 are not satisfied.
Consequently, no order can be passed in his favour.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, the petitioner's claim cannot be sustained.
Consequently, it is rejected.
The writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.