Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Physical Training Instructor in the State of Haryana, prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the selection grade on his completing 18 years of service viz. October 25, 1978.
A few facts as are relevant for the decision of this case may briefly be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service under the Central Government as an Instructor under the National Discipline Scheme.
He was appointed on October 24, 1960.
This scheme had been prepared by the Government under the National Fitness Corps Programme.
Subsequently, there was a decision to decentralise the scheme.
On October 1, 1972, the administrative control over the Instructors who had been posted in various Government/private schools in the State of Haryana was transferred to the State Government with effect from October 1, 1972.
On October 14, 1976 the State Government issued an order by which it sanctioned 311 posts of Physical Instructors in the pay scale of Rs. 125-5-150/5-250.
It also sanctioned 14 posts of Director, Physical Education in the scale of Rs. 220-8-300-10-400.
It was further decided that 15 per cent of the posts for both the cadres will be in the selection grade of Rs. 250-10-300 and Rs. 400-20-600, respectively.
It was also decided that all the Instructors under the National Discipline Scheme working in the State Government be absorbed with effect from July 1, 1976, and placed in the scales of pay sanctioned for the different posts.
The sanction was subject to certain conditions.
One of these conditions was that the employees working in the National Discipline Scheme shall be kept in a separate block without disturbing their inter se seniority and that ``it will be a diminishing cadre___________''.
In pursuance of this policy decision, the petitioner was appointed as a Physical Training Instructor (N.F.C.)
in the pay scale of Rs. 125-250 with effect from July 1, 1976.
A copy of the order dated October 15, 1976, issued by the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana, in this behalf is as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The appointment was purely on temporary basis.
It was, however, stipulated that ``from the date of absorption in the State service he will be entitled to all allowances as admissible to other State employees of this cadre''.
3.
Before the petitioner was actually absorbed as Physical Training Instructor in the State of Haryana, the Government had issued a letter dated January 31, 1975, regarding the grant of selection grade to ``the Provincialised Teachers''.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
By this letter sanction of the Government of Haryana was conveyed to the Department for the grant of ``selection grade with effect from 1.10.1974 to these Masters/Teachers borne on Provincialised Cadre who have completed 18 years of service on that date and from then onwards to ______''.
After his absorption in the State service, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Minister praying that he should also be granted the selection grade in accordance with the letter issued by the State Government on January 31, 1975.
The claim was examined but the State Government found no ground to grant any relief.
Since the petitioner did not hear anything in reply, he approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the State Government in not releasing the selection grade to him is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, he prays for the issue of a direction to the respondents regarding the grant of selection grade.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that the persons working in the Provincialised Cadre belong to a different class of employees.
They have no avenue of promotion.
It was due to an undue hardship that a decision to grant selection grade on completion of 18 years of service was taken.
Since the petitioner belongs to a different class of employees, he has no claim for the grant of selection grade.
Mr. Rathee, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that even the Instructors under the National Discipline Scheme have no avenue of promotion.
They also belong to a diminishing cadre and consequently the action of the State Government in not granting the selection grade to them is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The learned counsel has also placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in JBT Rajkiya Adhyapak Sangh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(3) RSJ 111.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had been initially recruited by the Central Government.
He was working under the National Discipline Scheme which had been prepared by the Central Government.
The petitioner and the others like him were absorbed in the State service vide order dated October 15, 1976.
This absorption was in pursuance of the policy decision taken by the Government on October 14, 1976.
The State Government had taken a conscious decision that 15 per cent posts of the Physical Training Instructors shall be placed in the selection grade.
It is not alleged that the State Government has not granted selection grade to the members of the Cadre in accordance with this decision.
The only claim made by the petitioner is based on the fact that those working in the Provincialised Cadre had been granted selection grade on completion of 18 years of service while the petitioner has been denied a similar relief.
This, the petitioner alleges, is discriminatory.
Admittedly, the petitioner does not belong to the Provincialised Cadre.
In fact, there were certain schools in the State of Punjab which were being run by the Municipal and District Boards.
On September 27, 1957, the State Government had taken an executive decision to take over the control of the schools which were being run by these Boards.
The services of even those teachers who were employed in these schools were also taken over.
Later on, these teachers were described as members of the Provincialised Cadre and the rules called the Punjab Education Service (Provincialised Cadre) Class III Rules, 1961 were promulgated to regulate their conditions of service.
These rules were retrospectively enforced with effect from October 1, 1957.
The teachers belonging to the Provincialised Cadre had claimed parity with those working in the State Cadre.
This claim was partly accepted by this Court.
The decision was challenged by the State of Punjab before the Apex Court.
In the State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh, AIR 1963 SC 913, their Lordships ruled that the members of the Provincialised Cadre were totally distinct and different from those belonging to the State Cadre.
It was held that the Government which is carrying on the administration is entitled to ``have a choice in the constitution of the services to man the administration ___________''.
It can constitute two services ``consisting of employees doing the same work but with different scales of pay or subject to different conditions of service.
Constitution of such services is not violative of Article 14.
The proposition that ``Article 14 requires that equal work must receive equal pay or that if there is equality in pay and work there have to be equal conditions of service is untenable''.
Accordingly, the appeal filed by the State Government was accepted and the decision of this Court was reversed.
It was categorically held that the members of the Provincialised Cadre belong to a distinct class and they were not entitled to parity with those working in the State Cadre.
6.
In view of this authoritative pronouncement of a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court, it is clearly settled that the teachers working in the Provincialised Cadre cannot claim parity with their counterparts in the State Cadre.
It would be equally true that those who do not belong to the Provincialised Cadre cannot complain of discrimination on the ground that they have been treated differently from those belonging to that cadre.
Resultantly, the grievance of the petitioner that he has been treated differently from the members of the Provincialised Cadre cannot be sustained.
7.
Mr. Rathee has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in JBT Rajkiya Adhyapak Singh's case (supra).
This case is clearly distinguishable on facts.
Nothing has been pointed out in the decision which may be applicable to the facts of the present case.
8.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.