T.N.C.
Rangarajan, J - These petitioners seek regularisation of the services of the petitioners from the date on which the posts were sanctioned.
2.
The undisputed facts are that the petitioners were appointed in 1989 on consolidated pay.
The appointment stated that they were appointed on the basis of the applications made by them after an interview held on 1591989 by the Superintendent.
It appears that he had been directed to make the recruitment by the University to fill up the newly created ad hoc posts which were initially for a period of three months.
In view of the fact that the services of the staff were required continuously, University having been just then established, these ad hoc posts continued.
The University had been constituted in November, 1986 and the services of those appointed in December 1986 and January 1987 were regularised.
The rest of the Staff were informed by a Circular dated 16.1.1990 that they will be absorbed in permanent services as per the Rules.
The University had been taking up the matter of creation of posts for the purpose of certain new scheme and programmes.
By GOMs.
No. 104 dated 2721993 Government had cleared the scheme and in particular created 52 additional posts in Siddartha Medical College, Vijayawada as given in the Annexure to that Government Order.
However, before the services of the ad hoc employees could be regularised in the sanctioned posts, the Act 2 of 1994 was passed by the State Legislature with effect from 25.11.1993 banning the recruitment of any ad hoc appointments.
It was also provided by the said Act that all ad hoc appointments made until that date will be reviewed and terminated.
The matter was taken up to the Supreme Court, and in the meanwhile, the Government issued GOMs.
No. 212 dated 2241994 providing for regularisation for such ad hoc appointments, if certain conditions are fulfilled, whereupon the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal, one of those conditions was that the persons must have worked continuously for a period of five years and are continuing on 25.11.1993.
The status of the ad hoc employees in the University was reviewed and out of 107 such employees only 46 had completed five years of service and the balance of 60 including one who had resigned had not then completed five years.
Out of them again, two were overaged and six did not have appropriate vacancies.
The Registrar wrote a letter on 2491994 to the Principal Secretary to the Government explaining this position and sought orders to permit the University to regularise the services of these candidates since at a meeting held on 1491994 in the Chambers of the Principal Secretary of the Government, it was agreed that all the employees should be regularised whether they have completed five years of service or not.
The Government then passed GOMS.
307 dated 1071995 regularising the services of 29 persons who had been appointed in 1987 and 1988 and who had also completed five years of service as on 25.11.1993.
But since no similar orders were forthcoming in respect of others who has not completed five years of service, the petitioners have filed these two writ petitions.
The case of the petitioners is that though they have been working in the clear vacancies, they have not been regularised and that the similarly placed individuals such as, K Narasimha Rao have been regularised, and therefore, they cannot be discriminated.
It is also contended that since posts have been sanctioned for taking their services, the University cannot withhold the payment of the salaries which had already been sanctioned.
3.
In the common counter affidavit filed by the Government, it is stated that the petitioners are not entitled to the regularisation in terms of GOMs.
No. 212 dated 22411994 and that the Government is a necessary party since the University cannot take any decision without the permission of the Government.
In the counter affidavit filed by the University, it is contended that without impleading the Government, the petitioners cannot for any relief as the University is powerless to regularise the employees without the permission of the Government.
It is also stated that by letter dated 2781993, the Principal Secretary has written to the Registrar stating that the issue of appointments without the media of the Employment Exchange and the rule of reservation is under consideration, and therefore, the regularisation of services of those already appointed, should be kept in abeyance.
It is also contended that the petitioners have not fulfilled the conditions of GOMs.
No. 212 dated 2241994, and therefore, they are not entitled to the regularisation.
With reference to K Narasimha Rao, it is stated that a post was specifically created and notified through the newspapers and since he was appointed by a regular recruitment process, he fulfilled the conditions of GOMs.
No. 212.
In the additional counter affidavit, it is stated that some of the posts sanctioned in GOMs.
No. 104 dated 2721993 were filled up by direct recruitment by following due procedure but certain posts are lying vacant and since the budget grant for the vacant posts have not been received, the petitioners are not entitled to be regularised against those posts or claim the pay sanctioned for those posts.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners have been working continuously and have also been assured that their services will be regularised and in spite of obtaining the sanction for the posts, they were not being regularised.
It was pointed out that in the case of K Narasimha Rao, the University regularised his services in spite of his not having completed five years as on 25.11.1993, and hence, the University had to regularise the service of the petitioner as well.
It was also submitted that since it was for the University to regularise the service, the Government was not a necessary party to the proceedings.
5.
The learned Government Pleader submitted that the matter is under consideration of the Government and the petitioners could well be advised to await the orders of the Government.
6.
The learned counsel for the University vehemently opposed these petitions and I am unable to comprehend why the learned counsel for the University should take a stand diametrically opposite to the stand taken by it in its letters to the Government and in the circular to the staff.
It was argued that the petitioners had been engaged irregularly, that they were not entitled to any regularisation, that they did not fulfil the conditions of GOMs.
No. 212, that they are seeking posts for which they are not been initially appointed and that without permission of the Government the University cannot do anything in the matter.
Several decisions were also referred to but I find that none of them are relevant to the issue.
7.
The learned counsel for the University also took me through the Regulations of the University and pointed out that the University had no power to create any post, and therefore, unless the Government is a party and permits the regularisation, the University itself cannot do so.
It is true that the posts have to be created only by the Government on the recommendation of the University since the Government has to sanction the budget requirement.
But in the present case, 52 posts have already been sanctioned and it is not in dispute that the petitioners have been discharging their duties only in respect of those sanctioned posts.
In fact, the University had been repeatedly writing to the Government for sanction of the posts on the footing that ad hoc appointments have been made in respect of regular requirement of posts.
Therefore, the question of creating any new posts for the sake of these petitioners does not arise.
The only question is whether the petitioners' services should be regularised in respect of the sanctioned posts when they are already discharging the duties, by the reason of their ad hoc appointments, before sanction of the posts.
Such regularisation was to be made in terms of GOMs.
No. 212 which provides that all the Departments have to process the cases of regularisation and obtain clearance of the Government before issuing the orders for such regularisation.
In view of this position, I order that the State of Andhra Pradesh, Finance and Planning (FWPC-III) Department be impleaded as respondent in both these writ petitions as requested by the learned Government Pleader.
8.
All the objections of the learned counsel for the University have been crystallised in GOMs.
No. 212 itself since that GO itself was passed taking into account the fact that the irregular appointments were being made without following the requirement of public notice of recruitment and the rule of reservation as well as the provisions of the Act 2 of 1994.
It is only after considering all such objections that the said GO was passed, making the way for regularisation of those who had been appointed earlier to the ban introduced by the Act.
In fact, the Act itself had been upheld by he Supreme Court only because GOMs.
No. 212 was issued by the Government providing for regularisation of those appointed prior to the coming into force of the said Act.
(See 1994(2) SCALE 204).
Therefore, only two objections survive and according to me the learned counsel for the University ought not to have pressed these two objections.
9.
The first objections is that the regularisation can be done only in terms of GOMs.
No. 212.
I am of the opinion that this objection cannot be put forward by the University when the University had itself issued a circular dated 16.1.1990 assuring that the ad hoc appointees will be regularised.
No doubt, this circular was issued before the Act 2 of the 1994 was promulgated.
But the University was committed to regularise the services of the ad hoc appointees, who were actually required to man the posts which was sought to be sanctioned.
In fact, the University has been pursuing the matter as could be seen from the letter dated 2491994 by which the University sought clearance of the Government for regularising the services of those people against 52 posts sanctioned by the Government.
In view of this peculiar background where the posts themselves were sanctioned to meet the needs of the University, which were being met by the ad hoc appointees, and they were given a legitimate expectation that their services will be regularised in those newly sanctioned posts clearly created for them, the question of imposing any further conditions cannot arise.
The letter dated 2781993 from the Government to the University relied on by the learned Counsel for the University underlines the effort of the Registrar of the University to obtain powers to make the regularisation without following the rule of Reservation or making a public recruitment.
It may be that the rule of reservation could not be waived altogether but certainly the other conditions could have been relaxed as was already done in the case of those recruited during the period from 211986 to 181989 by GOMs.
No. 193 dated 1431990.
Since the petitioners were recruited immediately thereafter in November, 1989, there was no reason why the same treatment could not be given to the petitioners also particularly when a decision was taken only in 1990 and not before their recruitment in November, 1989.
10.
Even assuming that the regularisation of the petitioners' services could be made only in terms of GOMs.
No. 212, the second objection of the University is that the petitioners do not fulfil the conditions laid down therein.
Here again, the University cannot construe the terms differently for the petitioner from the manner in which it was construed for regularisation of services of others.
This GO recites the direction of the Supreme Court to formulate a scheme for regularisation and states that persons who worked continuously, for a minimum period of five years and are continuing on 25.11.1993 may be regularised by the appointing authorities subject to fulfilment of the following conditions:  ``(1) The persons appointed should possess the qualifications prescribed as per rules in force as on the date from which his/her services have to be regularised.
(2) They should be within the age limits as on the date of appointment as NMR/Daily Wage Employee.
(3) The rule of reservation wherever applicable will be followed and backlog will be set off against future vacancies.
(4) Sponsoring of candidates from Employment Exchange is relaxed.
(5) Absorption shall be against clear vacancies of posts considered necessary to be continued as per work load excluding the vacancies already notified to the Andhra Pradesh Public Service Commission/District Selection Committee.
(6) In the case of Workcharged Establishment, where there will be no clear vacancies, because of the fact that the expenditure on Workcharged is at a fixed percentage of PS charges and as soon as the work is over, the services of workcharged establishment will have to be terminated, they shall be adjusted in the other departments/District Offices provided there are clear vacancies of last Grade Service.''
It is not in dispute that the petitioners fulfilled the conditions 1 to 5 and the condition No. 6 is not applicable to the present case.
Yet, the learned counsel for the University stressed the phrase ``persons who worked continuous for a minimum period of 5 years and are continuing on 25.11.1993'' and submitted that since the petitioners have not worked for five years as on 25.11.1993, they are not entitled to regularisation.
I am unable to accept this contention.
No doubt, the phrase as it reads appears to indicate that the condition that they should have five years of service and the condition that they should be in service as on 25.11.1993 are conjunctive.
But such conjunctive reading of these two conditions leads to a distortion of the scheme itself.
As can be seen from the legislative background, irregular appointments were banned from 25.11.1993 and those appointed irregularly prior to that date to be reviewed and terminated.
It is only because such termination was found to be arbitrary and untenable under the Supreme Court directive that the scheme of regularisation had to be made.
If this phrase was to be read conjunctively, it would have the effect of taking back the cut off date by five years.
In other words, no person who had been appointed after 25111988 could be regularised.
Such a conclusion would definitely be against the direction of the Supreme Court and the spirit of the scheme itself.
If that were really the intention of the scheme, the GO could have clearly stated that only those who are serving as on 25111988 would be regularised and those appointed thereafter would be terminated.
Such an order would have been struck down by the Supreme Court as arbitrary and the same arbitrary result cannot be achieved by an indirect method of providing a conjunctive condition that apart from being in service on 25.11.1993, the ad hoc appointee should also have completed five years of service as on that date.
I am of the considered opinion that since the scheme itself came into force only in 1994 by which date the ban on recruitment had already taken place with effect from 25.11.1993, the proper and reasonable construction would be that those who were in service for five years whether before or after that date would be entitled to the regularisation if any sanctioned post is available in respect of their needed services.
I find that in the case of K Narasimha Rao who was appointed ad hoc on 28.11.1988 the University referred the matter to the Government and by letter dated 8.4.1994 the Government merely requested the University to apply the provisions of GOMs.
No. 212, and accordingly, his services were regularised from 2341992 on which date the post was sanctioned.
Since he had not completed five years of service as on 25.11.1993, it is obvious that both the Government and the University have construed GOMs.
No. 212 to mean that the condition of `being in service on 25.11.1993' and the condition of `working continuously for a minimum period of five years' are two separate conditions and not to be read conjunctively.
I also note that the University has not been able to demonstrate clearly that these petitioners were not recruited after a public advertisement inasmuch as the appointment orders referred to applications and interviews and earlier letter of the University directing the Superintendent to make the recruitment.
I must, therefore, take it that the repeated claim of the learned counsel for the University that the petitioners were not regularly appointed, is not clearly established on record.
I am, therefore, convinced that the petitioners have a legitimate claim to be absorbed in the appropriate post out of the 52 posts sanctioned for that purpose without reference to GOMs.
No. 212 and even if that GO is to be applied, the petitioners fulfil the conditions and their claim for regularisation cannot be denied.
Consequently, the action of the Government in not processing or permitting the regularisation proposed by the University is unreasonable and cannot be justified.
11.
In the circumstances, let there be a mandamus to the Government to permit the regularisation of the petitioners by the University in the appropriate posts out of 52 sanctioned posts.
12.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.