Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the State Government to release the arrears of salary and allowances as due to him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner had initially joined service as Inspector of Co-operative Societies in the erstwhile State of Pepsu.
On re-organisation of States in the year 1956, the petitioner was integrated along with the other employees in the service of the State of Punjab.
At the time of re-organisation on November 1, 1966, the petitioner was already working as an Assistant Registrar.
He was allocated as such to the State of Haryana.
3.
On April 9, 1975 M/s Hoshiar Singh and Bhagwan Dass Sharma, who was junior to the petitioner as Assistant Registrar, were promoted to the post to Deputy Registrar.
The petitioner was over-loked.
He represented.
Vide order dated August 2, 1977, the State government issued the orders for the petitioner's promotion as Deputy Registrar.
He was still aggrieved.
He claimed promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to him were promoted.
In January 1978 the State Government issue the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P/4 with the writ petition.
By this order the petitioner was promoted with retrospective effect from April 15, 1975, when Mr. Hoshiar Singh etc. had joined as Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies.
A few days later the State Government also issued order dated January 2, 1978.
It was directed that the petitioner may be granted benefit of increments etc. With effect from April 15, 1975, however, "no arrears shall, be payable to him."
The petitioner represented against this order.
The State Government kept the matter under consideration for a fairly long time.
On September 29, 1981, the Government informed the petitioner that his claim has been rejected.
He served a notice through his counsel.
Having failed to get any reply he approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents in denying him arrears of salary in account of retrospective promotion is illegal and arbitrary.
He prays that they may be directed to make the necessary payment.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been submitted by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner has no legal remedy and in any case the petition suffers from the vice of delay and laches.
It should consequently be dismissed on that ground.
On merits, it has been admitted that the petitioner has been promoted with retrospective effect from April 15, 1975.
It has also been admitted that his request for the payment of arrears was declined by the Government vide order dated September 29, 1981.
However, the claim for arrears is contested on the ground that petitioner had not actually worked on the post for the period from April 15, 1975 to September 9, 1977.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The two questions that arise for consideration are:- (1) Should the petitioner be denied that arrears of salary on the ground of delay and laches ?
(2) Should the petitioner be denied the arrears of salary on the ground that he had not actually performed the duties of the higher post of Deputy Registrar ?
Reg.
(1) - It is the admitted position that vide order dated January 2, 1978, the petitioner had been promoted as Deputy Registrar with effect from April 15, 1975.
It is also not disputed that vide letter dated June 27, 1979, the Government had informed the Registrar of Co-operative Societies that the petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of increments but not the arrears.
This decision was, however, conveyed to him by the Registrar in due course.
Thereafter, the petitioner had represented.
The State Government had entertained that representation and it was after more than two years that the decision was taken to reject his claim.
It was only on September 29, 1981 that a communication was sent in this regard.
It is thus clear that till September 29, 1981 the petitioner's claim for the payment of arrears was pending consideration with the Government.
Till then he did not have any real cause of action to approach this court.
After his claim was rejected, the petitioner again served a notice through the counsel.
It was only when the respondents did not do any thing that the filed the present writ petition.
On January 21, 1983 a challenge to the order dated September 21, 1981 by which the petitioner's claim for arrears of salary has been rejected, was not barred by limitation.
Consequently, he was entitled to urge that the claim cannot be declined on the ground of delay and laches.
5.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If the Bench hearing the writ petition had rejected the petitioner's claim he could have resorted to his remedy before the civil court at that time.
His remedy would have been lost.
However, the writ petition has remained pending decision for 13 long years.
The petitioner has waited for the decision all this time.
It would be too harsh to him that his claim be rejected after the lapse of 13 years when he cannot even approach the civil court for the grant of relief as claimed by him in his writ petition.
6.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it cannot be said that the plea of the petitioner is barred by limitation.
Consequently, the first question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the petitioner is not dis-entitled to claiming relief only on the ground of delay.
In any event, whatever may be the delay, it will be kept in view while granting the relief.
Reg.
(2) - The respondents claim that the petitioner is not entitled to the arrears of salary as he has not actually performed the duties of the higher post.
The fact of the matter is that the respondents acted illegally in ignoring him for promotion in April, 1975 when two persons junior to him were promoted When the petitioner represented, they gave him partial relief.
He was promoted vide order dated August 2, 1977.
It was only when the petitioner persisted that the order dated January 2, 1978 was issued by which the petitioner was promoted with effect from the date the persons junior to him had been promoted.
Thus, the respondents had prevented the petitioner from performing the duties of the post of Deputy Registrar from April 1975 to September, 1977.
If the petitioner is not denied the benefits, the responders shall be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong.
This would be unjust and unfair.
No authority can take advantage of its own wrong.
The department had illegally denied promotion to the petitioner.
Once that wrong is remedied, its consequences must folow.
To deny him the arrears of salary is to put premium on the fault committed by the Department itself.
Resultantly, the second question is answered in favour of the petitioner.
It is held that the petitioner cannot be denied the arrears of salary merely on the ground that he did not perform his duties.
This is so because it was the Department which had prevented the petitioner from performing the duties of the higher post.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent are directed to release the arrears of salary which may have become due to the petitioner on account of the difference of pay actually drawn by him and that which was due to him in the rank of Deputy Registrar.
Of course, the sum would be very small.
Even if the interest is awarded on this amount, it would not become very heavy.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had also taken some time in approaching this Court, the respondents shall only be liable to pay the actual amount and not the interest.
8.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.