K Sreedharan, CJ.
- The petitioner was an Assistant Marketing Officer under the third respondent.
On account of certain misconduct, he was dismissed from service by order dated December 27, 1990.
That order was challenged before the Subordinate Judge's Court at Chandigarh in suit No. 147 of January 27, 1993.
The trial court passed a decree setting aside the order of dismissal and directed the respondent to treat the petitioner as on duty for the period for which he was kept out of service.
Consequential benefits attached to the post were also directed to be given to him.
Pursuant to the decree of the Civil Court dated April 26, 1996, the petitioner was re-admitted to service on June 10, 1996.
Thereafter by Annexure P-3 order dated August 27, 1996, the petitioner was posted as Assistant Marketing Officer, Nawanshehar.
That order of transfer is challenged in this writ petition on the grounds that the civil court decree was not given full effect to inasmuch as the petitioner's claim for promotion during the period during which he was kept out of service was not considered; his juniors were given promotion during the said period, and that by the transfer he is directed to work under his juniors.
2.
The learned counsel representing the third respondent made available to us the entire record relating to promotion to the post of Marketing Officer.
The record shows that SP Singh who was junior to the petitioner was promoted as Marketing Office way back on September 15, 1988, at the time when the petitioner was in service.
While giving promotion to SP Singh, he was allowed to supersede not only the petitioner but also Jagdish Chander.
Seth Jagdish Chander was superseded because the departmental proceedings were pending against him.
The petitioner was superseded by SP Singh because he had a better confidential record compared to the petitioner.
Seth Jagdish Chander was senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Assistant Marketing Officer.
Departmental proceedings initialated him ended in his favour.
Taking into consideration the seniority and the service record, Seth Jagdish Chander was promoted to the cadre of Marketing Office by order dated April 3, 1995.
Since that promotion happened to be during the period in which the petitioner was out of service, the claim of the petitioner vis-a-vis Seth Jagdish Chander wsa considered by the third respondent on July 17, 1996.
On such consideration, the third respondent came to the conclusion that the petitioner did not deserve promotion to the higher cadre.
3.
As per the decree in the suit No. 147 of January 27, 1993, the order of dismissal passed against the petitioner was set aside and he was directed to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
The petitioner contends that the consequential benefit that was directed to be extended to him includes promotion to the cadre of Marketing Officer.
The argument is that the third respondent went wrong in denying promotion to the petitioner to the cadre of Marketing Officer.
It is trite law that no employee can have any right to promotion.
He has only a right to be considered for promotion.
From the record now made available to us, it is established beyond doubt that the third respondent considered the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the cadre of Marketing Officer.
On such consideration which according to us, it reasonable consideration the petitioner was not found entitled to be promoted to the higher cadre.
We do not find any ground to interfere with the said conclusion arrived at by the third respondent.
We are clear in our mind that the third respondent gave full effect to the decree passed by the trial court.
4.
The petitioner also put forth the case of non-compliance of the Civil Court decree by stating that some juniors to the petitioner were promoted during the period when the petitioner remained out of job.
The petitioner did not care to mention who those juniors to him are and on which dates they were given promotions.
The above statement made in paragraph 8 of the writ petition is too vague.
The petitioner should have given more details for this Court to examine whether the contention put forth by him is bona fide or not.
The method adopted by the petitioner cannot be approved.
5.
In view of the circumstances detailed above, the petitioner still continues to hold the post of Assistant Marketing Officer.
As Assistant Marketing Officer, he has been transferred to Nawanshehar.
Annexure P-3 order dated August 27, 1996, by which the petitioner has been transferred deals with the transfers and postings of ten officers under the third respondent.
That order appears to be one issued in exigencies of service.
We do not find any ground to interfere with the said order.
Writ petition is devoid of any substance.
The petitioner is not entitled to any of the prayers made by him.
Writ Petition is dismissed.