R C Gandhi, J - The petitioner is seeking the relief of promotion basing his claim upon seniority, which is a condition of service.
The petitioner has stated in his petition that in the year 1968, he was working as Senior Assistant in the Estates Department and was involved in a criminal case of embezzlement for the alleged commission of offence under Section 409 RPC.
Challan was subsequently presented in the Court and the petitioner was made to face trial.
In the said criminal proceedings, the petitioner was acquitted by the learned Sessions Judge, Jammu vide judgment dated 1661979.
However, the trial Court observed in the judgment that the action of the petitioner calls for a departmental enquiry.
During the pendency of the investigation, the petitioner was placed under suspension vide Government Order No. 202-GD of 1969.
2.
According to the observations of the learned Sessions Judge, Jammu, the respondent No. 3 under Order No. 151-DE of 1982 dated 1561982 appointed Shri B R Wazir, Executive Engineer, Estates Division, Jammu as Inquiry Officer to submit his report within one month.
The Enquiry Officer under No. 8059 dated 2811983 submitted his report with the recommendation that the petitioner be reinstated as no sufficient charges have been proved against him.
On the recommendation of the Enquiry Officer, the Government issued Order No. 301-DE of 1985 dated 491985 revoking the suspension of the petitioner and the period of suspension was also directed to be treated as spent on duty.
3.
During the course of the suspension period, the petitioner has stated that respondent No. 5, who was junior to him according to the tentative seniority list issued by the Director Estates in the year 1973 has been promoted as Head Assistant under Order No. GD of 1973 dated 10.8.1973 and subsequently promoted as Estates Officer under Order No. 318-PW of 1984 dated 27.4.1984, by the respondent No. 3.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the promotion of respondent No. 5 on the ground that the charges of embezzlement have not been proved against the petitioner and the petitioner being senior is entitled for consideration and promotion to the next higher posts.
Respondent No. 5 being junior has been promoted and the petitioner has been deprived of his right of promotion and the case of the petitioner be dealt with in accordance with the mandate of Article 110-A of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations.
5.
Respondents 1 to 4 have filed the objections supported with affidavit, while respondent No. 5 has filed counter-affidavit separately.
Respondents 1 to 4 have not denied the promotion of respondent No. 5 and the respondent- State has also admitted the fact of issuance of the tentative seniority list by the respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 5 has stated in the counter-affidavit that his promotion is unconditional and he has acquired a vested right to hold the post and in case the petitioner is granted the relief of promotion, the petitioner shall be getting two promotions automatically, which is not admissible under Article 110-A of the J&K Civil Service Regulations or any other service rules in force.
The respondents 1 to 4 have further stated that it is still open to the department to hold regular enquiry into the charges of embezzlement, which could not be conducted due to the reason that the official record of the department was not available.
It is further stated that since there is no post available at present in the Estates Department and as and when the post becomes available, the petitioner shall be considered for promotion keeping in view of his eligibility in accordance with the rules.
6.
I have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
7.
So far as the contention of the respondents 1 to 4 for holding enquiry is concerned, the respondent No. 3 filed a supplementary affidavit in terms of court order dated November 22, 1990 and sought to hold enquiry against the petitioner.
The court granted three months' time vide interim order dated 151991 to hold enquiry with the stipulation that no further opportunity shall be granted to them in this regard.
The respondents during this period did not hold any enquiry.
The petitioner has been reinstated and his period of suspension has also been treated as on duty.
8.
Adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has been deprived of his right of consideration and promotion to the next higher posts, because of his being placed under suspension.
There is force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that pendency of the enquiry or the criminal proceedings, though is a circumstance for keeping in abeyance the promotion of the petitioner, but the right of consideration and promotion after an employee is exonerated of the charges cannot be denied.
The respondents 1 to 4 have admitted the issuance of tentative seniority list by the respondent No. 3 and had submitted also that the tentative seniority list is operative for all practical purposes.
The petitioner appears at Serial No. 3, while the respondent No. 5 appears at Serial No. 5 of the said seniority list.
The respondents including respondent No. 5 have also admitted while making submissions that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 5.
The seniority of an employee is a condition of service and tool kit of employment.
9.
Placing under suspension of the petitioner is an act of the State and the petitioner cannot be visited upon to suffer for the wrong acts committed by the State, which ultimately could not be proved, the petitioner was admittedly deprived of his promotion only because of his suspension and the case of the petitioner is covered under Article 110-A of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, which is reproduced hereunder :-  "An employee who may be placed under suspension and/or against whom a departmental inquiry may have been instituted his claim for promotion to the next higher grade while under suspension and/or during inquiry should be duly examined by the Departmental Promotion Committee and his suitability assessed and a finding recorded whether the official had he not been suspended or his conduct not being under investigation would have been recommended for the promotion or not.
The finding by the Committee should be kept secret and opened only after the termination of suspension or conclusion of the proceedings against the officer.
Where the officer is exonerated of the charges levelled against him and in case of suspension the period has been treated as on duty, he may on reinstatement be promoted to the higher post to which he would have been appointed but for his having been under suspension or his conduct having been under investigation.
The person who may be junior to him and who may have been promoted in his place should immediately be reverted unless there can be any other vacancy to accommodate him.
The pay of such of the Government servant on promotion should be fixed by allowing the intervening period during which the officer could not be promoted due to his being under suspension or Departmental inquiry having been instituted against him, be treated as reckoning for increments in the higher grade but no arrears allowed.
The period shall, however, be treated as service for experience if any required for promotion to the next higher grade.
The seniority of the officer would be determined according to the date on which he would have been promoted but for his suspension.
Pending cases if any shall be decided accordingly."
10.
So far as the case of promotion of the petitioner is concerned, he has not been considered by the respondents and Article 110(A) of the J&K Civil Service Regulations envisages that the person, who may be junior and have been promoted in his place should immediately be reverted unless there can be any other vacancy to accommodate him and the pay of such Government servant should be fixed by allowing the intervening period during which the officer could not be promoted due to his being under-suspension or departmental enquiry having been instituted against him is required to be reckoned for increments in higher grade, but no arrears to be allowed.
In light of the position of law contained in Article 110(A), which have been inserted by SRO-235 dated 471985, relief prayed for by the petitioner cannot be ignored.
Article 110(A) of the J&K Civil Service Regulations also stipulates that pending case, if any, shall be decided accordingly.
The case of the petitioner is also required to be considered and decided in such terms.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. D K Khajuria has also cited at the bar a judgment of the Apex Court reported as 1991(2) S.L.R.
59 : 1991(2) SCT 270(SC) : (New Bank of India v. N P Sehgal and another), wherein it is held that mere fact that disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or under consideration against an employee it does not constitute a good ground for not considering such employee for promotion, if he is in the zone of consideration nor would it constitute a good ground for denying the promotion.
He has also relied upon the judgment of this Court reported in 1992 K.L.J.
340 (Balwant Raj v. State of J&K and others), wherein it is held that the period of suspension if treated on duty and the charges found to be unjustified and the Government Servant fully exonerated of the charge, is entitled to full pay and allowances for the period, to which he would have been entitled had he not been subjected to such suspension.
I am in full agreement with the contention of the petitioner and the law cited at the bar extends support to the case of the petitioner.
He has also tried to press into service a judgment of this Court reported in 1989 KLJ 66 (Mohd.
Maqbool Dar v. Mng.
Director, J&K Tourism Dev.
Corp Sgr.
), which deals with a situation of a termination of an employee.
The law laid down by this judgment is distinguishable on the facts of the case.
12.
Mr. Rehman appearing for the State was directed to find out as to whether there exist any vacancy in the department, he has submitted by means of a communication that a post of Estates Officer is available in the Department.
13.
Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the view that while the Estates Department have the post available and the respondent No. 5 can also be accommodated keeping in view that he has been promoted long back.
The right of the petitioner cannot be denied as nothing has been proved against the petitioner and the period of suspension has also been treated as on duty.
14.
For the abovesaid reasons, I allow the writ petition and direct the respondents 1 to 4 to consider the petitioner for the next higher promotional post and in case the petitioner is found fit under rules, he shall be accorded promotion.
The respondents 1 to 4 can also utilise the available vacancy for accommodating the respondent No. 5, if they so desire.
The petitioner shall rank senior to the respondent No. 5 against the promotional posts also.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all accruing consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.