GS Singhvi, J - The main issue raised in this petition relates to the legality of the order of suspension dated 421991 passed by the Chief Administrator, Haryana Urban Development Authority (here-after described as HUDA).
An ancillary issue raised is whether the petitioner could be kept under suspension for more than five years without any enquiry.
2.
The petitioner was engaged as a daily wage Clerk in the service of HUDA in the year, 1985.
After he had served for about six years, the Chief Administrator passed order dated 421991 and ordered suspension of the petitioner.
On the basis of the directions given by the Chief Administrator, HUDA, the Estate Officer passed order, annexure P-3, and relieved the petitioner from his place of posting and directed him to report for duty in the office of the Secretary, HUDA.
3.
After having remained under suspension for a period of over one year and seven months, the petitioner instituted this petition and prayed for quashing the order of suspension and for issue of a direction to the respondents to reinstate him in service.
His contention is that there is no reason or justification for passing of the order of suspension and this is fortified from the fact that for a period of over one year and six months, even the charge-sheet has not been issued by the competent authority.
4.
The respondents have defended the suspension of the petitioner on the ground that an enquiry was contemplated against the petitioner with regard to an allegation or misconduct because serious discrepancies were found in the accounts maintained by the Organisation in which the petitioner was working as a Clerk.
5.
It also appears from the record that the petitioner had instituted CWP No. 1957 of 1988 for issue of a direction to the respondents to regularise his service in accordance with the decision of this Court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) SLR 739.
That writ petition was disposed of on 14101992 with a direction that the case of the petitioner for regularisation of his service shall be considered in view of the existing instructions as well as the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(4) SCC 110.
6.
Employer's right to make appointment inheres in itself the right to suspend the employee and also to terminate his service.
An employee who is placed under suspension is entitled to subsistence allowance in case there exists any provision in the statute governing the right of the employer to suspend the employee or a contract of employment, which empowers the employer to suspend the employee, but at the same time, requires the employers to pay subsistence allowance.
In the absence of such statutory provisions or a term in the contract of employment, the employee is entitled to full wages during the period of suspension.
7.
Jurisdiction of the Court to review the action of the employer to suspend an employee is very limited.
Ordinarily, it is for the employer to determine whether an employee should be kept out of active service.
It is also for the employer to determine whether continuance of an employee in active service would be injurious to the establishment or public interest.
The Court will interfere with the exercise of the power of suspension by the employer, if it is found to be contrary to law or there is a case of patent arbitrariness.
Where the employer suspends the employee in contemplation of disciplinary action, the Court will certainly enquire about the reasons for abnormal delay in the initiation of enquiry and if it finds that the employer has not taken prompt action to initiate or to complete the disciplinary action, an inference of arbitrariness may legitimately be drawn.
8.
What has happened in this case speaks of patent arbitrariness on the part of the respondents.
After suspending the petitioner in February, 1991, the respondents virtually forgot about the existence of the petitioner least realising that the petitioner was being paid subsistence allowance out of public funds without doing any work.
As on date more than 5 years and 2 months have elapsed since the suspension of the petitioner and the respondents have not taken any steps to initiate the disciplinary proceedings.
They have not issued charge-sheet to the petitioner.
This shows that there was no contemplation of disciplinary action against the petitioner and, therefore, there was no justification to place him under suspension.
At any rate, continued suspension of the petitioner for a long period of over five years can have no element of justification in a case like the present one.
9.
We also cannot over-look the fact that due to his suspension, the petitioner has suffered immense injury during the last five years inasmuch as he has not received his full wages.
This has seriously affected the livelihood of the petitioner and his family members.
At the same time, public exchequer has suffered because the respondents had to pay the subsistence allowance to the petitioner at the rate of 50% of his salary during the first six months and at the rate of 75% during the remaining period.
This all happened because of complete failure on the part of the respondents to take action in the matter and to pass appropriate order.
10.
During the course of arguments, I enquired from the learned counsel for the respondents as to why a charge-sheet has not been served upon the petitioner so far but Shri Gupta submitted that he has not received any instructions from the respondents on this subject.
This further shows the utter casualness with which the respondents have dealt with the issue of suspension of the petitioner and this lopesided approach of the respondents has caused immense injury to the public interest.
11.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
Suspension of the petitioner brought about in compliance of the direction issued by the Chief Administrator, HUDA on 421991 is declared illegal and quashed.
As a logical consequence, the petitioner shall be reinstated in service.
The respondents are directed to take a decision within three months from today on the issue of serving a charge-sheet upon the petitioner.
If they decide to charge-sheet the petitioner and hold an enquiry, then, the question of payment of full salary shall be subject to the result of enquiry.
In that event, the enquiry proceedings should be completed within a period of nine months from the date of service of charge-sheet.
12.
In case the respondents do not charge-sheet the petitioner, he shall become entitled to be paid all other monetary benefits which he would have earned but for his suspension.
The respondents are also directed to pay the amount of subsistence allowance, if any, due to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
13.
Keeping in view the fact that on October 14, 1992, this Court had issued direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of his service, the respondents are directed to carry out that order within next three months.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.