VK Bali, J (Oral) - It is the case of poor school teacher who has been denied his pension for over a period of two decades.
The way and manner in which he has been treated clearly shows not only carelessness but callous attitude at the hands of the respondents.
The obvious prayer in the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is for release of pensionary benefits and inasmuch as the same can be allowed by quashing order dated 5th November, 1980 (Annexure P-6), the prayer in that direction has also been made.
Before, however, his legitimate right to ask for pension is upheld, it shall be useful to extract brief facts giving rise to the present petition.
2.
The petitioner joined the Education Department of erstwhile Pepsu as a teacher on 6h of January, 1954 and was confirmed with effect from 29th of September, 1960.
On Ist of December, 1969, he went on deputation on foreign service to the Punjabi University, Patiala as Research Assistant in the department of Education and community service for two years.
His deputation was to expire on Ist of December, 1971.
However, before completion of deputation period, he sent representation to the Director of Public Instructions, Punjab on 15th November, 1971, praying that the he be retired from the education department from Ist of December, 1971 as he no more wanted to be employee of the department of Education, Punjab.
He further prayed that he be allowed the benefits regarding pension, gratuity etc. A copy of the representation has been annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
The Director Public Instructions vide his order dated 10th of February, 1976 informed him that his resignation has been accepted with effect from 2.12.1971.
On 9th of June, 1976, petitioner was served with another order of Director Public Instructions whereby he was informed that pensionary benefits as admissible in accordance with the Punjab Government letter dated 24th October, 1972 were allowed to him with effect from 2nd of December, 1971 i.e. date from which his resignation was accepted.
On receipt of the letter aforesaid the petitioner applied for his pensionary benefits.
His case was forwarded by Deputy District Education Officer, Patiala to the Accountant General, Punjab, Chandigarh on 13th of September, 1976.
District Education Officer requested the office of Accountant General, Punjab that pension and leave salary contribution may be determined for the deputation on foreign service from 2nd of December, 1969 to Ist of December, 1971 and the same was directed to be deducted from the amount of gratuity.
On 26th of October, 1976, Accountant General, Punjab informed District Education Officer that as per Punjab Government (Finance Department) order dated 23rd of March, 1975, the retiral benefits will accrue from the date of voluntary retirement or date of absorption under a corporation or a Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Government.
It was specifically mentioned that the petitioner would retire from service with effect from 5th January, 1979 after completing qualifying service for 25 years.
Vide memo dated 5th of November, 1980, issued by respondent No. 2 petitioner was informed that the Government was not in a position to release pensionary benefits.
With this letter the service book of the petitioner was also returned.
Immediately after the receipt of the aforesaid letter, petitioner contacted his counsel and issued notice to the respondents on 15th of December, 1980 and stressed that he was entitled to the pensionary benefits from the date of his permanent absorption i.e. 2nd of December, 1971 or in the alternative after completion of 25 years service i.e. 5th of January, 1979.
In response to the notice, the petitioner was informed on 27th of February, 1981 by the Assistant Director, Department of Education, Punjab that his case was in process and was sent to the Government.
The petitioner waited for some time and sent reminder to the Government reiterating his request on 3rd of April, 1981.
Vide letter dated 19th of November, 1981 District Education Officer, Patiala requested Director of Public Instructions to forward the case of the petitioner regarding pensionary benefits to the Legal Remembrancer, Punjab.
Nothing, however, was done in the matter which constrained the petitioner to file writ petition was back in 1988.
3.
Mr. Jagia, learned Counsel representing the petitioner on the basis of Sub-rule (2) of rule 53 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II contends that a permanent government employee who is permitted to be absorbed in service or post, if such absorption is declared by Government to be in the public interest, is deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he might have elected or deemed to have elected from the date of such absorption or the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever is later.
There being a rule dealing with the situation, the Government had no option in the matter but for to pay/give retirement benefits to the petitioner from the date he was absorbed in Punjabi University.
The rule relied upon by Mr. Jagia reads, thus:-  "53(2) A permanent Government employee who may be permitted to be permanently absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by Government or Municipality, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, shall if such absorption is declared by Government to be in the public interest, be deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he may have elected or deemed to have elected, and from the date of such absorption or the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever is later.
xx xx" 4.
Even though written statement, contesting the cause of the petitioner, has been filed but during the course of arguments nothing at all could be stated which might detract from the merits of the contention raised by Mr. Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner.
All that is stated by counsel representing the State is that he has the instructions from the Advocate General to seek adjournment in this case by which time the petitioner shall be paid his retirement benefits.
The Court is more than convinced that this adjournment is being sought with the sole object to avoid interest and costs that deserve to be imposed in a case of this kind.
If there was some seriousness in the matter thought over by the authorities at any stage, such a request ought not to have been made at the fag end when the petition has been taken up for final arguments and arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner have been heard.
It may be recalled that this petition remained pending in this Court for over a period of about 15-16 years.
If the authorities were serious in imparting justice to the petitioner, they would have done well to pay the legitimate claim of the petitioner far earlier.
5.
Nothing at all, as mentioned above, on merits has been pointed out to the Court by which the petitioner may not be entitled to his pensionary benefits.
It is conceded position that the petitioner had put in qualifying service that entitled him to earn pension.
6.
As mentioned above, it is a case of poor teacher, who died during the pendency of this petition.
The court is convinced that he has been practically robbed of by the State.
No one appears to have applied his mind at any stage whatsoever for all these years which might have had the effect of redeeming or reducing the miseries, the petitioner has gone through.
In fact, the attitude of the respondents has been totally callous.
Pension is a right of an employee, who, after number of years of his service rendered to the State, earns it on account of meticulous Rules prescribed for the purpose.
There ought not to be and cannot be any delay in giving such benefits to an employee.
Sitting in a DB, while deciding the case titled as AK Kapoor v. State of Haryana, 1991(6) SLR 583, I had relied upon number of judgments of this Court and Apex Court and thread-bare discussed the rules regarding payment of pension on the eve of retirement of an employee.
I had also very adversely commented upon unreasonable delays caused in compensating an employee by giving him pension and other benefits that actually accrue to him after retirement.
There is no need, however, to reiterate the Rules and reasons that stand adequately detailed in AK Kapoor's case (supra).
It is, thus, a fit case where the petitioner, who unfortunately died while fighting this long drawn legal battle, deserves to be compensated, although through his legal representatives.
A direction is, thus, issued to forthwith release pensionary and other benefits that might have accrued to the petitioner.
The money, so calculated, shall obviously be now paid to the legal heirs of the petitioner.
They shall be entitled to full pension till such time petitioner died and thereafter they shall be entitled to family pension, if admissible under the Rules.
Let the arrears be calculated and paid to the heirs of the petitioner with compound interest @ 18% per annum with yearly rests.
The compound interest @ 18% has been allowed keeping in view the fact that money that was payable to Megh Raj Kansal in the year 1980 shall be now released after a period of 16 years and had the money been paid on due date, it would have swelled to thrice over as, in a period of 5-1/2 years, if a certain amount is deposited in fixed deposit in a scheduled bank, the same doubles up.
This is the only way, the Court is convinced, that the legal heirs of petitioner can be compensated.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/-.
Petition allowed.