GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - The petitioner has challenged the legality of the orders Annexures P-19 dated 2521989 read with Annexure P-18 dated 14.2.1989 and Annexure P-29 dated 28.12.1990 and has prayed that these orders be quashed with a direction to the respondents to re-instate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
In order to appreciate the multi-fold contentions advanced by Shri Gurcharan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, it is appropriate to make a brief reference to the facts of the case.
The petitioner had joined service of Swami Premanand Mahavidyalaya, Mukerian, District Hoshiarpur, in the year 1974 as Lecturer in Commerce.
On the basis of a complaint made by Shri Rajinder Singh, father of Ms. Amarjit Kaur, who was a student of the College, that the petitioner had connived with his daughter who ran away from her house, the Managing Committee of the College took a decision to suspend the petitioner and also serve him with a charge-sheet.
This decision of the Managing Committee was given effect to by the Secretary vide Memo Annexure P-1 dated 361985.
The petitioner sought certain documents i.e. Minutes book of the emergent meeting of the Managing Committee held on 2751985 and other relevant documents which the Managing Committee declined to supply him.
Thereafter, he filed a reply to the charge-sheet.
The Managing Committee felt that the reply filed by the petitioner was not satisfactory and therefore, it constituted a committee of three persons, who were members of the Managing Committee, for holding a regular inquiry against the petitioner.
First meeting of the inquiry committee took place on 26.8.1985 with due notice to the petitioner, who did not appear before the inquiry committee.
The second meeting was held on 15111985.
On that day the petitioner appeared.
His reply was taken into consideration by the inquiry committee and the hearing was adjourned to 18111985 with due intimation to the petitioner.
On 18111985, the petitioner did not appear before the inquiry committee.
Instead he sent a telegram to the inquiry committee with a request to adjourn the hearing because he was to go to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
The inquiry committee found that the cause given by the petitioner for adjournment of the inquiry proceedings was untenable and, therefore, it decided to proceed ex parte.
Hearing of the inquiry was fixed on 9121985 and an intimation for that date was sent to the petitioner vide letter dated 7121985.
Two witnesses were examined on 9121985 and the proceedings were adjourned to 17121985.
On 18121985, the inquiry committee submitted its report with a finding that the petitioner stands proved.
The Managing Committee considered the inquiry report in its meeting held on 221986 and formed a tentative opinion that the charge levelled against the petitioner, who had been found guilty of moral turpitude, does not deserve to be retained in service.
Consequently, a show-cause notice dated 321986 was issued to the petitioner.
He submitted reply dated 1631986.
The Managing Committee once again considered the matter on 1861986 and after giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner passed resolution to dismiss the petitioner from service and forwarded this proposal to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab.
The said authority gave a notice to the petitioner in response to which he filed a representation and after hearing both the sides, the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges) approved the proposal of the Managing Committee vide its order 14.2.1989.
Immediately thereafter, the Managing Committee passed the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service.
The petitioner unsuccessfully appealed against the decision of the Managing Committee because the College Tribunal before when he had filed appeal did not find any merit in his claim for reinstatement.
3.
Shri Gurcharan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised the following contentions in support of the writ petition :-  (1) The inquiry was initiated against the petitioner without any preliminary inquiry and no opportunity of hearing was afforded to the petitioner to prove falsity of the allegation levelled against him.
(2) The charge-sheet served upon the petitioner was vague and defective and no proceeding could have been held against the petitioner on the basis of this charge-sheet.
(3) The inquiry committee did not give reasonable opportunity of hearing to the petitioner inasmuch as it held the proceedings ex parte and no opportunity for cross-examining the witnesses was afforded to the petitioner.
(4) Notice of the hearing fixed for 9121985 was despatched to the petitioner on 9121985 itself and it was impossible for the petitioner to make himself available for the inquiry on 9121985.
(5) Amarjit Kaur was not called for examination or cross- examination during the inquiry and, therefore, the inquiry proceedings should be quashed on the ground that the management withheld the most important witness.
(6) That the findings recorded by the inquiry committee are based on conjecture and no legally admissible evidence was available with the inquiry officer to record a finding that the petitioner was guilty of the allegation that he had connived with Amarjit Kaur in her running away from the house.
(7) The report of the inquiry committee was not made available to the petitioner and, therefore, the petitioner had no opportunity to make an effective representation before the Director, Public Instruction.
(8) That the order of dismissal has been given retrospective effect and no employer has got any power to bring about cessation of the relationship of employer and employee with retrospective effect.
4.
Shri Gurcharan Singh placed reliance on the following decisions :-  1.
R Jeevaratnam v. State of Madras, AIR 1966 SC 951; 2.
Rao Rallapalli Suryanarayana v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1968 SLR 77; 3.
Shashi Bhuahan Mohanty v. State of Orissa, 1969 SLR 63; 4.
Girish Chandra Goswami v. AK Roy, 1969 SLR 72; 5.
Dhup Singh Kanungo v. State of Haryana, 1969 SLR 436; 6.
Krishan Lal Godara v. State of Rajasthan, 1969 SLR 666; 7.
State of Maharashtra v. Bhaishankar Avalram Joshi, 1971)(1) SLR 113; 8.
Lajpat Rai Malhotra v. Financial Advisor, 1971(1) SLR 592; 9.
Kamini Kumar Das v. State of West Bengal, 1972 SLR 746.
Shri Satya Pal Jain, learned counsel for the Managing Committee argued that the ex parte proceedings were held against the petitioner on 18111985 because he failed to appear before the inquiry committee without any reasonable cause and thereafter it was not imperative for the inquiry committee to give fresh notice to the petitioner.
Shri Jain submitted that the inquiry committee recorded finding qua the charge levelled against the petitioner on the basis of substantive evidence available before it and the mere fact that Amarjit Kaur was not produced for examination/cross-examination during the inquiry cannot have the effect of vitiating the finding of guilt recorded against the petitioner.
Shri Jain submitted that copy of the inquiry report was sent to the petitioner along with a copy of the letter dated 3/4.4.1986 which was addressed to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, for approval of the proposal of he Managing Committee for petitioner's dismissal from service and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to take the plea that copy of the enquiry report was not made available to him.
5.
After having given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition, which in my opinion deserves to be dismissed.
Reasons for this conclusion are:-  (a) The proceedings of inquiry held against the petitioner are regulated by the provisions contained in the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974, read with the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1978, and neither the Act nor the Rules contemplate holding of preliminary inquiry as a condition precedent to the initiation of a regular departmental inquiry.
In its very nature, the preliminary inquiry is held by the employer in order to verify the facts mentioned in a complaint on the basis of which a decision can be taken for initiation of regular inquiry against the delinquent.
It is not necessary in such inquiry to give a notice to the delinquent.
At times the material available with the employer even without holding a preliminary inquiry affords sufficient basis for forming a prima facie opinion that a regular inquiry is necessary.
Therefore, mere absence of a preliminary inquiry cannot have the effect of vitiating the proceedings by the employer in regular inquiry.
(b) Argument of the learned counsel that the proceedings held by the inquiry committee were contrary to the principles of natural justice, if examined in the context on the various facts which have been brought on record and conduct of the petitioner, has to be held as wholly untenable.
There is no denying that the petitioner did (-sic-) receive a copy of the charge-sheet.
No doubt, he demanded copy of the Minutes book of meeting of the Managing Committee but they were clearly irrelevant for filing a reply to the charge-sheet and, therefore, no prejudice has been suffered by the petitioner on account of non-supply of the copy of the Minute-book of the meeting held by the Managing Committee on 2751985.
After constitution of the inquiry committee, notices of two dates were given to the petitioner.
On the first date, he did not appear.
On the second date, i.e. 15111985, he appeared and noted that the next date is 18111985.
On 18111985, he sent a telegram to the inquiry committees requesting for adjournment on the ground that he was to go to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
Neither in the telegram nor in the application which the petitioner sent on 19111985 to the inquiry committee any reference was made to the urgency of the petitioner for going to All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
Moreover, the record which has been produced before the Court by Shri Jain shows that on 18111985, the petitioner had gone to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Department of Neuropsychiatry and the doctor has simply written "seen".
There is no reference to any disease or medicines in the slip produced by the petitioner.
It is, therefore, evident that the petitioner had deliberately absented from the proceedings of the inquiry held on 18111985 and the inquiry committee was fully justified in proceeding ex parte against him.
There is a controversy between the parties about the notice for the proceedings held on 9121985.
While the petitioner says that the notice was despatched to him on 9121985, the case of the Managing Committee is that it was sent to him on 7121985.
De hors this controversy, it was not necessary for the inquiry committee to send this notice to the petitioner after he had noted on 15111985 the next date of hearing fixed by the inquiry committee i.e. the date on which it decided to proceed ex parte against him.
Therefore, the absence of notice of the proceedings to the petitioner held on 9121985 is of no consequence.
The petitioner has to blame himself for ex parte proceeding and he is not entitled to complain that he was not given a proper and reasonable opportunity of hearing by the inquiry committee to put forward his own defence or to cross-examine the two witnesses.
In my considered view, the petitioner is not entitled to assert that the proceedings of the inquiry committee are vitiated on account of violation of the principles of natural justice.
(c) On the issue of non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report also there is a factual controversy between the parties.
Learned counsel for the petitioner asserts that such report was not made available to the petitioner and, therefore, further action taken by the employer is liable to be nullified on account of violation of Rule 4(3)(a) of the 1978 Rules.
Shri Jain submitted that copy of the inquiry report was sent to the petitioner along with the papers which were supplied to him in the form of a copy of letter which was addressed to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges).
Ordinarily, non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report has the effect of vitiating a departmental inquiry but in the peculiar facts of this case, this alleged lapse on the part of the employer, in my opinion, does not have the effect of vitiating the proceedings.
A look at the order passed by the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges) and by the Appellate Tribunal clearly shows that the petitioner did not raise any objection before either of these authorities that he had not been supplied with the copy of the inquiry report and his cause has been prejudiced due to non-supply of the copy of the report.
Even before this Court, it has not been shown as to what prejudice has ben suffered by the petitioner due to non- supply of the inquiry report.
(d) The Supreme Court in Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319(SC) : JT 1993(5) SC 1 though was dealing with case regarding the requirement of supply of copy of the inquiry report after 42nd Amendment of the Constitution by which second proviso has been deleted from Article 311(2), their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that the requirement of supply of copy of the inquiry report is implicit in every departmental inquiry held by the employer.
However, non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report will by itself be not sufficient to quash the punishment order and in each and every case, the Court has to examine itself as to what is the effect of non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report.
Unless a clear prejudice has been shown to have been caused, the punishment order will not be quashed on the ground of non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report and as has been mentioned earlier, the petitioner has neither pleaded nor has he proved that the non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report has caused any prejudice to him.
Failure of the petitioner to raise an objection regarding the non-supply of the copy of the inquiry report before the two authorities coupled with the fact that he has failed to show any prejudice on account of alleged violation of Rule 4(3)(a) of the 1978 Rules, no capital can be made by the petitioner on the ground that copy of the inquiry report was not made available to him.
Argument of the learned counsel that the inquiry and the findings recorded by the Tribunal are based on conjecture is without substance.
A look at the orders Annexures P-18 and P-20 together with the Inquiry report which was produced during the course of hearing clearly shows that the inquiry Committee has made reference to the oral as well as the documentary evidence produced before it by the Managing Committee during the course of inquiry proceedings.
The documentary evidence is in the form of a report submitted by Rakesh Kumar, who was none else than a friend of the petitioner.
The oral evidence is in the form of the statement of father of the girl and the Principal of the College.
Father of the girl, in my opinion, was the best witness who could testify about the conduct of the petitioner in persuading his daughter to run away from the house.
Mere non-production of Amarjit Kaur as a witness can have no effect on the validity of the findings recorded by the inquiry committee or the orders passed by the Director, Public Instruction of the Appellate Authority.
It is well settled principle of law that the degree of proof required for bringing home a charge in domestic/departmental inquiry is vastly different than for proving a guilt in a criminal case.
In the departmental proceedings, the employer is entitled to record a finding of guilt on the basis of prepondenance of evidence and if a person of reasonable prudence can on the basis of evidence available on record form an opinion about the guilt of the delinquent, the finding cannot be interfered with on the ground that in a criminal case such finding would not stand the test of scrutiny.
The evidence of Rajinder Singh and the Principal, Shri Ghai, was, in my opinion, sufficient for recording a finding that the petitioner was guilty of the charge levelled against him.
(e) On the issue of non-payment of subsistence allowance, Shri Jain has stated that the subsistence allowance had in fact been paid to the petitioner during his suspension.
He, however, stated that in case subsistence allowance had not been paid for a particular period, the Court may give direction for payment of such subsistence allowance.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the non-payment of subsistence allowance should by itself be sufficient to quash the proceedings is not tenable.
No doubt, it is obligatory for the employer to pay subsistence allowance to a person who is placed under suspension but the inquiry proceedings held against the suspended employee can be declared invalid only if it is shown that the non-payment of subsistence allowance has effectively prevented the delinquent from participating in the proceedings and as no evidence has been produced by the petitioner to show that he has been seriously prejudiced due to non-payment of the subsistence allowance, the principle of law laid down in Ghansham Das Shrivastava v. State of MP, AIR 1977 SC 1183, cannot appropriately be applied in this case for holding that the proceedings are vitiated due to non-payment of the subsistence allowance.
In regard to the argument of the learned counsel regarding the vagueness of the charge-sheet and alleged defects therein, I find that no grievance was made by the petitioner to this effect before the appellate authority or the revisional authority.
Therefore, at this belated stage, petitioner cannot be allowed to make a grievance against the alleged vagueness and defects in the charge-sheet.
(f) Another argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the order passed against the petitioner could not have been given retrospective effect.
Though Shri Jain made an attempt to persuade the Court to hold that once the decision was taken to remove the petitioner from service from a particular date and such proposal was approved retrospectively, the service of the petitioner can be terminated from that date.
A bare perusal of Rules 4, 5 and 6 of the 1978 Rules clearly shows that what the employer is required to do is to record its finding on the charge levelled against the delinquent, give a show-cause notice to the delinquent together with a copy of the report and forward the same to the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges) along with its proposal to impose a penalty of dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank.
The Director has to consider the proposal along with the representation, if any, made by the delinquent and then approve or not to approve the proposal by the management.
On the receipt of the approval of the Director, the Managing Committee is required to pass a detailed order in accordance with the approval.
It is, therefore, clear that an effective order can be passed by the Managing Committee only after the proposal is approved by the Director.
In my opinion, when the order can only be passed after the approval of the proposal of the Managing Committee, it cannot be said that the order passed by the Managing Committee could be given retrospective effect.
The theory of relation back which is ordinarily available under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 cannot appropriately be applied in a case like the present one.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed subject to the modification that the order of dismissal of the petitioner's service shall be treated as effective only w.e.f 2521989, the date on which the decision of the Managing Committee was conveyed to the petitioner by the Principal of the College.
It is also directed that the Managing Committee shall pay subsistence allowance, if any, due to the petitioner for the period of suspension, i.e. from 361985 to 2521989.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.