Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The appellant was recruited as a Constable on February 10, 1992.
He was discharged from service with the following order :  "Constable Shagan Lal No. 1046/GRT is discharged from service with immediate effect under P.P.R.
1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 as he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
Order be booked and all concerned be informed accordingly."
2.
The appellant filed a suit of a declaration that the order discharging him from service is illegal, unconstitutional and therefore, untenable.
3.
After recording of evidence and consideration of the matter the learned trial court decreed the suit.
The State of Punjab filed an appeal.
The appellate court found that the order was innocuous.
It cast no stigma.
It was in conformity with the provisions of Rule 2121.
Consequently, it reversed the judgment of the learned trial court and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant.
Hence this appeal.
4.
Mr. Mukand Gupta, learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the order of discharge in the present case is founded on an allegation of mis- conduct.
The counsel submits that is had been passed only on account of the fact that the appellant had remained absent from duty.
Consequently it was incumbent on the authority to follow the prescribed procedure.
The learned counsel has also placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships of Supreme Court in State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 427(SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 108, and in Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) SCT 758(SC) : 1996(1) SLR 17.
5.
Before proceeding to consider the contentions raised by the learned counsel, the provision of Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules (Vol. II) may be noticed.
It provides as under :  "1221.
A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this Rule."
6.
A perusal of the above rule shows that when a constable is recruited he is virtually on probation for a period of three years.
If his work is found to be good he is allowed to continue in service.
If the Superintendent of Police finds that he is not likely to prove an efficient police officer, he can proceed to discharge him from service.
7.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the appellant had applied for leave for five days.
However, he did not join duty on the expiry of this leave.
On the contrary, he remained absent for more than three months.
In view of this factual position the competent authority had the option to issue a charge-sheet to the appellant and to proceed to take penal action.
Equally, the Superintendent of Police was entitled to take a view that a constable who remains absent from duty for a period of three months is not likely to make a good police officer.
It appears that the Superintendent of Police adopted the latter course.
He formed an opinion that the appellant who had remained absent from duty for a period of three months was not likely to make a good police officer.
Consequently, he passed the impugned order.
In doing so, he acted in complete conformity with the provisions of Rule 1221.
He did not intend to take any penal action.
Consequently, no charge-sheet etc. was issued to the appellant.
Broadly, there is always a reason before an order of termination is passed.
The employer does not terminate the services of an employee because his work is good.
It is only when he finds that the employee has acted wrongly that an order of termination is passed.
However, it is not necessary that the procedure prescribed for the imposition of a penalty should be followed in all the cases.
This procedure has to be followed only when the employer intends to punish the employee.
If this was not so, there would be no distinction between a temporary and a permanent employee.
There would be no need to place a person on probation.
The provision in rule 1221 is only intended to provide an opportunity to the employer to watch the performance of a constable.
If during this period the constable acquits himself properly, he continues in service.
Otherwise, the Superintendent of Police exercises his option of either passing a simple order of discharge or of proceeding to take penal action.
In the circumstances of the present case it appears that the Superintendent of Police had passed a simple order of discharge.
It cast no stigma.
No allegation has been levelled against the appellant.
Consequently, no enquiry was required to be held.
It is in view of this position that the learned appellate court has dismissed the suit.
The view taken by the learned Judge is in strict conformity with the rule enunciated by a Full Bench of this Court in Sher Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 1 (P&H)(FB) : 1994(1) PLR 456.
8.
Mr. Mukand Gupta relies on the judgment of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jagdish Chander's case (supra).
A perusal of this decision shows that in the order passed by the Superintendent of Police it had been categorically observed that Jagdish Chander was not likely to prove an efficient police officer because "he is habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and indisciplined".
This was not a simple order of discharge.
It cast a definite stigma.
In this situation it was held by their Lordships that the order was illegal as it had been passed without holding an enquiry etc.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
As already noticed the order is in strict conformity with the rule.
9.
Mr. Gupta has also referred to the decision in Malkiat Singh's case.
In this case the constable was discharged from service on the ground of absence from duty.
On a perusal of the record their Lordships had found that he was late by six hours one occasion.
On the second occasion he was absent from night duty.
On the 3rd occasion he had remained absent for a day.
The constable had offered an explanation namely that his wife had to attend to her and so he could not be present on April 24, 1995.
Even medical certificate was produced.
In view of this evidence it was held that he had not deliberately absented himself from duty and in such a situation the order of discharge could not be sustained.
The absence of a few hours on three occasions cannot be compared with an absence of more than three months.
Still further no evidence to show that the appellant's mother was ill had been produced by him before the Superintendent of Police.
Even now the learned counsel for the appellant has not been able to refer to any evidence which may provide any explanation for his absence.
10.
In view of the above, the learned counsel can derive no advantage from the decisions referred to by him.
11.
The police is a disciplined force.
A person who remains absent for more than three months and is unable to provide a reasonable explanation, therefore, deserves to be discharged from duty.
12.
No other point has been urged.
13.
In view of the above, the appeal is dismissed in limine.