THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed to issue a Writ of Mandamus to the Government to refer the dispute to the Labour Court.
The petitioner was employed as Driver in the Haryana Police Housing Corporation Limited.
According to him, his services were wrongfully terminated on September 28, 1993.
Therefore, he raised an industrial dispute and sought a reference to be made to the Labour Court for adjudication of the dispute.
The State of Haryana vide its order dated July 27, 1994, declined to refer the matter for adjudication to the Labour Court on the ground that the petitioner had received the benefit under section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
2.
Learned counsel for the State of Haryana contended that the petitioner has received the retrenchment compensation and, therefore, there is compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act but according to the petitioner, he was retrenched and was forced and compelled to accept the amount of Rs. 6811/- being wages for the period from September 29, 1993, to January 12, 1994.
According to the petitioner, this amounts to unfair labour practice.
Whether there is compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, is a matter to be decided by the Labour Court only.
The Government has no power under section 10 to make an enquiry and come to the conclusion that there was compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The only consideration for the Government is whether there exists an industrial dispute between the workman and the employer.
There is no dispute that the petitioner has been employed on April 25, 1991, and his services were terminated on January 12, 1994, and according to the petitioner-workman, his services were wrongfully terminated on September 28, 1993.
Thus, it is clear that there exists an industrial disputes between the petitioner and his employer.
The ground on which the State Government declined to refer the dispute cannot be sustained under law.
3.
I, therefore, allow the Writ Petition and direct the Government to refer the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
However, there will be no order as to costs.