TS Doabia, J - On the basis of the decision given by the Supreme Court, in the case reported as Kartar Singh Grewal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 1067 the petitioner submits that the punishment which has been awarded to him 10 days before the date of retirement requires to be modified in the same manner as was done by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid mentioned case.
2.
Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India the Supreme Court of India has wide powers.
This power is not available to this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Faced with this the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority be directed to look into this aspect of the matter.
He also submits that neither the Appellate Authority nor the Reviewing Authority afforded any personal hearing to the petitioner.
3.
So far as this aspect of the matter is concerned, this point has not been taken in the Writ Petition.
However, from the perusal of the order passed in Review it becomes apparent that the order was passed after perusing the record.
The same would be the position if Appellate Order is perused.
If this be the position the ends of justice would be met if the Appellate Authority is directed to re-decide the appeal after affording a personal hearing to the petitioner.
This course would be in consonance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Ram Chander v Union of India and others, AIR 1986 SC 1173.
In para 23, following observations have been made by the Supreme Court :-  "There has been considerable fluctuation of judicial opinion in England as to whether a right of appeal is really a substitute for the insistence upon the requirement of a fair hearing or the observance of natural justice which implies 'the duty to act judicially'.
Natural justice does not require that there should be a right of appeal from any decision.
This is an inevitable corollary of the fact that there is no right of appeal against a statutory authority unless the statute so provides.
Professor H.W.R.
Wade in his Administrative Law, 5th Edn., at P. 487 observes : "Whether a hearing given on appeal is an acceptable substitute for a hearing not given, or not properly given, before the initial decision is in some cases an arguable question.
In principle there ought to be an observance of natural justice equally at both stages.........
If natural justice is violated at the first stage, the right of appeal is not so much a true right of appeal as a corrected initial hearing : instead of fair trial followed by appeal, the procedure is reduced to unfair trial followed by fair trial."
After referring to Megarry, J.'s dictum in a trade union expulsion case holding that, as a general rule, a failure of natural justice in the trial body cannot be cured by a sufficiency of natural justice in the appellate body, the learned authority observes :  "Nevertheless it is always possible that some statutory scheme may imply that the 'appeal' is to be the only hearing necessary."
It was held that personal hearing if given would advance course of justice.
4.
It would be thus apt to direct the Appellate Authority to afford a personal hearing to the petitioner and decide :  (i) as to whether the punishment which has been awarded to the petitioner is commensurate with his mis-conduct, (ii) as to whether the decision on which reliance is being placed, i.e., Kartar Singh Grewal (supra) or on any other case is attracted.
5.
It be seen that the order of punishment is to have grave consequences for the petitioner.
He is likely to be deprived of part provident fund and also gratuity.
As a matter of fact, this is the stand taken by the Bank.
See Annexure-I.
This is order dated 2321985.
There is another order on the record.
This is annexure-J.
This is dated 18121984.
Placing reliance on Rules 116 and 117 of the Rules, it has been observed that the petitioner is not entitled to the amount of provident fund which represents Bank's contribution.
The perusal of Rules 116 and 117 indicates that there is a discretion vested in concerned Authority to make payments or to decline it.
This again affects civil rights of the petitioner.
6.
Thus directions are given as under :  (i) the Appellate Authority would re-decide as to whether the gravity of the mis-conduct is such which requires extreme punishment to be awarded just 10 days before the superannuation; (ii) the question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to gratuity amount or not be also decided,  (iii) the trustees of the Provident Fund would decide the claim after hearing the petitioner in terms of Rules 116 and 117 referred to in communication dated 18121984.
Let decision be taken by the Appellate Authority within six months and decision be taken by the trustees of trust within further four months.
This period fixed in this order would begin from the date copy of the order is made available to the Bank and the Trustees of the Trust.
7.
The petitioner is disposed of accordingly.
There would be no order as to costs.
Security, if paid, be refunded to the petitioner as per rules.