THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition has been filed challenging the award of the Labour Court, Gurgaon, dated May 8, 1993.
Respondent No. 1 was employed by the management of M/s Bhagwan Mahavir Charitable Eyes Hospital-cum-Community Eyes Research Centre, Hailey Mandi, Pataudi, District Gurgaon, as Ward Assistant on a monthly salary of Rs. 350/-.
The services of respondent No. 1 were terminated by the management on October 8, 1995.
Thereafter the management of hospital-cum-community research centre was taken over by the Government on November 8, 1995.
After taking over of the hospital, the Government appointed its own staff.
Subsequently, respondent No. 1 raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Gurgaon, on October 27, 1987.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that services of respondent No. 1 were illegally terminated and directed reinstatement of respondent No. 1 into the job.
2.
Challenging the said award, the petitioner namely the Chief Medical Officer filed this Writ Petition.
The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that after taking over of the hospital along with the community research centre, respondent No. 1 cannot be deemed to be the employee of the new management.
Therefore, no order of re-instatement against the new management could validly be passed by the Labour Court even though the action of the previous management was illegal.
There cannot be any direction to take respondent No. 1 into service by the new management.
He also contended that the staff of the hospital and the community research centre was not transferred to the new management and the Government appointed its own staff to manage the hospital.
Therefore, the result would be the closure of the hospital by the earlier management and after taking over of the hospital by the Government and it is the Government which is running the hospital and community research centre with its own staff.
In these circumstances, no relief could be granted to respondent No. 1 by the Labour Court.
3.
There is no dispute that the Government has taken over the hospital-cum- comminity research centre on November 8, 1985.
Services of respondent No. 1 were terminated by the previous management on October 8, 1985, i.e., prior to the taking over of the hospital by the Government.
Further the gift deed under which the management was taken over by the Government does not provide that the staff working under the previous management was also to be taken over by the Government (Gift Deed is attached to the Writ Petition as Annexure P-1).
It shows that only the buildings and the equipment have been transferred to the Government.
Thus, it is clear that the services of the employees of the previous management came to an end.
If any person employed by the management has been taken or utilised by the Government, he will be a new entrant.
The employees of the previous management will not have any right to continue in service after the management of the institution was taken over by the Government unless the gift deed specifically provides for the same.
This position is amply made clear by the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Dev Dutt Kaushal and etc., 1995(4) SCT 575 (SC) : A.I.R. 1996 SC 85, wherein it has been observed as follows:  "The first claim of the respondent is that he is entitled to continue in service till he attains the age of sixty years.
It is not possible to agree.
It is admitted on all hands that the age of retirement of the college lecturers under the Government is fifty-eight years.
In view of the terms and conditions of the gift deed mentioned above, it is plain that the respondent's plea cannot be accepted.
There is no clause or condition in the gift deed preserving or saying the age of retirement prescribed in the said private college.
Actually on the take over of the college, the teachers/lecturers had no right as such to be absorbed or to be appointed under the Government.
Their appointment in government service was subject to fulfilment of certain conditions specified above.
The gift deed repeatedly states that on such appointment, they shall be treated as "new entrants" and shall be placed at the bottom of the seniority list as on the date of the absorption, in the relevant grade/category.
The gift deed further stated that in matters not specifically provided for therein the Government's rules, regulations and orders will apply.
In such a situation, it is obvious that the claim for continuance till the attainment of sixty years is simply not acceptable."
In this view of the matter, when the gift deed does not provide for taking over the employees of the previous management, there is no obligation on the part of the Government to take them in service.
Therefore, when there is a change of management, the employees whose services have been terminated cannot claim that they should be re-employed or they should be taken back in service by the Government after taking over of the institution.
Thus, I am of the opinion that the order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court cannot be sustained as there cannot be any direction to the new management to take back an employee whose services were terminated by the previous management though illegally.
Counsel for respondent No. 1 submitted that the Government may be directed to consider his request for appointment in the hospital.
The Government may consider the representation, if any, made by respondent No. 1 for appointment if there is any vacancy in the hospital.
The right of respondent No. 1, if any, is to proceed against the previous management for the damages for wrongful termination of his services but he cannot get the job under the new management, i.e., the Government unless the Government wants to employ him.
The Writ Petition is, therefore, allowed and in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.