RP Sethi and SS Sudhalkar, JJ.
- Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
2.
The petitioners (in all the writ petitions) are the drivers of the Roadways, who have been declared unfit for performance of their duties as drivers on the ground of medical unfitness.
The petitioners have submitted that illness to which they have been subjected is attributable to their service conditions for which they cannot be penalised and the respondent is under an obligation to provide them alternative jobs or adequately compensate them if no such job is available with them.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari and others v. Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, Jaipur and another, etc., AIR 1991 SC 1003 : 1991(2) SCT 44(SC).
In that case the Supreme Court considered the cases of drivers of the Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, who had been declared medically unfit to perform further duties as drivers and attributing such disease to their service conditions, the Supreme Court issued appropriate directions to the corporation for rehabilitation of such drivers who had been subjected to disability on account of service conditions keeping in view the nature of duties performed by them.
The Corporation in that case was directed to grant appropriate relief to the petitioner therein keeping in mind all the circumstances and to take action as follows:  "The corporation shall in addition to giving each of the referred workmen his retirement benefits, offer him any other alternative job which may be available and which he is eligible to perform.
(ii) In case no such alternative job is available, each of the workmen shall be paid alongwith his retirement benefits, an additional compensatory amount as follows : (a) Where the employee has put in 5 years or less than 5 years service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 7 days salary per year of the balance of his service.
(b) Where the employee has put in more than 5 years but less than 10 years service the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 15 days' salary per year of the balance of his service.
(c) Where the employee has put in more than 10 years but less than 15 years service the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 21 days salary per year of the balance of the service.
(d) Where the employee has put in more than 15 years service but less than 20 years service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to one month's salary per year of the balance of his service.
(e) Where the employee has put in more than 20 years service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to two months salary per year of the balance of his service.
The salary will mean the total monthly emoluments that the workman was drawing on the date of his retirement.
(iii) If the alternative job is not available immediately but becomes available at a later date, the corporation may offer it to the workman provided he refunds the proportionate compensatory amount.
(iv) The option to accept either of the two reliefs, if an alternative job is offered by the Corporation, shall be that of the workman."
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents have referred to the policy Annexure P.8 of the Government attached with C.W.P.
No. 17066 of 1994 and submitted that the alternative job can be offered to any one member of the family of the petitioner provided he fulfils the qualifications required for the post of driver.
We, however, feel that providing a job of driver would be against the spirit of the directions given by the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case (supra).
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to provide alternative job to a family member of each petitioner if he possesses the requisite qualification for the post offered to him, which may not be necessarily be a post of driver.
4.
Accordingly, these writ petitions are disposed of by setting aside the impugned orders and with a direction to the respondents to comply with a directions given by the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case by providing suitable alternative job to the petitioner or according to the policy of the State to any one member of his family without insisting for possession of the qualification for the post of driver.
In case no such alternative job is available either for the petitioner or any member of his family, the petitioner in that event shall be paid alongwith his retirement benefits, such additional compensatory amount as has been directed by the Supreme Court in Anand Bihari's case (supra).
5.
Needful be done within three months from today.
6.
Till final orders are passed by the respondents, the interim orders passed in favour of the petitioners, if any, shall continue.
7.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 17066 of 1994 that despite there not being any termination order against his client he is not being permitted to perform his duties nor any salary is being paid to him.
In view of the directions given herein earlier, the writ petitioner Bahadur Singh shall be deemed to be in service and entitled to all emoluments.
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to provide him alternate job or pay him retirement benefits with additional compensatory amount in terms of our directions if his services are no more required by them by passing a specific order in that behalf.
Petition allowed