Amarjeet Chaudhary,J - Since common questions of fact and law are involved in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 14764, 15213 of 1994 and 3806 and 3807 of 1995 so the same are disposed of by this common order.
The order is given in Civil Writ Petition No 14764 of 1994.
The brief facts are epitomised as under:-  All the petitioners were appointed in various capacities in different Municipal Committees/Corporations within the State of Punjab.
The petitioners who have retired prior to April 1, 1990 have prayed for issuance of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to allow them pensionary benefits with effect from the date of their attaining the age of superannuation and for quashing the notification dated July 28, 1994 only to the extent it makes pensionary benefits payable to the employees of Municipal Committees/Corporations who retired on or after April 1, 1990.
2.
It is averred in the petition that prior to the impugned notification, Municipal Committees/Corporations in the State of Punjab have been allowing their employees contributory provident fund benefits on their retirement on attaining the age of superannuation.
The benefits, therefore, available to the petitioners were inferior to the benefits available to the Government employees inasmuch as security offered to the employees of the Municipal Committees/Corporations after their superannuation was of a short term duration.
Employees of the Municipal Committees/Corporations, like the other employees of the Punjab Government spent their entire life in the service of Municipal Committees/Corporations with the hope that adequate means would be given to them to meet their day to day needs after superannuation.
They made repeated demands that they be treated at par with the employees of the Punjab Government and be given pensionary benefits.
They served a demand notice on the State Government.
When the aforesaid exercise was proved to be futile, they struck work with effect from December 11, 1989.
Thereafter series of negotiations were held between State Government on one hand and the employees of Municipal Committees/Corporations on the other hand.
As a result of the same, the State Government had agreed to allow pensionary benefits to all the employees who retired on or after April 1, 1990 and who opted Pension Scheme and expressed willingness to refund the employer's share of Contributory Provident Fund.
It was also suggested that the employees be included in the pensionary scheme.
According to the petitioners, the said benefit was never given to them.
It is relevant to mention here that the Government also finally published the Rules called "The Punjab Municipal Corporation Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994, in the Punjab Government Gazette dated July 29, 1994.
3.
The main grievance of petitioners in all the writ petitions is that once the Government had taken a decision to extend all the pensionary benefits to the employees of the Municipal Committees/Corporations irrespective of the dates of their retirements, the action of the respondents in fixing a cut off date is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The respondents have filed written statement and controverted the pleas of the petitioners.
It is pleaded that the Municipal Committee is within its right to fix a cut off date.
5.
Mr. JS Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners are entitled to the grant of pensionary benefits irrespective of the dates of their retirements and a cut-off date cannot be fixed.
6.
Mr. Randhir Singh, leaned D.A.G., Punjab has argued that some other employees of the Corporation earlier filed Civil Writ Petition No 11173 of 1994 "Sham Dass Sharma etc. v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(1) SCT 378 (P&H) seeking directions to the State of Punjab to pay them pensionary benefits irrespective of the dates of their retirements.
The said writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court.
He has further argued that as the relief claimed in the present writ petitions is the same as was claimed in the earlier writ petition (supra), the present writ petitions are liable to be dismissed.
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
8.
We find that the point involved in the present writ petitions is the same as was subject matter of Civil Writ Petition No 11173 of 1994.
This Court has observed in the judgment delivered in the said writ petition as under:-  "Even though these Rules have been published in the year 1994, these have been enforced with effect from the agreed date viz. April 1, 1990.
By virtue of clause (3), all the employees who have joined service on or after April 1, 1990 or who were in the regular service of the Corporation prior to April 1, 1990 and have opted for these Rules, are entitled to the grant of pension.
The date viz. April 1, 1990, has, thus, not been taken out of the 'hat'.
It has a historical basis.
This was the date which had been accepted by the Government in December, 1989.
Subsequently,the provision for enforcing the Rules with effect from April, 1990 cannot be said to be arbitrary.
The grant of pension like any other benefit to the employees has financial implications.
It creates a burden on the employer.
For obvious reasons, the employer has the right to assess the position regarding its resources.
If after the consideration of the matter, it finds that funds are available for the grant of certain benefits, it can grant such benefits as are found to be just and reasonable.
It is a question of policy which has to be decided by the employer."
It may be noticed that the Division Bench has further observed that financial implications are factors to be weighed by the authorities before deciding the cut off date and this could alone be done by the Government.
Apart from this a close perusal of the writ petitions shows that the demand for giving pension instead of Contributory Provident Fund was raised only in late 1989 and the authorities agreed to this demand from the start of next financial year i.e. April 1, 1990.
This is the justified reason for providing April 1, 1990 as the cut off date.
Even otherwise, the employees who had retired much prior to April 1, 1990 had taken the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund and their relationship with the employer, local bodies, has ceased to exist and as such making any such change in the said cut-off date would be totally uncalled for.
The respondent-State was within its right to fix a cut-off date which has rightly been fixed and no fault can be found with the same.
9.
It has not been brought to our notice that the judgment in Sham Dass Sharma's case either has been modified or reversed.
We do not find any reason to arrive at a different conclusion than the one arrived at by this Court in Sham Dass Sharma's case (supra).
10.
The Apex Court in All India Reserve Bank Retired Officers' Association and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1992 Supreme Court 767 has upheld the introduction of Pension Scheme in lieu of Contributory Provident Fund Scheme vide which the benefit of Pension Scheme was not given to the employees who had retired prior to 111986.
The Supreme Court has also held that the cut off date is not arbitrary, artificial or whimsical.
For the fore-going reasons, these writ petitions are dismissed.