GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to quash the selection and appointment of respondents No. 6 to 21 on the posts of Clerks/Guards in the services of Sirsa Central Cooperative Bank Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Bank').
The petitioner has also prayed for issue of direction for holding an enquiry in the matter.
2.
Earlier to the impugned appointments, the petitioner had also applied for appointment as Clerk in the services of the respondent-Bank but he was not appointed.
He has none challenged the impugned appointments on the ground of violations of the provisions of the Constitution, the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975 (for short 'the Rules'), the guidelines issued by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana and mala fides.
Petitioner has stated that in complete disregard of the guidelines issued by the Registrar, the Administrative Committee of the respondent-Bank made appointments of respondents No. 6 to 21 of whom 12 are related to the Directors and the Members of the Administrative Committee.
By making reference to Annexure-P.9, the petitioner has asserted that notwithstanding the ban imposed against the creation of new posts in view of the Government's decision to effect economy, the respondent-Bank has made 15 appointment on the basis of resolutions passed by the Administrative Committee on 28101995 and 12121995.
The petitioner says that the posts against which respondents No. 6 to 21 have been appointed were not advertised and no criteria was laid down for making the so called selection and, therefore, the impugned appointments are contrary to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
In its reply, respondent No. 3 has not contested the averments made in the writ petition regarding the manner in which the respondents No. 6 to 21 have been appointed.
But the respondent No. 3 pleaded that the services of respondents No. 8 to 13 and 15 to 20 have already been terminated and the term of appointments of respondents No. 6, 7, 14 and 21, which are going to expire on 25.5.1996, 3061996, 2751996 and 3061996 respectively shall not be extended.
It has also been stated that all vacancies would be filled by making regular appointments as per the provisions of 1975 Rules.
Reference has also been made to the order dated May 14, 1996, passed in CWP No. 1513 of 1996, Sanjay Kumar v. Registrar, Cooperative Societies, which has been disposed of by this court as having become infructuous.
We shall now deal with the various grounds on which the impugned selections/appointments have been challenged and while doing so, we shall proceed on the assumption that the averments made in the writ petition are correct because the respondents have not chosen to controvert the same.
4.
Violation of the provisions of the Constitution :  (i) Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the posts of Clerks/Guards against which the respondents No. 6 to 21 have been appointed are public posts and as the vacancies were to last for long, it was incumbent for the bank to send a requisition to the Employment Exchange concerned and/or advertise the posts before making appointments on the basis of so called selection made by the Administrative Committee.
Learned Counsel appearing for the Bank submitted that for making appointments for 89 days, it was not necessary for the Bank to send requisition to the employment Exchange.
He, however, conceded that no advertisement was issued inviting applications from eligible candidates.
(ii) In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(4) SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC), the Supreme Court examined the various facets of Articles 14 and 16 in the context of ad hoc/temporary/daily wage appointments and after considering the ambit and scope of Articles 14 and 16, the apex Court indicated five principles which should ordinarily regulate recruitment to public services.
One of the five principles indicated relates to ad hoc and temporary appointments.
This principle is :- "Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirements of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly."
In view of the aforementioned principle laid down by the Supreme Court, it must be held that every public employer is under a constitutional duty to make appointment against the public post after considering the claim of all the eligible candidates.
This can be done by sending requisition to the employment exchange or by advertisement of the posts.
In this case neither of these steps have been taken by the respondents and, therefore, conclusion is inescapable, namely, that appointments of the respondents No. 6 to 21 are contrary to Articles 14 and 16.
5.
Section 4 of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 imposes a duty on private as well as public employer including the Government to send requisitions to the employment exchange.
Section 3 of the 1959 Act carves out certain exceptions one of which is that requisition of the vacancies need to be sent to the employment exchange in case the tenure of vacancies does not exceed 89 days.
Thus what has been excluded from the preview of 1959 Act by virtue of Section 3 thereof is an appointment against a vacancy which does not last more than 89 days.
Otherwise the requirement of publication of the advertisement of the posts has to be satisfied as laid down by Supreme Court in Union of India v. N Hargopal and others, AIR 1987 SC 122.
However, what has happened in this case shows deliberate disregard of the provisions of the 1959 Act by the officials of the bank.
The bank and its functionaries devised the mechanism of avoiding compliance of 1959 Act by giving 89 days' appointments to respondents No. 6 to 21.
However, they have not been able to dispute that vacancies against which respondents No. 6 to 21 have been appointed were having a duration of more than 89 days.
It is thus clear that the officials of the bank designedly flouted the provisions of Section 4 of the 1959 Act.
6.
(2) Violations of the Rules of 1975 and guidelines issued by the Registrar:  (i) Rule 2(k) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Rules contains the definition of the term 'relatives'.
Rule 92(e) of the Common Cadre Rules contains a bar against appointment of the persons related to non-official Directors of the Bank.
Rule 94 of the Common Cadre Rules imposes duty on all the banks to make direct recruitment after proper advertisement in atleast one leading newspaper indicating the qualifications required, grade of pay etc.
In the context of the challenge to the impugned appointments it will be useful to reproduce Rule 2(k) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Rules, 1963 and Rule 92(e) of the Common Cadre Rules.
These are :-  "2(k).
Relative includes any person who is related to the person concerned, his wife, his son/daughter or his son's wife or daughter's husband through a common ancestor but more remote than a grandfather or anyone married to a person so related."
"92(e).
No person shall be appointed in the Bank who is related to any of the Directors (Non-official) within the meaning of Rule 2(k) of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Rules, 1963.
Provided that none of the conditions at 9.2(b) and 9.2(c) above shall apply in case of appointment made by promotion from within the service or by transfer on deputation of any person from Co-operative Department or Government of Haryana/Reserve Bank of India."
(ii) In this case it is an undisputed fact that majority of the respondent Nos. 6 to 21 are directly related to the non-official Directors of the bank and, therefore, contravention of Rule 92(e) read with Rule 2(k) of the Common Cadre Rules is writ large on the face of the record.
Similarly, it is clearly established that the procedure prescribed by the Registrar vide Annexure-P.8 for making selection has not been followed before giving appointments to respondents No. 6 to 21.
(iii) A look at the averments made in para 7 of the writ petition shows that as many as 12 persons out of a total of 15 appointed on the basis of the resolution passed by the Administrative Committee are related to the Directors or Members of the Administrative Committee.
The details of these relatives are:-  "(i) Smt. Savita Bhatia is related to Director Bimal Bhatia being his wife and she has been appointed as Clerk.
(ii) Gurnam Singh is closely related to one of the Directors.
(iii) Jaswant Singh is the nephew of the Chairman of the Sirsa Central Cooperative Bank Ltd, Sirsa.
(iv) Gurmail Gir is relations of Director and even otherwise, the appointment of Gurmail Gir is totally contrary to rule because he has been appointed as Guard.
For Guard vide letter No. 6249 dated 1121995 the Guards should be either from Army or from Home Guard, but Gurmail Gir does not belong to any of the category.
(v) Chander Pal has been appointed on the recommendation of Chairman alongwith Bhaga Ram and Ranvir Singh.
(vi) Guljari (Clerk) is the cousin brother of Director Krishan Kumar.
(vii) Baldev (Clerk) is the son of brother-in-law of ARCS of the Bank Ltd at Sirsa.
(viii) Mahavir is the son-in-law of the brother of the General Manager.
(ix) Mohinder is the son-in-law of Gulab Ram, Director.
(x) Vijay Singh (Clerk) is the son of Managing Director.
(xi) Ram Niwas (Guard) is the relation of Gopi Ram, Director.
(xii) Ram Kumar Rohila is the result of recommendation of Managing Director whereby he has recruited his son as Clerk in place of Ram Niwas being Junior Assistant."
7.
Learned counsel for the bank fairly conceded that relations of the officials of the banks have been appointed.
Moreover he could not throw any light on the procedure adopted by the Administrative Committee for adjudging the suitability of respondents No. 6 to 21.
Respondent No. 3 has not indicated the criteria which was followed for the purpose of making selection.
In view of this, it has to be held that the bank and its functionaries had pre-determined the persons who were to be appointed against the posts of Clerks and Guards and consideration of the claim of other eligible candidates was virtually excluded.
We, therefore, hold that the appointments of respondents No. 6 to 21 are vitiated by bias and mala fide.
Rather it is a clear case of favouritism and nepotism, where the officials of the bank treated the services of the bank as their private property and made appointments as if they were distributing largess.
Such appointments cannot be overlooked by the court and the fraudulent action of the Administrative Committee and the management of the bank cannot be condoned by the court merely because the respondent-bank has come forward with a plea that term of appointments of some of the respondents have come to an end and it will not extend the tenure of service of others.
Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that CWP No. 1513 of 1996, Sanjay Kumar v. The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, has been dismissed as having become infructuous, we deem it our duty to nullify the selection and direct initiation of appropriate action against those who have played with the Constitutional provisions, statutory rules and the guidelines issued by the Registrar and have treated the bank as their private property.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Appointments of respondents Nos. 6 to 21 on the posts of Clerks/Guards are declared illegal and the same are quashed.
The respondents No. 6, 7, 14 and 21 are restrained from working on the posts held by them and the bank is directed to discontinue their services from tomorrow.
Each of the members of the Administrative Committee who have passed the resolutions resulting in the appointments of respondents No. 6 to 21 are directed to pay costs of Rs. 1,000/- to the petitioner.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, is directed to initiate action against he management of the bank for violation of the rules and the guidelines.
The State of Haryana is directed to consider granting of sanction for prosecution of the Members of the Administrative Committee for violations of the provisions of section 4 of the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of vacancies) Act, 1989.
However, we make it clear that before passing orders for sanction, opportunity of hearing should be afforded to the concerned persons.