VK Jhanji, J - This is defendants' second appeal.
Plaintiff Piara Singh (respondent herein) filed suit for mandatory injunction directing the defendants to appoint him as Depot Manager.
He also sought declaration that appointment of defendant No. 3 namely Raminderjit Singh (appellant No. 2 herein) is illegal, null and void and is liable to be set aside.
Plaintiff was originally an employee in the department of Printing and Stationary, Punjab.
Later this department was transferred to the Punjab School Education Board, as a result of which it was decided to transfer the employees working in the erstwhile Printing and Stationery Department to the Board.
Plaintiff alongwith other employees was absorbed in the service of the Board on the terms and conditions circulated by the Board vide letter dated 3111976.
Plaintiff in his plaint has averred that prior to the absorption of the employees of the erstwhile Printing and Stationery Department, Punjab, the Assistant working with the Board had promotional avenue only to the post of Superintendent.
Thereafter, six posts of Manager were created by the Board in order to provide promotional avenue to the Assistants of erstwhile Printing and Stationery Department, Punjab.
Subsequently, on the opening of five more Text-book depots in the State of Punjab, equivalent number of posts of Manager were created by the Board.
Apart from this, there already existed a post of Manager, Text-book depot.
Two more posts, i.e. of Manager (Inspection) and Superintendent were created, thereby raising the strength of posts of Manager to 14.
Certain posts of Managers were advertised by the Board for being filled by direct recruitment.
Plaintiff along with other persons applied for the said post in response to the advertisement.
Plaintiff was called for interview on 224980.
Plaintiff along with others appeared before the Selection Committee, but was not selected.
One Zora Singh was selected and appointed.
Plaintiff has alleged that Zora Singh did not have the requisite experience and adverse reports and complaints were mounting against him.
A representation was made against the selection of Zora Singh.
Again the Board advertised the post of Manager against which plaintiff applied along with other candidates.
Plaintiff was interviewed on 1181980 and was declared selected for appointment to the post of Depot Manager.
However, before the letter of appointment could be issued to the plaintiff, scheduled caste candidates raised their claim against the post and the defendants reserved the post for scheduled caste candidates.
It is the case of the appellants that though the post of Depot Manager which was reserved by the defendants for scheduled caste candidates but still Raminderjit Singh, defendant No. 3 was appointed on officiating basis and later was given regular grade of Depot Manager.
In the plaint, it has also been averred that the appointment and continuance of Raminderjit Singh after the post was reserved to which the plaintiff was initially selected, is illegal and the intention of the defendants is to deny the plaintiff of his legitimate right to be appointed to the post of Depot Manager against which he was selected.
2.
Defendants 1 and 2 in their written statement have admitted that six posts of Managers were created w.e.f.
121975 at the time of taking over depots from Government on which six Managers in the erstwhile Printing and Stationery Department were adjusted by the Board.
However, they have denied that these posts were created to provide promotion avenue to the Assistants of erstwhile Printing and Stationery Department.
On the opening of five more depots, five posts of Managers were created vide order dated 1531977 and one post of Manager already existed at Chandigarh Depot.
The creation of another post of Manager (Inspection) on 10.9.1981 was also admitted.
Respondents 1 and 2 have however denied that the post of Manager was again advertised; rather it is the case of defendants that actually the post was circulated amongst the employees of the Board, for which an interview was held on 1181980 and the plaintiff was selected, but no declaration was made in this connection.
Some candidates belonging to scheduled caste represented that this post be given to them.
On consideration of their representation the Selection Committee decided that the post be reserved for Scheduled Castes and be circulated and therefore, selection of the plaintiff was not implemented.
In regard to appointment of Raminderjit Singh, they have averred that he was given the charge of Manager on 751980 as provisional arrangement prior to selection of plaintiff by the Selection Committee and the same was allowed to continue till such time clarification is received from the Government.
Defendant No. 3 in this written statement has denied that the plaintiff was selected by the Selection Committee or that the appointment of defendant No. 3 is illegal.
His case is also that he was holding the charge of Manager on provisional basis.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the appointment of defendant No. 3 is illegal, null and void and is liable to be set aside ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction as prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred by time ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable, as alleged ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit is hit by Section 23 of the Punjab School Education Board Act, 1969 ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
The trial Court on the basis of evidence on record dismissed the suit as it found that the post against which the plaintiff has staked his claim is meant for reserved candidates and the appointment of defendant No. 3 is only a provisional/temporary arrangement and cannot be said to be illegal.
In appeal, learned Additional District Judge has set aside the judgment of the trial Court and on acceptance of the appeal, suit of the plaintiff has been decreed, against which this second appeal has been preferred by the defendants.
4.
The judgment of the trial Court has been set aside by the first appellate Court primarily on the ground that the post had not been reserved for scheduled caste candidates at the time of inviting applications or at the time of interview.
It was only on 20101980 the Board reserved the post for candidates belonging to scheduled caste community.
The other ground on which action of the Board has been held to be arbitrary and unreasonable is that though the post was reserved for scheduled caste candidates yet no member of that community was appointed and defendant No. 3 was allowed to hold the post, though may be provisionally.
As a consequence of acceptance of appeal, defendants 1 and 2 have been directed to appoint the plaintiff to the post of Manager, Text-Books Depot w.e.f.
1181980 with all resulting benefits of pay and seniority and with the consequential relief that continuation of defendant No. 3 against that post has been declared illegal, null and void after 1181980.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that the judgment under appeal cannot be sustained at least to the extent where it has allowed the plaintiff the appointment w.e.f.
1181980 as Manager, with all consequential benefits, besides declaring the continuation of defendant No. 3 on the post on provisional basis as illegal.
It is not in dispute that before the order of appointment could be issued to the plaintiff, the members of scheduled caste community made a representation to the Board that the post in question is a reserved one and only a member belonging to their caste is entitled to be appointed against it.
The Board found merit in this representation.
Defendant No. 3 was asked to work against this post and his appointment was only till such time the scheduled caste candidate could be appointed against the said post.
The Board was under no obligation to offer the appointment to the plaintiff simply because he had been selected for appointment.
The decision for not offering the appointment to the plaintiff was bona fide and was for the reason that the Board found merit in the representation of the scheduled caste employees that the post in question is a reserved one, meant for scheduled caste candidates.
The proposition that after the vacancy had been notified for appointment and the candidate had been found fit the employer cannot be allowed to act arbitrarily in not offering the appointment, cannot be applied in this case because for valid reasons the appointment was not offered to the plaintiff.
It may also be noticed that vide order dated 911990, Sucha Singh a member of scheduled caste community has been appointed against this post.
In this view of the matter, the judgment under appeal is not sustainable.
6.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the plaintiff contended that at the time of motion hearing the Board was directed to create a post of Manager, Text-Books Depot and against the post so created the plaintiff was ordered to be appointed.
He, thus, contended that on the post so created the plaintiff is continuing and in case the appeal is allowed, the result would be that after so many years the plaintiff would again be on the road.
7.
On 1191990 when the appeal came up for motion hearing before GR Majithia, J, Jaswant Singh, Secretary of the Board made the following statement :  "The appellant shall create a post of Manager Text Books Depot with effect from 1.10.1990.
Against the post so created plaintiff-respondent Piara Singh will be offered the appointment.
He will be deemed to be appointed against the post so created with effect from 1.10.1990.
The matter relating to the creation of the post has first to be referred to the Finance Committee and thereafter to the Board."
On the basis of statement made, the plaintiff has been offered appointment and is continuing against the post so created w.e.f.
1.10.1990.
Though I am of the view that the plaintiff has failed to show the existence of any legal right against the post which was advertised, but considering that he was offered appointment on a post which was created w.e.f.
1.10.1990 it would be unjust and unfair to put him back on the road.
However, he is not entitled to the benefits with effect from 1181980 as has been allowed by the first appellate Court.
8.
Resultantly, the appeal is allowed, judgment and decree of the first appellate Court is modified to the extent that appointment of the plaintiff to the post of Manager, Text Books Depot shall be w.e.f.
1.10.1990 with all consequential benefits of pay and seniority.
The suit of the plaintiff shall stand decreed to this extent only.
There shall be no order as to costs.