GS Singhvi, J - None has appeared on behalf of the petitioners which shows the lack of interest on the part of the learned counsel for the petitioners to assist the Court.
However, this failure of the learned counsel to discharge his moral obligation towards his client is no ground to refrain the Court from adjudicating the writ petition on merits.
2.
The petitioners were recruited as Constables in the Punjab Police in the year 1985-86.
The petitioners have pleaded that their record is quite satisfactory.
In July, 1988, petitioner No. 1 was given Special Prize Certificates with Rs. 150/-.
After the incident which took place on 1991988 at the Police Station Civil Lines, Patiala, in which some officers and policemen were killed, the petitioners were detained under the National Security Act, 1980.
The petitioner were branded as dangerous and desperate persons.
However, after their cases were reviewed by the Advisory Board and it was found that there was no sufficient ground to detain the petitioners, the order of their detention was revoked and the petitioners were released on 1631989.
In the meantime, the petitioners were dismissed from service vide order dated 13.9.1988 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala (A).
After their release from jail, the petitioners made representation for their re-instatement and when they realised the futility of their attempt to invoke a sympathetic response from the respondents, the petitioners have sought Court's intervention for their re-instatement and for grant of consequential benefits.
The main ground on which the petitioners have challenged the order of dismissal is that the disciplinary authority has acted in violation of the provisions of the Constitution and the principles of natural justice because no inquiry was held by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala, before dismissing them from service and thus, they were deprived of the opportunity of defence.
Further case of the petitioners is that there is no material available with the respondents on the basis of which it can be said that holding of inquiry against them was not reasonably practicable.
3.
The respondents have defended the impugned order of dismissal of services of the petitioners on the ground that the decision taken by the competent authority under Article 311(2) of the Constitution is beyond the power of judicial review.
They have further submitted that on receipt of secret information/source reports emanating from Hon'ble the Advisor to the Governor of Punjab, Inspector CIA, Deputy Superintendent of Police, City, Patiala, that ASI Dalbir Singh and the petitioners were indulging in various activities prejudicial to the public interest, ASI Dalbir Singh and his staff were called for inquiry and while the inquiries were going on, ASI Dalbir Singh shot at the Senior Superintendent of Police and Superintendent of Police (D), Patiala.
ASI Dalbir Singh also received bullet injury and all the three person died and this shows that the petitioners were dangerous for the people in general and also security hazard for the Police Department and, therefore, the Senior Superintendent of Police passed the order of their dismissal from service.
According to the respondents, release of the petitioners from detention has no nexus with the activities in which the petitioners were involved and, therefore, the competent authority was justified in taking the view that it was a fit case in which the petitioners should be dismissed without any inquiry.
4.
A look at the order of dismissal shows that in the first place, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala, has made reference to the acts of the petitioners of extorting money from innocent people and having links with smugglers.
He then observed that the petitioner had indulged in prejudicial activities and had become security hazard for the Police Department.
On that premises, the Senior Superintendent of Police expressed the view that it was not in the public interest to retain the petitioners in public service and, therefore, he passed the order of dismissal while exercising his power under Rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 read with Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
This order by itself does not make any reference to the impracticability of holding a departmental inquiry.
The order does not even show that it is not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry into the allegation of misconduct against the petitioner.
The order does not show that the competent authority has on the basis of the material available with it come to the conclusion that inquiry into the allegation of extortion of money and likes with smugglers is not practicably feasible.
Thus, the impugned order singularly failed to satisfy the conditions precedent enumerated in Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
5.
Learned Assistant Advocate General tried to support the impugned order of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Patiala, to the effect that the police officials were extorting money from innocent people and had established links with anti-social elements and smugglers and were hatching conspiracy against the security of State and maintenance of public order.
The Senior Superintendent of Police referred to that report and observed that activities of the petitioners were highly condemnable.
He observed that regular departmental inquiry is not reasonably practicable because they would not depose against each other.
On that basis, he passed the impugned order of dismissal.
Shri Walia also referred to the report of Shri Sarjit Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Patiala, dated 16.8.1988 in which he recorded that Dalbir Singh and his men had hatched a conspiracy to eliminate some police officials by showing as if it was an act of terrorists.
On the basis of these documents, Shri Walia submitted that the order of dismissal could be sustained with reference to Article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution of India.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and are of the considered opinion that the impugned order is legally unsustainable.
Arguments of Shri Walia that the impugned order could be sustained with reference to Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution is clearly misconceived because power under Article 311(2)(c) can only be exercised by the Governor of the State.
The Senior Superintendent of Police is not a person authorised to exercise the power under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution and, therefore, the impugned order cannot be held to have been issued in exercise of power under Article 311(2)(c).
7.
In regard to Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution, we find that not only the impugned order does not show application of mind by the competent authority to the requirement of constitutional provision, the record produced by Shri Walia also does not contain any material showing that the competent authority was satisfied, on the basis of good and sufficient reasons, that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
It is not a case in which the respondents have come forward with a plea that holding of inquiry against the petitioners was improbable.
It was not a case in which the respondents have come out with a case that the persons from whom the petitioners had extorted money would not come forward to depose against the petitioners.
It is also not a case in which the respondents have placed any material before the Court to show that the petitioners had threatened any person for giving evidence against them.
Thus, we do not find any ground on the basis of which the impugned order can be sustained with reference to Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution.
In this connection, we may refer to two recent decisions of this Court in Ex-Constable Sangram Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(4) SLR 536 : 1995(3) SCT 725(P&H), and Gurdev Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(5) SLR 610 : 1996(1) SCT 142 (P&H)(DB).
In both the cases, the court has analysed the provision of Article 311 and has referred to the decisions in Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, 1984(2) SLR 16, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC), Chief Security Officer and others v. Singasan Rabi Das, 1991(2) SLR 140 : 1992(1) SCT 595(SC), Kedarnath Singh v. Union of India and others, 1984(2) SLR 347, MK Kunjappan v. President of India and others, 1984(2) SLR 669, and Shri Naresh Kumar and another v. Commissioner of Police and others, 1992(7) SLR 177, and held that unless cogent material was placed before the Court to show that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry, the order of dismissal passed with preference to Article 311(2)(b) cannot be sustained.
In our opinion the principle laid down in these two decision is fully applicable to the case in hand and the impugned order is liable to be declared as void.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P-2 is declared illegal and is quashed.
This shall, however, not prevent the respondents from passing fresh order in accordance with law.
It shall also be open to the respondents to take action for suspension of the petitioners.
Since the petitioners have not discharged their duties during he intervening period, they shall not be entitled to monetary benefits in the form of back wages between the date of dismissal and the date of this order.
9.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.