Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was working as a Principal at the Anganwadi Workers and Training Centre prays for the issue of a writ, order or direction to the Haryana State Council for Child Welfare to pay him "his salary and assign him duties".
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On October 13, 1983, the petitioner was appointed as an Instructor.
He was subsequently promoted as Principal.
The order of promotion has not been produced by the petitioner.
As a result, the exact date of promotion and the terms of appointment are not known.
On March 20, 1991, the Respondent-Council decided to close three Centres.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-1.
In pursuance to this decision, the petitioner's services were terminated with effect from March 31, 1991.
A copy of the order of termination has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner alongwith four other persons filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4758 of 1991.
Initially, the operation of the orders impugned in this petition was stayed.
However, the writ petition was finally disposed of by the Motion Bench vide order dated October 4, 1991 with the following observations :-  "Admittedly, the entire financial burden is to be borne by the Union of India.
In view of this situation, the respondents are directed to continue with the functioning of the Anganwadi Workers Training Centres, Karnal and Kurukshetra subject to the condition of release of funds from the Union of India.
If the funds are not made available to the centres within one month from today, the respondents will be at liberty to close the centres.
When the funds are released by the Central Government, the same will be paid in accordance with the scheme.
The order be given dasti to the counsel for the petitioner."
3.
The petitioner alleges that in fact the funds had already been released by the Government of India vide their letter dated June 3, 1991.
A promise for the release of the next instalment was also conveyed.
Thereupon, the petitioner wrote to the Director, Department of Social Welfare, Haryana and also to the General Secretary of the Respondent-Council to depute a batch to the Centres which had been closed and to release the aid.
A copy of the order dated October 4, 1991 was also supplied.
Despite this, no action was taken by respondent No. 1 either to depute any batch for training or for release of funds.
No payment was made to the petitioner from March 1991 onwards.
The petitioner served a notice and even initiated contempt proceedings.
However, the contempt petition was withdrawn.
The petitioner alleges that despite repeated representations, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-14 to P-20, he has not been paid the salary from April 1, 1991 till today.
He has also not been assigned any duties in spite of the fact that various vacancies are lying vacant and persons junior to him have been adjusted.
By way of illustration, it has been alleged that Mr. Ram Dhan Singh has been appointed as a Principal.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents is violative of the directions given by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4758 of 1991 as also provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
A written statement has been filed by respondent No. 2.
It has been submitted by way of a preliminary objection that the Respondent-Council is a charitable Institution.
It is being managed with the funds raised by donations, subscriptions, collections from members and contributions as well as grants including those from the Government.
It is registered as a Society.
There is no Governmental control and, thus, it does not fall within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution Reference in this behalf has also been made to the decision of the Supreme Court in SLP(C) No. 9566 of 1980 decided on January 8, 1981.
On merits, it has been averred that the petitioner had been appointed on a purely temporary basis.
After assessing the work load, the Director, Social Welfare, Haryana, issued instructions for the closure of three Centres located at Karnal, Kurukshetra and Sonepat.
The State-Council followed these directions and the services of the employees including the petitioner were terminated w.e.f.
March 31, 1991.
Due to financial constraints, the centres had to be closed.
The schemes for Kurukshetra, Karnal and Sonepat centres had been abandoned.
No work had been allocated to the said centres.
No trainee was allocated to these centres.
The allegation that the persons junior to the petitioner had been retained in service, has been denied in paragraph 7 of the written statement.
It has been further averred that the petitioner had applied for the post of Principal.
He was interviewed on February 22, 1993.
He was placed at No. 2 in the merit list.
The candidate who was placed at No. 1 viz. Mrs. Sarla Yadav, was selected and appointed.
The allegation that vacancies are available, has also been controverted.
5.
Even though the petitioner has filed a replication, the averments in the written statement have not been specifically controverted or explained.
With regard to the averments in paras 1 to 10 of the written statement, it has merely been averred that the "facts stated in these paras are correct and reiterated.
Replication to these paras is on the record of CWP No. 4758 of 1991."
Even with regard to the other averments made in different paragraphs of the written statement, the factual position has not been specifically explained or controverted.
The petitioner had also filed an additional affidavit with Civil Misc.
Application No. 12099 of 1993 in which it was averred that the "other principals and instructors of the closed Anganwadi Training Centres were adjusted or given fresh appointments.
This was not done in my case and I was never given chance of adjustment or reappointment."
In this behalf, name of Mr. Ram Dhan Singh, respondent No. 3 has been mentioned and it has been averred he had been re-appointed on September 21, 1991.
Similarly, Mrs. Parveen was adjusted as an Instructor vide order dated August 14, 1991.
It has also been averred that the petitioner was called for interview for the post of Social Worker/Counsellor.
At the time of the interview, he was persuaded to withdraw his application with the promise that he will be accommodated with arrears of wages from March 31, 1991.
However, this was not done.
A reply to this affidavit was filed by Mr. JD Sharma, the Honorary Secretary of the Council.
It has been averred that the post offered to Mr. Ram Dhan Singh on October 21, 1991 was a fresh appointment and Mrs. Parveen was adjusted on a vacant post of Instructor as a fresh appointment.
It has also been averred that an amount to the tune of Rs. 1285965 found due to the petitioner for the period from April 1991 to December 1991 is lying with the District Child Welfare Officer, Kurukshetra.
The petitioner can represent "to the above-named person for getting his amount released."
6.
These are all the pleadings.
Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioner while persons junior to him were allowed to continue, was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
She has further contended that even after the passing of the order of termination, various persons including respondent No. 3 (Mr. Ram Dhan Singh) were adjusted in the service of the Respondent-Council.
The action in not adjusting the petitioner was illegal.
It has also been contended that the operation of the order of termination had been stayed by this Court in CWP No. 4758 of 1991.
Therefore, the order of termination did not come into effect at any stage.
Consequently, the petitioner was entitled to the payment of full wages from March 31, 1991.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. Rajesh Khurana, learned counsel for the respondents has questioned the maintainability of the writ petition in view of the preliminary objection raised in the writ petition.
He has further submitted that the petitioner's services were terminated on account of the closure of the three Institutions.
Subsequently, he had applied for the post of Principal.
His claim was considered.
He was appointed vide order dated January 31, 1994.
He had actually joined the post on February 3, 1994.
A photo-copy of the joining report has been produced.
It is Mark 'A'.
Learned counsel has further submitted that the three centres could not be run in spite of the release of funds as no trainees were available therein.
The release of money was subject to availability of candidates.
In the absence of trainees, the centres could not have been restarted and the petitioner could not be adjusted.
8.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, a preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of the writ petition has been taken.
The factual position as stated therein has not at all been controverted in the replication filed by the petitioner.
In fact, no reply thereto has been filed.
Mr. Khurana, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, has vehemently contended that the writ petition is not maintainable.
He has even referred to the orders passed by different Benches of this Court as well as the order dated January 8, 1981 passed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court wherein it was observed that "the Court dismissed the Special Leave Petition on the ground that no petition can lie against the District Council which is not a state within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution" However, Mrs. Rathore stated that the question regarding the maintainability of the writ petition against the Respondent-Council is pending consideration before a Full Bench of this Court.
In view of this position, I do not consider it appropriate to go into the matter.
I am, accordingly, examining the issue raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner on merits.
9.
The first question that arises for consideration is - Was the order terminating the petitioner's services with effect from March 31, 1991 on account of the closure of the training centre at Kurukshetra illegal ?
While considering this question, the following facts have to be kept in view :-  (i) There is no specific prayer in the writ petition for the quashing of this order;  (ii) From the order of this case, it appears that the petitioner had challenged the validity of the order of termination in Civil Writ Petition No. 4758 of 1991.
The Bench had initially stayed the operation of this order.
However, while disposing of the writ petition finally, the order was not quashed.
The contents of the order have already been noticed above.
10.
If a strictly technical view were to be taken, the claim made by the petitioner may merit rejection in view of the above-noted facts.
It is well settled that it is the case pleaded which has to be proved.
Relief beyond the prayer in a petition cannot be granted.
The principles of C.P.C. apply to the writ proceedings.
By virtue of Explanation V to Section 11 of the CPC, a relief claimed by the petitioner which is not expressly granted by the decree is deemed to have been refused.
Accordingly, it can be said that the order of termination which was duly challenged by the petitioner having not been quashed by the Bench, the petitioner cannot be permitted to re-agitate the matter.
The challenge now made can, thus, be negatived in view of the aforesaid position.
11.
Lest technicalities should result in miscarriage of justice, I proceed to examine the petitioner's claim with regard to the validity of the order of termination.
The sole ground for challenging the order is that persons junior to the petitioner were allowed to continue in service.
This averment has been made in paragraph 7 of the writ petition.
It has been specifically denied in the written statement.
It has been further averred that the petitioner's appointment was purely temporary.
The order by which the petitioner was appointed as Principal has not been produced.
The terms of appointment have not been disclosed by the petitioner.
The averments in the written statement have not been controverted in the replication.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the persons junior to the petitioner were retained in service on March 31, 1991 when his services were terminated.
Accordingly, it is difficult to uphold the contention that the action was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The plea is, consequently, rejected.
12.
It was then contended that various junior persons were subsequently adjusted.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the appointment of respondent No. 3.
In the reply to the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that respondent No. 3 had made a request which was accepted and he was given a fresh appointment on October 27, 1992.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, the learned counsel for the respondents stated that his application for the post of Principal was duly considered and he was also appointed vide order dated January 31, 1994.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner had submitted various representations.
He had primarily claimed that he was entitled to his salary of the post of Principal and the trainees should be deputed to the centre.
In one of the representations, he had also prayed for adjustment.
Finally, he had been appointed as a Principal in January 1994.
Furthermore, the facts relating to the inter se position of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 3 are not on record.
Consequently, it is not possible on the present record to say he had a better claim than the said respondent.
On the present record, the plea of violation of Articles 14 and 16 cannot be sustained.
13.
Lastly, Mrs. Rathore contended that the petitioner is entitled to full wages as the order had not come into effect at any stage.
As already observed, CWP No. 4758 of 1991 in which the order of termination had been challenged was disposed of by the Bench vide its order dated October 4, 1991.
Consequently, the interim order passed by the Bench came to an end.
Thereafter, the petitioner cannot say that the order of termination was not effective.
As for the salary from the date of the interim order to the date of the final disposal of the writ petition, the respondents have categorically stated that the amount is lying with the District Child Welfare Officer, Kurukshetra.
The petitioner can represent and get the amount.
In view of the above, I find no ground to interfere.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.