GS Singhvi, J - By this order I am deciding fifteen writ petitions in which the petitioners have prayed for quashing of the order dated 2831994 passed by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana reverting the petitioners from the posts of Taxation Inspectors.
2.
A brief narration of facts of CWP No. 4517 of 1994 is sufficient for the purpose of this decision.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 (Bishamber Nath) joined service as a Clerk on 271965 in the Excise and Taxation Department, Haryana on the basis of his appointment made pursuant to the regular selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
He was promoted as Assistant some time in the year 1980.
On 2061988, he was further promoted as Taxation Inspector on ad hoc basis.
Petitioner No. 2 - Gopi Chand joined service as a clerk on 1511970.
He was promoted as Assistant in the year 1987 and then as Taxation Inspector on ad hoc basis with effect from 341989.
These petitioners and petitioners in other writ petitions have by now worked as Taxation Inspectors for the last five to six years and all of them have been reverted to the ministerial posts, namely, Assistants/Senior Assistants/S.S.S./Accountants.
4.
The petitioners have alleged that in C.W.P.
No. 1388 of 1992 (Jagdish Chhabra and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on 481992, a learned single Judge of this Court gave direction to the respondents to make recruitment to the posts of the Taxation Inspectors strictly according to the ratio of 1 :2 from amongst the Head Office staff and the field staff in respect of the vacancies which were available upto 2211992 and even though the same direction was reiterated in CWP 3793 of 1993 filed by the Excise and Taxation Ministerial Staff Association, Haryana and decided on 841993, the respondents have not undertaken proper exercise for making regular promotion to the posts of Inspectors in accordance with the ratio of 1 :2.
5.
Broadly speaking the petitioners have challenged the impugned reversion on the ground of violation of the provisions contained in the Haryana Excise and Taxation Inspectorate Rules, 1969 and the equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Some of the petitioners have also alleged that seniority of the ministerial staff has not prepared in terms of the Haryana Excise and Taxation Inspectorate (State Service Group-C) Rules, 1969.
They have further alleged that while preparing such seniority list respondents 1 and 2 have illegally treated them as junior and have brought about their reversion.
The petitioners have also pleaded that the impugned action is violative of the principles of natural justice.
6.
The writ petitions have been opposed on the ground that the petitioners had been promoted on purely ad hoc basis and they did not have any right to hold the posts.
Further case of the respondents is that the ministerial employees have been promoted as Taxation Inspectors far in excess of their quota and, therefore, the Government was fully justified in reverting them in order to maintain the ratio between the direct recruits and the promotees.
The respondents have also stated that in accordance with the judgment of the learned single Judge dated 481992, the Department has properly worked out the quota between the direct recruits and the promotees and only those promotees have been reverted who are in excess of the quota fixed under the rules.
7.
After the arguments were partly heard, the Court directed the learned government counsel to file an affidavit indicating the details of the vacancies in different quotas and also indicating as to how many vacancies have been filled by direct recruitment and by promotion.
Shri Raina, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana produced a statement indicating the total number of posts available on 21.2.1992 and also the distribution of posts between direct recruits and the promotees.
He made strenuous effort to convince the Court that a genuine and real effort has been made by the departmental authorities to work out the number of posts and only those promotees have been reverted who are in excess of their own quota.
8.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the rival pleadings, I am of the opinion that the respondents have not been able to convince the Court that they have faithfully carried out the direction given by the learned single Judge on 481992.
Shri Raina could not show that the department has prepared a final seniority list as per rule 5 of the 1969 Rules and the promotions of the ministerial employees have been made in accordance with such seniority list.
He has also not been able to convince the Court that the ratio between the Head Office staff and the field staff has been maintained in accordance with the rules.
There also appears to be some justification in the grievance of the petitioners that juniors to them have been promoted as Taxation Inspectors and some of the junior persons who had been promoted on ad hoc basis have been retained in service.
In this background of the matter, I find merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the impugned order is contrary to the principles of natural justice.
No doubt, persons appointed by promotion on ad hoc basis do not acquire any right to be promoted on the post and the employer has a right to revert such ad hoc employees but in the peculiar facts of these cases, wherein there is a serious dispute between the parties about the compliance of the direction given in the order dated 481992 and no final seniority list of the ministerial staff has been prepared and also in view of the fact that the petitioners have already held the posts of Taxation Inspectors for five to six years, ends of justice warrant that an opportunity of hearing should be afforded to the petitioners.
Even the learned Deputy Advocate General realised that if proper exercise is undertaken by the departmental authorities to determine the vacancies and proper distribution of these vacancies between direct recruits and the promotees is made, the unsettled position of the employees in the department may got crystalised.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the impugned order of reversion should be quashed with a direction to the respondents to determine the seniority inter se amongst the ministerial employees of the department and work out the number of posts available as on January 22, 1992 and then distribute amongst them as per the 1969 Rules and make a further bifurcation of the vacancies amongst the promotees inter se and then determine as to whether excess persons are holding the promotional quota posts and whether the petitioners or any one of them have been promoted against the posts meant for direct recruitment.
Only then it will be possible for the respondents to determine whether it is imperative for the respondents to revert the petitioners or any one of them.
9.
Consequently, the writ petitions are allowed.
Order dated 2831994 is declared illegal and is hereby quashed.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to :  1. prepare the inter se seniority of ministerial employees of the department and finalise it after circulation amongst the affected employees.
This exercise should be undertaken and completed within three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order by respondent No. 2; 2. to calculate exact number of posts in the cadre of Inspectors as on 2211992 as well as the posts which became available after January 22, 1992; 3. to determine as to how many posts were required to be filled against direct recruitment quota and promotion quota and also assess how many posts were physically filled against the quota of direct recruitment and promotees; 4. to determine thereafter whether the petitioners or any one of them are holding posts in excess of their quota.
If after this exercise, it is found that the petitioners or any one of them are holding the posts in excess of the promotion quota, it shall be open to the respondents to revert such petitioners.
5.
The entire exercise should be undertaken and completed within four months of the finalisation of the seniority list of ministerial staff.
If for any reason, it is not possible to complete the exercise within the time specified in this order, it shall be open to the respondents to seek further extension of time from this Court.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.