VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, challenge is to order dated 1161992 whereby services of the petitioner were terminated with immediate effect and in lieu of one month's notice, he was given one month's salary in cash.
2.
Petitioner in response to the advertisement applied against a temporary post of Bursar (Administrative Officer).
Vide appointment letter dated 21101991 petitioner was selected and appointed as Bursar in the Moti Lal Nehru School Sports, Rai, District Sonepat (in short the School).
He was put on probation for a period of two years and his services could be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason in case his work and conduct was not found satisfactory.
It is the case of the petitioner that he performed his duties as Bursar very efficiently and his honesty, integrity, work and conduct was above board.
Accordingly to him, the termination order has been passed against him because on 2051992 he objected to the withdrawal of Rs. 10,000/- by the Principal-Director of the School from the government fund for private purpose.
The Director, Sports on whose asking the amount was withdrawn took offence to the writing of such a letter and accordingly called the petitioner in his office at Chandigarh on 25.5.1992 which later was postponed to 26.5.1992.
On 26.5.1992, when the petitioner met the Director, Sports, he was threatened that petitioner would be taught a lesson for putting in writing about the Director, Sports withdrawing Rs. 10,000/- from the school funds.
Petitioner has further alleged that in sequence of this, a conspiracy was hatched by the Director, Sports and the Principal-Director of the School and as a result thereof, a false and fabricated complaint was procured from the Principal-Director.
On the basis of said complaint, Director Sports, Haryana, desputed BD Sharma, Establishment Officer of Directorate, for procuring some documents from the School.
The complaint and the material supplied by the Establishment Officer was submitted to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana Sports and Youth Welfare, and relying upon that complaint and material, services of the petitioner have been terminated.
As regards his work and conduct, petitioner has stated that during first Junior National Fencing Championship which was held in the Campus of the School from 1551992 to 1751992, his work and conduct was found excellent and the Head of the Organising Committee, i.e. Director, Sports, recommended an award in the shape of Memento which was awarded to the petitioner by the Minister, Cooperation, Haryana on the last date of the Meet being the Chief Guest of the day.
3.
In their written statement, respondents No. 1 to 3 have denied that allegations levelled by the petitioner being false, baseless and misleading.
Respondents have stated that the work and conduct of the petitioner as Bursar, during his stay at the School was not found satisfactory.
The Principal- Director of the school sent a report regarding his work and conduct to the Director Sports.
The report has been attached as Annexure R-1 to the written statement.
It has also been averred that the administrative control and arrangements of the petitioner during the 1st Junior Fencing Championship was not suitable and upto the required standard of the Institution due to which the Institution had to face humiliation during the Sports Meet.
As regards presentation of Memento to the petitioner, it has been stated that it was presented as a matter of routine along with other officials who helped in organising this Championship.
No special recommendation for awarding Memento was made by the then Director of Sports, Haryana.
Respondents have further submitted that the Principal-Director collected Rs. 10,000/- from the Cashier on Sunday, i.e. 1751992 as the said amount was immediately required by the Director, Sports, Haryana in connection with some emergent sports activity.
Respondents have denied that the amount was utilised for private purpose; rather it has been submitted that the Director, Sports, being the overall incharge of the School has full power to the use of funds of the School for sports purposes.
Respondents have admitted that the petitioner was summoned by the Director, Sports, in his office but it has been denied that he was called to explain his action in writing letter to the Principal with regard to the withdrawal of the amount.
It has been averred that the Director summoned him regarding drawbacks in administrative arrangements noticed/seen by him during his stay in the School premises during the period of Championship.
Petitioner was pointed out acts of omission and commission on his part.
The allegations of threats have been denied being without any basis.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner is not disputing that the employer has a right to review the work of an employee with a view to ascertain his suitability for further retention, but his contention is that the petitioner has been punished for his objecting to the withdrawing of Rs. 10,000/- by the Principal-Director on the asking of the Director, Sports.
He contended that the then Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Sports Department (Shri KC Sharma) praised the work and conduct of the petitioner before the Governor in the Governing Body Meeting of the School.
Confidential reports which are required to be written by March every year, if called from the respondents, would show that his work and conduct was found good/excellent.
In regard to Annexure R-1, he contended that no notice of the same was given to him, but now with the replication he has given para-wise reply to the allegations contained in Annexure R-1.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the services of the petitioner have been terminated absolutely on merit as the work and conduct of the petitioner was highly unsatisfactory.
He contended that it is not correct to state that termination is on any ground other than his work and conduct.
5.
The order impugned in this case is innocuous and does not ex-facie disclose any stigma or penal consequence.
Where the order of termination is simpliciter, ordinarily it cannot be assumed that it has anything but what it purports to be.
In such a case it is for the government servant to establish by material on record that the order is in fact passed by way of punishment.
In this case, material brought on record is only an allegation made by the petitioner that his services have been terminated because he had objected to the withdrawing of Rs. 10,000/- by the Principal-Director on the asking of Director, Sports but this allegation has not been substantiated by any material on record.
Petitioner addressed a confidential letter to the Principal-Director on 2051992 bringing to his notice that utilisation of Rs. 10,000/- has resulted in using government money for private purpose.
Immediately on receipt of this letter, the Principal-Director informed the petitioner that he had instructed the Cashier to give Rs. 10,000/- on Sunday as the same were required by the Director, Sports, Haryana, in connection with some emergent sports activity.
It is not denied that the Principal-Director who is the overall incharge of the School has the authority to withdraw money for using it for sports activity or for any other activity concerned with the welfare/up-keep of the School.
To my mind, there is nothing suspicious about this transaction.
It has also come on record that a sum of Rs. 8,000/- was returned on the following day and the balance of Rs. 2,000/- was handed over to the Principal by the Director, Sports on 19.5.1992 and was returned to the Cashier on 2051992.
Letter from the petitioner is dated 2051992 when the money had already been deposited.
In these circumstances, it cannot be ruled out that writing of confidential letter was like lodging of a caveat in anticipation of action or to be used as a shield.
As regards the work and conduct of the petitioner, the respondents in Annexure R-1 have given in detail as to how the work was assessed by the Principal who is the controlling Authority.
Petitioner though along with his replication has tried to give reply to each and every paragraph of Annexure R-1, but to my mind this Court cannot go into the inadequacy or insufficiency of the material which was taken into consideration for assessing the work and conduct of the petitioner.
The satisfaction of the employer about the work and conduct of his employee is entirely personal to the employer and it is he who can opine.
It is not the province of the Courts to ordinarily go behind that view arrived at within the four corners of his right to do so.
A Full Bench of this Court in Guru Nanak Dev University v. Dr. (Mrs.) Iqbal Kaur Sandhu and others, AIR 1976 P&H 69, has held that "To our mind, it is entirely erroneous to consider the matter of the satisfaction of the employer about the work and conduct of his employee as if it were a lis betwixt them in which each side must marshall up his facts and arguments in extenso and then a speaking and rational order be recorded for holding whether the work was satisfactory or otherwise.
Unless binding authority says to the contrary, we are on record to hold that satisfaction in these cases is the personal satisfaction of the employer.
The learned Judge was, therefore, in error in requiring and wanting details of factual material and each instance of unsatisfactory work and conduct as a condition precedent for the employer to arrive at on overall appraisal about the work and conduct of the probationer.
We are firmly of the view that it is unnecessary and even dangerous to induct any such novel or nebulous concept in a matter so essentially simple as the satisfaction, or otherwise of an employer qua the work of his employee."
6.
The contention that want of notice, Annexure R-1 has caused prejudice to the petitioner cannot be accepted because services of the petitioner could be terminated after overall assessment of his work and conduct.
During the period of probation, no notice is required before termination of such services.
It has been held by the Apex Court in The Governing Council of Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology, Bangalore v. Dr. Pandurang Godwalkar and another, 1993(1) SCT 267(SC) : 1992(5) S.L.R.
661 as under :-  "Even if such employee while questioning the validity of an order of termination, simpliciter brings on the record that some preliminary enquiry or examination of some allegations had been made, that will not vitiate the order of termination.
Reference in this connection may be made to the case of Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Dr. Mohd.
S. Iskender Ali, 1980(2) SLR 792 (SC), where it was pointed out that a temporary employee is appointed on probation for a particular period `only in order to test whether his conduct is good and satisfactory so that he may be retained.'
It was also said that even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency may be the motive or the influencing factor which induced the employer to terminate the service of the employee which such employer admittedly had under the terms of the appointment, such termination cannot be held to be penalty or punishment.
Same view has been reiterated in connection with appointment on temporary or ad-hoc basis in the cases of Ravindra Kumar Misra v. UP State Handloom Corpn Ltd., (1987) Suppl.
SCC 739; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760(SC) : 1991(1) SLR 606 (SC) and Triveni Shankar Saxena v. State of UP, 1992(2) SCT 165(SC) : 1992(1) SC 37."
On behalf of the petitioners, reliance was placed on the decision of Division Bench of this Court in Raj Kumar Sangwan v. The Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Limited, 1993(1) RSJ 697.
In that case, the Court came to the conclusion that termination of services was by way of punishment.
However, in the present case the order impugned has been passed on the basis of overall assessment of work and conduct of the petitioner.
7.
The allegation that Secretary to Government, Haryana, Department of Sports and Youth Welfare had found the work of the petitioner to be satisfactory, is without any basis.
It has been denied in the written statement that the Secretary to Government, Haryana, ever appreciated the work of the petitioner.
From the record, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana also submitted that no A.C.R.
was initiated or recorded during the service tenure of the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, the allegation that confidential report which came to be recorded in March, was good or excellent, is also without any substance.
Resultantly, there being no merit in the writ petition the same shall stand dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.