VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner joined as Constable in Jalandhar district in the Punjab Police Department on 17101975, passed Lower School Course in 1979, promoted as Head Constable on 12.12.1979 and confirmed as such on 111987.
On 11101986, order of dismissal of the petitioner came to be passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar.
Order has been passed without holding departmental enquiry as required under the rules.
Petitioner filed an appeal against the order of dismissal to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar who vide order dated 1261989 dismissed the appeal.
It is against these orders passed by the disciplinary Authority and confirmed by the Appellate Authority that the petitioner has filed this petition.
2.
Order of dismissal has been passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police in exercise of powers conferred on him by virtue of Rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (in short 1934 Rules) read with Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India.
In the order, it has been recorded that petitioner has links with extremists and he leaks out the secrets of the department while being in the police job in uniform.
The reason given in the order for dispensing with the enquiry is that the terrorists or their supporters of the petitioner may cause bodily harm to the Enquiry Officer or to the prosecution witnesses.
The order has been impugned on the ground that there is no evidence on record to show that the petitioner had links or had leaked out any secrets of the department.
Order has also been questioned on the ground of non-application of mind.
3.
In the written statement filed by Shri Suresh Arora, Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, it has been averred that few objectionable acts on the part of the petitioner were noticed by the District Police Authorities and in order to verify the same, the petitioner was called in the office of Additional Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar.
Petitioner was sent to the office of Additional Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar vide Daily Diary No. 35 dated 4.10.1988 PS Nakodar, but instead of reporting to the District Police Office, he has absented himself and thereafter, whereabouts of the petitioner were not known despite best efforts.
In order to find out the facts regarding objectionable act on the part of the petitioner, a secret enquiry was made and it has come to light that the petitioner is having links with terrorists/extremists.
After having gone through the material facts, the competent Authority has passed the order of dismissal under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India strictly in public interest.
Respondents have stated that petitioner came to the police station, Nakodar on 4111988, 5111988 and 22111988 to 2121988, but they have added that he had come to hand over the charge to successor Moharrir Head Constable of the police station.
4.
Rule 161(1) of the 1934 Rules provides that no police officer shall be departmentally punished otherwise than as provided in these rules.
Rule 1624 provides a detailed procedure required to be followed in a departmental enquiry before the major penalty can be imposed upon a member of Punjab Police Service.
Article 311 of the Constitution of India prescribes that a person who is member of Civil Service cannot be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
Article 311(2) affords the safeguard of providing reasonable opportunity of showing-cause of the action proposed and providing of reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the charges if it is intended to dismiss or remove the public servant from service.
In view of the amendment of Article 311(2) by the 42nd amendment in 1976, it is no longer necessary to issue second show-cause notice to the delinquent employee about the proposed punishment.
Second proviso is an exception to Article 311(2).
The words in the second proviso, viz. "This clause shall not apply" are mandatory and are in the nature of constitutional prohibitory injunction restraining the disciplinary Authority from holding an enquiry where one of the three clauses of the second proviso becomes applicable.
Second proviso has been introduced in public interest and for public good and has to be strictly construed.
Clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311 lays down that substantive provisions contained in Article 311(2) shall not apply where the Authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reasons to be recorded by that Authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry.
A reading of various provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India makes it very clear that second proviso is an exception to Article 311(2).
It may be noticed that requirement under clause (b) is not that the enquiry is impossible and cannot in any circumstances be held nor is it the requirement that such enquiry is wholly or utterly impracticable.
The only requirement is that the Authority must be satisfied from the material before him that it is not reasonably practicable to hold departmental enquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India and another v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576 has held that the condition precedent for the application of clause (b) is satisfaction of the disciplinary Authority that "it is not reasonably practicable to hold" enquiry contemplated by clause (2) of Article 311.
The decision to do so cannot rest solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned Authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice.
For this see, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
125.
A Division Bench of this Court in Darshanjit Singh Dhindsa v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) SCT 338(P&H) : 1993(2) R.S.J.
651 has held that mere reproduction of the words of the statute are not sufficient to justify the finding of fact with respect to the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 15701 of 1994 (Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 471995, a learned Judge of this Court on a conspectus of various decisions including decisions of Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416, Union of India v. TR Chellappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1356, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
125 and Chief Security Officer and others v. Singasan Rabi Das, 1992(1) SCT 595(SC) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
140, has held that order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank passed by the competent Authority under any of the clauses under Article 311(2) is open to judicial review and the exercise of power under these clauses can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent Authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant considerations.
A person aggrieved by an order passed under proviso to Article 311(2) can challenge it, where the Authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; where its satisfaction is based on considerations which are not relevant; where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; where the satisfaction is not grounded on materials which are of rationally probative value; and where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
5.
In the context of what has been discussed above, the impugned order needs to be tested.
Order shows that Sr.
Superintendent of Police has passed the order as he was satisfied that the petitioner has developed links with extremists and leaks out the secrets of the department.
The order does not make reference to any record on the basis of which the senior Superintendent of Police has recorded his conclusion that the petitioner is mixed up with the extremists and is supplying information to them.
The source from which the Senior Superintendent of Police has derived knowledge about petitioner's links with the extremists has not been disclosed in the order.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the allegations that exercise of power by the Senior Superintendent of Police is colourable and there is no material on record to show that the petitioner had links with extremists or had leaked out any secret information to the extremists, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, was asked to produce before me the record for showing that the order has been passed one the basis of some material.
In response to the direction, record produced before me is a file which contains only on the paper, i.e. a carbon copy of the order.
It contains no other document muchless any material on the basis of which the Senior Superintendent of Police could have come to the conclusion that the petitioner had links with extremists or had leaked out secret information of the department.
Since nothing has been pointed out as to what impelled the disciplinary Authority for recording its satisfaction that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry, this Court has no alternative but to quash the order of dismissal.
6.
The order passed in appeal too cannot be sustained.
Rule 1631 of the 1934 Rules specifically provides that the order passed in appeal shall contain the reasons therefor.
The Appellate Authority is required to give a reasoned order while disposing of the appeal.
According to the petitioner, as is evident from the grounds of appeal which has been annexed to the petition as Annexure P-2, he had raised more than 11 points for consideration of the appellate Authority in addition to his past record and also commendation certificates which he had obtained during the course of his service.
The impugned order in this case shows hardly any application of mind on the part of the appellate Authority.
Appellate Authority has totally ignored the points raised by the petitioner for its consideration and the appeal has been disposed of by a very brief order.
7.
In the circumstances, the order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary Authority in exercise of powers under Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution and confirmed by the Appellate Authority are quashed and the petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
It is, however, made clear that it would be open to the disciplinary Authority to initiate the departmental proceedings, if it intends to hold one, in accordance with law.
It is also made clear that the disciplinary Authority can exercise all the powers conferred on it under the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition shall stand allowed.
No costs.