VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to orders, Annexures P-1 and P-2 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran and Deputy Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar respectively.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner joined Police department as Constable in 1962; passed Lower School Course in 1968; promoted as Head constable on 1571970 and confirmed as such on 111978; promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in 1981 and confirmed as such on 111987, and furher promoted to the post of Sub Inspector in September 1988.
Vide order dated 1721989 petitioner was dismissed from service by Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran in exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 16.1(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (in short 1934 Rules).
Petitioner filed an appeal against the order of dismissal to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar, who vide order dated 13.3.1989 dismissed the appeal.
Petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that there is no evidence on record which could connect the petitioner with the commission of offence of having accepted a huge amount of gratification and letting off the suspects.
Order, Annexure P-3 has been challenged on the ground of non-application of mind.
Respondents in their written statement filed through the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, have pleaded that the act of the petitioner was so grave which warranted maximum punishment and it was not possible to hold regular departmental enquiry because the petitioner had let of Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha, a hard-core terrorist, after accepting a huge sum of illegal gratification and under these circumstances no police officer was likely to depose due to the fear of the petitioner who was associated with Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that there was no sufficient and valid reason for dispensing with the holding of enquiry and the reasons mentioned in the impugned order are without any basis and simply an excuse for not following the procedure of departmental enquiry.
Counsel contended that there was no material with the competent Authority to form an opinion that the petitioner had accepted illegal gratification and let off Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha.
In answer to these submissions, Mr. SK Bhanot, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has argued that the exercise of powers by the competent Authority under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India being bona fide, this Court cannot go into the sufficiency of the reasons which prevailed with the competent Authority for passing the impugned order of dismissal.
He contended that in the circumstances as prevailing then it would not have been possible for the department to establish the charge against the petitioner in regular enquiry under rule 16.1(2) of the 1934 Rules.
4.
Under proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, no enquiry need by held if the Competent Authority records in writing that it is not readably practicable to hold such an enquiry.
The only requirement is that the Authority must be satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold enquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) S.L.R.
576 has held that the condition precedent for the application of clause (b) of the second proviso is that the disciplinary Authority should record in writing that 'it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry contemplated by clause(2) of Article 311 of the Constitution.'
'What is requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which to hold inquiry but some instance by way of illustration may however be given that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold inquiry where the government servant through or together with his associates, threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, who are going to give evidence against him so as to prevent them from doing so or where the government servant by himself or together with or through associates, threatens the Officer or members of his family so that he is afraid to hold the inquiry or direct it to be held.'
The Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Haryana, AIR 1991 SC 385 : 1991(1) SCT.
125 has held that the decision to dispense with the departmental inquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of Law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of caprice of the concerned officer.
In that case, it was alleged that the petitioner therein, instead of replying to the show-cause notice, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the Superiors and gave threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, if any departmental inquiry was held against him.
The order of dismissal was quashed as it was not shown to the Supreme Court on what material the respondent came to the conclusion that the appellant and thrown threats.
A learned Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12973 of 1993 decided on 2321995 has held that the order of dismissal or removal passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India is open to judicial review and can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent Authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant considerations.
Validity of the order passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution can be challenged, where the authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; where its satisfaction is based on considerations which are not relevant; where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; where the satisfaction is not grounded on materials which are of rationally probative value; and where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
5.
In the context of what has been discussed above, the impugned order needs to be viewed.
6.
The Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran has passed the order of dismissal on the ground that the petitioner while posted as SHO PS Verowal had caught and interrogated, in the last week of December, 1988, one Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha, a listed terrorist, who was responsible for many of the kidnapings and extortion of money from the public.
During interrogation, he had admitted his involvement in large scale killings/extortion of money/kidnappings and other heinous crimes, but the petitioner instead of booking him under TADA Act and other relevant provisions of law let him off after accepting a huge amount from him.
On the basis of these facts, the Senior Superintendent of Police was of the view that it is not possible to hold regular departmental enquiry against the petitioner and for the reasons recorded separately, departmental enquiry has been dispensed with.
The order does not make any reference to any record on the basis of which Senior Superintendent of Police has recorded his conclusion that the petitioner let off Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha after accepting illegal gratification.
The source from which the Senior Superintendent of Police has derived knowledge in this regard has not been disclosed in the order.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the allegations that there is no material on record to show that the petitioner had indulged to this kind of activity, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce before me the record to show that the order has been passed on the basis of material.
In compliance to this direction, record produced before me is a file containing letter dated 1621989 from the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran to the Senior Superintendent of Police.
Vide this letter, the Senior Superintendent of Police was informed that on coming to know from a source that Lakhwinder Singh a listed terrorist responsible for many of the kidnappings and extortion cases was caught by Verowal police during a general combing/searching operation in the area of Khadur Sahib during the last week of December, 1988, and interrogated by SI Puran Chand, then SHO PS Verowal, and was later on let off after accepting huge amount of money as illegal gratification.
On receipt of this information, he made enquiries and the information has been found to be correct and the staff of PS Verowal have admitted that Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha was caught and interrogated and also that on interrogation he had revealed his identity.
He had also confessed before the SHO and ASI about his involvement in a number of cases of extortion, kidnappings and murders.
The ASP thus opined that Puran Chand, SI, is solely responsible for the same.
He also recommended that his action warrants nothing less than dismissal from service and registration of a case under the provisions of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act as in such a case no departmental enquiry would be feasible because nobody will be willing to depose against a police official who is mixed up with terrorists simply for fear of reprisal from the terrorists.
The letter was received by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran on 1721989, on which date he recorded his satisfaction that no police officer is likely to depose against the petitioner due to fear of terrorists who were associates of Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha, and the order of dismissal came to be passed on that very day.
A reading of letter from the ASP to the Senior Superintendent of Police shows that he made reference to information he received from some source with regard to involvement of petitioner linking him with Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha but that source has not been disclosed in the letter, nor the file contains the statements of the staff of PS Verowal who allegedly admitted before the ASP that the petitioner was involved or mixed up with the said terrorist.
The Senior Superintendent of Police has not recorded in the impugned order or in any other document that he has verified the facts contained in letter of ASP or has any other information from an independent source about petitioner's alleged links with terrorist, Lakhwinder Singh @ Lakha.
As a matter of fact, the record does not reveal that the Senior Superintendent of Police made any enquiry about the truthfulness of the allegations.
The letter written by ASP is dated 1621989 and the order came to be passed on the very next day, i.e. 1721989 by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
It appears that the Senior Superintendent of Police instead of making an independent enquiry with regard to the truthfulness of the allegations, solely acted on the recommendations made by the ASP recommending dismissal of the petitioner without holding departmental enquiry.
In view of this, it must be held that the impugned order suffers from total non-application of mind.
The appellate order too has to be set aside as it does not contain any reason in support of the conclusion recorded by the disciplinary Authority warranting the exercise of powers proviso to Article 311(2).
Moreover, once the initial order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police is vitiated, the appellate order is also liable to be quashed.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and orders, Annexures P-1 and P-2 quashed.
Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
This shall, however, not preclude the respondents to hold enquiry in case they intend to hold one against the petitioner in accordance with law and pass fresh order.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.