GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the report of the Inquiry Officer (Annexure P-1), order of punishment (Annexure P-4) and order of dismissal of his appeal (Annexure P-6).
He has also prayed for grant of consequential benefits.
2.
Facts of the case show that the petitioner had joined service as Constable in the Police Department of the Government of Haryana on 17,1981.
In the year 1992, he was posted at Police Lines, Kurukshetra.
By an order dated 381992 of the Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra, he was suspended.
At the same time disciplinary inquiry was ordered against him.
A chargesheet was served upon the petitioner by the Inquiry Officer with the allegation that he had not reported for duty at the residence of Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra, had come to the Police Lines after consuming alcohol and had misbehaved with the senior Officer.
It was also alleged that he was carrying a small knife.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report (Annexure P-1) holding the petitioner guilty of charges levelled against him.
The Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra, accepted the report of the Inquiry Officer and issued show-cause notice dated 25.1.1993 proposing dismissal of the petitioner from service.
Petitioner filed reply dated 821993 and after considering the same, the disciplinary authority passed the order dated 25.2.1993 dismissing the petitioner from service.
Against the order of dismissal from service, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General, Ambala Range, Ambala.
That appeal has been dismissed vide order dated 551993.
A revision-cum-mercy petition filed by the petitioner has also been dismissed on 131994.
3.
The petitioner has assailed the enquiry proceedings as well as the order of punishment on the ground that the Inquiry Officer did not comply with the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as no opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses was given to him and he was not allowed to lead evidence in defence.
Order of punishment has been challenged on the ground of violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, which according to the petitioner, are applicable to the employee of the State of Haryana in the police department.
Appellate order has been challenged on the ground that it does not contain reasons.
On merits of the charges levelled against him, the petitioner has pleaded that the whole case was made up against him because he had expressed his inability to give duty at the residence of the Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra, on account of illness.
Petitioner has denied the allegation of having consumed alcohol by saying that he had in fact taken Ayurvedic medicine due to illness.
4.
Writ petition has been opposed by the respondents, who have pleaded that the petitioner had absented from duty when he was posted as guard at the residence of the Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra, on 2971992.
On 3071992, the petitioner visited Police Lines, Kurukshetra.
He was under the influence of liquor and he abused Sub Inspector Gian Chand.
When challenged by the Sub Inspector, he ran away but was subsequently apprehended.
He was got medically examined.
The doctor opined that the petitioner had consumed liquor.
A regular departmental enquiry was held and even though the petitioner was given several notices, he absented from the departmental proceedings.
This compelled the Inquiry Officer to take proceedings against him ex parte.
Respondents have further pleaded that after due consideration of the entire matter, the disciplinary authority held the petitioner guilty of gravest acts of misconduct and dismissed him from service for proved charge of misconduct.
The appellate authority has dealt with various contentions raised by the petitioner in his appeal and has, passed a reasoned order dismissing his appeal.
5.
Although several contentions have been advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner but we do not consider it necessary to deal with all of them because, in our opinion, the impugned order of punishment is liable to be quashed on the short ground that the disciplinary authority has not complied with the mandate of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (Volume 11).
This Rule reads as under:  "162 Dismissal  Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such as award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
6.
This rule can appropriately be divided into two parts.
The first part consists of the cases in which the punishment of dismissal can be awarded.
Such punishment can be awarded where the employee is found guilty of the gravest acts of misconduct or where the cumulative effect of the continued misconduct of the employee proves his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The second part imposes a duty on the competent authority to take into consideration the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension before dismissing him.
Thus, before a competent authority can exercise power under rule 162 of the Rules, it is imperative for such an authority to record a finding that the employee is guilty of gravest acts of misconduct or that he is guilty of continued misconduct which proves his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
Absence of such a finding will lead to a conclusion that the competent authority has not applied its mind to the nature of misconduct before passing the order of punishment, It will also lead to a conclusion that the competent authority has not taken into consideration the service record of the delinquent employee before imposing the penalty.
7.
In State of Punjab v. Ram Singh, 1992(3) SCT 448(SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2188, the Supreme Court held that :  Before awarding it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
8.
Their Lordships proceeded further to hold that the word `act' would include singular `act' as well, and colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
By way of illustration, their Lordship pointed out that a person who may have put in 29 years of unblemished service but in the 30th year he commits defalcation of public money or fabricates false records to conceal misappropriation can be said to have committed gravest act of misconduct.
The Supreme Court further held that cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service is a distinct ground for exercise of power under rule 162 of the Rules.
9.
In State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SCT 123 P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174, a Division Bench of this Court made a reference to some of its earlier judgments and held :  "It is essential for the punishing authority to apply its mind and to record a specific finding as to whether the conduct of the delinquent official which has been complained of is of such a grave nature that it must lead inflexibly to his dismissal."
10.
In Bhagwat Parsad v. Inspector General of Police and others, 1967 SLR 807, this Court held that the word 'misconduct' used in the rule has to be construed in the context of the word simplicitor.
The Court held that gravest act of misconduct while not being capable of being put in a strait-jacket or confined to a definition must, however, relate to an action which is of the utmost gravity and grossly flagrant.
It implies a matter of utmost seriousness.
11.
If we examine the impugned order of punishment in the light of the principle laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court.
It becomes clear that though the disciplinary authority has held the petitioner guilty of gravest act of misconduct, it has not adverted to the service record of the petitioner before imposing the extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
The disciplinary authority has also not considered the question as to whether the petitioner could be awarded a lesser penalty like compulsory retirement.
It is not altogether insignificant to note that by the time order of dismissal was passed against the petitioner, he had completed almost 12 years of service and it is his specific case that during the period of 12 years, no punishment had been awarded to him and no adverse report had been made against him.
Clean record of 12 years of service could not have altogether been ignored by the disciplinary authority while imposing the extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
12.
This non-consideration of the past record of the petitioner and non- application of mind to the provisions of rule 162 by the disciplinary authority has resulted in injustice to the petitioner and therefore the order of punishment deserves to be quashed.
13.
Insofar as the appellate order is concerned, we are convinced that the appellate authority has passed a reasoned order and the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the appellate authority has not given reasons for rejecting the appeal filed by the petitioner, is without substance.
However, once we have held that the order of punishment passed by the disciplinary authority is contrary to law, the order passed by the appellate authority confirming the order of punishment is also liable to be quashed.
14.
We are not altogether unmindful of the fact that requirement of discipline in police forces is greater than ordinary civil servants and there is every justification for enforcing discipline among the police personnel with greater vigour.
However, while awarding punishment to the members of such force, the competent authority cannot be altogether oblivious of the constant of the service in the police department and the fact that there is a growing tendency in the people to consume liquor.
Of course, it will be for the disciplinary authority to determine as to whether a singular act of consuming liquor by the police personnel coupled with his misbehaviour with the Sub-Inspector would still be a ground for imposing the extreme penalty on the petitioner or some more humane or compassionate approach can be adopted for awarding a lesser punishment to him.
15.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders (Annexures P-4 and P-6) are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service.
The disciplinary authority shall, however, be at liberty to pass fresh order.
But before doing so, it should give an opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.