SS Sudhalkar, J - This Letters Patent Appeal arises out of the judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 10971 of 988 given by learned Single Judge, who had allowed the petition.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment dated 251991, respondents No. 1 to 3 have preferred this Letters Patent Appeal before this Court.
2. the contentions of the petitioners i.e. the present respondent are that he is working as Branch Manager in the State Bank of Patiala, Mataur, District Jind.
In 1987, he was promoted as Officer Junior Management Grade Scale-I The next promotion from the said post is the Middle Management Grade Scale-II (in short MMGS-II).
He contends that the promotions to all grades in the Bank are to be made in accordance with the policy laid down by the Board or the Executive Committee in accordance with the guidelines formulated by the State Bank from time to time.
3.
A promotion policy was framed by the Bank vide circular No. 68 dated 561985 and according to the policy, there were two channels of promotions i.e. (i) seniority channel and (ii) merit channel.
The petitioner was competing in the merit channel.
All Officers of Junior Management Grade Scale-I having six years of service in the Bank as on 111984 were eligible to compete and they were to appear in a written test and an interview.
The petitioner contends that the promotions in the merit channel were to be given effect from 181984.
He further contends that he was fully eligible to compete for the promotion to MMGS-II under Merit Channel on 111984.
A written test for the promotion was held on 1881985 and the interview was held on 21121985.
The petitioner was selected for promotion being higher on merit but his result was kept in a sealed cover as per `sealed cover Vacancies Procedure'.
According to the said procedure, the cases of all eligible officers are to be considered for promotions including the officers of following categories at par with other officers :  (i) Officers who have been placed under suspension; (ii) Officers against whom disciplinary proceedings are in progress; and (iii) Officers against whom disciplinary proceedings have been contemplated.
The results of any of the above-mentioned category of officers is required to be kept under sealed cover and it can be opened only upon the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings against the concerned officer and if the officer is exonerated, then the sealed cover is to be opened and the result is to be given effect retrospectively but if there is an imposition of penalty, then the result kept in sealed cover is not to be given effect.
4.
The petitioner contends that on 181984, the date with effect from which the promotions were to be made, he was neither suspended nor any disciplinary proceedings were in progress against him nor any such proceedings were contemplated against him.
However, the bank had kept the result of the petitioner under `sealed cover' on the ground that on the relevant date, the disciplinary proceedings had been contemplated against him.
This plea, according to the petitioner, is baseless and against the record.
The petitioner contends that for the first time, the disciplinary authority i.e. the original respondent No. 2 issued a charge-sheet dated 2271987 against the petitioner and it was regarding the alleged irregularities committed by the petitioner from 2191981 to 921985.
The covering letter had a mention regarding the proposed inquiry.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply on 3181987.
However, on 12.1.1988, the Competent Authority had found the reply unsatisfactory and decided to hold a departmental inquiry on the charges contained in the charge-sheet dated 2271987.
The petitioner ultimately was found guilty of only one charge and a penalty of reduction of the basic pay by two stages was awarded vide order dated 3181988.
The petitioner contends that his result was arbitrarily and illegally kept in `sealed cover'.
5.
On 22101988, the petitioner was informed that his representation was decided against him and it was mentioned in the letter that though the name of the petitioner was recommended for the promotion by the interview committee, the result was kept in `sealed cover' because the disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against the petitioner on 2491985 and since the disciplinary proceedings ended with the infliction of penalty, the recommendation of the Interview Committee could not be given effect to as per the policy.
The petitioner has, therefore, filed the said writ petition which was allowed by the learned Single Judge and the impugned order rejecting the petitioner's representation was quashed and it was declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been promoted to Middle Management Grade Scale-II with effect from August 1, 1984 and that he shall be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary.
He was also held entitled to costs of Rs. 3,000/-.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment, respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed this appeal before this Court.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
It was argued on behalf of the appellants that the judgment of learned Single Judge deserves to be set aside in view of the fact that the departmental proceedings were contemplated against the petitioner when the question of promotion was being considered and, therefore, the department was justified in adopting the `sealed cover procedure' and not given effect to the promotion after the completion of the disciplinary proceedings which resulted in imposition of penalty on the petitioner.
8.
In the Judgment in New Bank of India v. NP Sehgal and another, 1991(2) SCT 270 (SC) : JT 1991(1) SC 498, which was also cited before the learned Single Judge, it was held that even if disciplinary action is in process against an officer of the appellant-Bank, that would not entitle the appellant-Bank to exclude from consideration for promotion the officer concerned if he is otherwise entitled to be so considered and that the only right given to the appellant in such cases is that if such an officer is otherwise found fit for promotion and selected for promotion, that promotion has to be withheld until the officer is exonerated from the charges, and that if such an officer is exonerated from the charges, promotion will have to be given effect to from the date on which he was otherwise due but for the disciplinary action.
9.
However, it is also held in the said case that when the promotion was granted, there could be no question of condonation of the earlier acts of misconduct by reason of this promotion and the charge-sheet submitted against respondent and the disciplinary proceedings pursuant to the said charge-sheet cannot be said to be bad in law and cannot be interfered with on the ground of condonation.
10.
The learned Single Judge has taken a view that there was no option but to hold that the petitioner's promotion could not be withheld after his having been found suitable and that the rules quoted in the said judgment provided for withholding the promotion until the officer was exonerated from the charges.
This principle helps the petitioner-respondent so far as it mentioned that till the petitioner is exonerated, the result regarding his promotion has to be kept in sealed cover.
The later part of the judgment regarding the question of condonation of the earlier act of misconduct is not relevant so far as the present appeal is concerned.
11.
Another case cited before us is that of Shiv Kumar Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board reported in AIR 1988 SC 1673.
However, it deals with the question of seniority and, therefore, we do not enter into the merit of this case as the facts and the law laid down in it are not relevant for the decision of the present case.
Suffice it to say that three years after completion of the probationary period satisfactorily, a minor penalty of stoppage of one increment without any future effect was imposed on an employee.
He was confirmed on the post after one year and was placed below his juniors in the seniority list.
12.
In the case of State of Madhya Pradesh and another v. Syed Naseem Zahir and others, 1993(1) SCT 262 (SC) : 1992 (5) SLR 618, it was held by the Supreme Court that if an employee is completely exonerated, the `sealed cover' shall be opened and if the recommendation is in his favour, he shall be notionally promoted with effect from the date when a person junior to him was promoted.
It is further held that in case the respondent is punished in the proceedings, then action would be taken in accordance with the guidelines as laid down by the Supreme Court in Jankiraman's case.
13.
Jankiraman's case is the case of Union of India etc. etc. v. KV Jankiraman etc. etc. reported in 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : JT 1991(3) SC 527.
Various aspects are considered in that case.
It was held that in case of complete exoneration of an employee, he has to be given the benefits of salary of the higher post along with the other benefits from the date he would have normally been promoted but for the disciplinary action.
14.
Considering another aspect, it has been held in that case that even when the penalty imposed on the employee is of reduction in rank, the promotion cannot be given to him from the original date.
It has been held that for the same reasons, an employee cannot be rewarded by promotion as a matter of course even if the penalty is other than that of the reduction in rank.
15.
However, amongst the aspects considered by the Supreme Court in dealing with the various cases decided in that judgment, an important factor which would go to the root of the present case before us can be found in the discussion of the case in S.L.P.
(Civil) No. 11680 of 1991 on page 541.
In that case, the Departmental Promotion Committee met in the year 1988.
The employee was not given promotion because of the departmental proceedings which were pending against him.
It was for the first time in 1990 that the employee was served with a memorandum asking him to explain in respect of certain alleged acts of misconduct.
He sent a reply for the same on 1851990.
It is also observed in the said judgment that till 111991, no charge-sheet was served upon the employee.
However, 12 persons junior to him were promoted by an order dated April 16, 1990.
The Tribunal in that case had directed the employer to open the sealed cover and if the result shows that the DPC had found the employee fit for promotion to the post of Commissioner of Income Tax, to give effect to the said recommendation.
16.
Similar also are the facts in Civil Appeal No. 3018 of 1987 discussed at page 538 of the said judgment.
17.
Considering the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in such cases, we have now to see whether these facts are applicable to the present case or not.
In the present case, undisputed facts are, as mentioned above, that the charge-sheet was given on 2271987 while the written test and interviews were carried out in the months of August and December, 1985.
May be the employer must have contemplated the disciplinary proceedings but no charge-sheet was served on the respondent-petitioner at the time when the promotional process took place.
18.
Looking to the facts of the present case and applying the principles laid down in the above mentioned cases along with Jankiraman's case (supra), we find that the appellants were not justified in adopting the `sealed cover procedure' when the charge-sheet was not served on the petitioner-respondent.
19.
The learned Single Judge has mentioned that ``it is no doubt correct that the ultimate charges levelled against the petitioner on July 22, 1987 were substantially the same as those contained in the proposal at Annexure R-3, the fact remains that an opinion to issue a charge-sheet had not been formed in September, 1985.
At best, there was a proposal to proceed further and a decision to forward the papers to the `disciplinary action cell' had been taken."
We find no reason to disturb this finding in view of the various Supreme Court cases discussed above.
To repeat, the disciplinary proceedings had not started against the petitioner-respondent on the dates when the written test and the interviews for promotion were carried out and the promotional process was going on.
The subsequent charge-sheet, therefore, gave no right to the appellants to put the result regarding his promotion in sealed cover.
As a result we are in complete agreement with the decision of learned Single Judge and, therefore, find no reason to interfere with the same.
This Letters Patent Appeal, therefore, fails and is dismissed with costs.