Ashok Kumar Mathur, CJ - This is an appeal directed against the order passed by the learned Single Judge in a writ petition No. 1555 of 1999 dated 6121999 filed by the petitioner Madan Mohan Ghosh.
The learned Single Judge set aside the order of the Ist Industrial Tribunal whereby the Tribunal permitted Mr. Amar Roy, an advocate, the President of the Employees' Association to represent the employer Company before the Tribunal.
2.
The petitioner workman raised an Industrial Dispute with regard to his illegal termination by the employer and accordingly the matter was referred to the Industrial Tribunal for its adjudication by appropriate Government.
The petitioner was represented by Sri SN Roy Chowdhury, General Secretary, Motor Workers' Union of which the petitioner was a member.
An objection was raised on behalf of the petitioner against the representation of legal practitioner Sri Amar Roy to conduct the case on behalf of the respondent/company.
Petitioner workman filed an application for calling some documents with regard to the existence of the Association and the representation being made by Mr. Amar Roy.
It was contended that Mr. Amar Roy was neither any officer of the Company nor any member of this Association.
Therefore, he cannot represent the Company.
The application was rejected by the learned Judge, Ist Tribunal by his order dated 11.10.1999 had permitted Mr. Amar Roy to represent the employers before Tribunal, therefore, aggrieved by the order the petitioner/workman filed the present writ petition.
3.
The learned Single Judge after reviewing the whole matter came to the conclusion that Mr. Amar Roy cannot be permitted to represent the Employers' Association because of sub-section (3) of the Section 36 as Sri Roy is a lawyer and he is neither a member of the Company nor the officer of the Employer's Association.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and accordingly set aside the order of the Tribunal.
Aggrieved against the order passed by the learned Single Judge present mandamus appeal has been preferred by the employer.
We have heard the learned Counsel of the parties and pursued the record.
The whole controversy centres round to the interpretation of Section 36(1) and (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to Act).
4.
In order to appreciate contention raised by the parties it will be useful to reproduce section 36 of the Act which reads as follows :  "36(1).
A workman who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) any member of the executive or other office-bearer of a registered trade union of which he is a member.
(b) any member of the executive or other office-bearer of the federation of trade unions to which the trade union referred to in clause (a) is affiliated; (c) where the worker is not a member of any trade union by any member of the executive or other office-bearer of any trade union connected with, or by any other workman employed in the industry in which the worker is employed and authorised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) An employer who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by - (a) an officer of an association of employers of which he is a member; (b) an officer of a federation of association of employers to which the association referred to in clause (a) is affiliated; (c) where the employer is not a member of any association of employers, by an officer of any association or employers connected with or by any other employer engaged in, the industry in which the employer is engaged and authorised in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation proceedings under this Act or in any proceeding before a Court.
(4) In any proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal a party to a dispute may be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding and with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be."
5.
A perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 36 clearly lays down that workman can be represented by any member or officer-bearer of trade union or any executive member or officer-bearer of the federation in case the person is not a member of the trade union then by any other member of the executive or other office-bearer of any trade union or by a workman employer in his own industry.
The employer is similarly given a representation under sub-section (2) of Section 36 by any officer of the association of the employers or any federation or any other officer of an association of employers connected with or by any employer engaged in an industry in which the employer is engaged and authorised by such employer.
Therefore, the enactment has given an equal representation to both the parties that is the workman as well as the employer.
6.
In the present case, the petitioner workman was being represented by one of the officer-bearers of the trade union, Sri SN Roy Chowdhury, General Secretary of Motor Workers' Union of which the petitioner is a member.
Likewise the employer also authorised Sri Amar Roy the President of the Employers' association known as the Assam, West Bengal, Orissa and Bihar Employers' Association (hereinafter referred to Association) to represent before Tribunal.
This was objected by the workman and seriously doubted that whether such association exists and the President is a member or not.
7.
The order was also passed by the Tribunal for submission of the original record of the association.
However, no such record was produced but the Tribunal on the basis of the material placed before it came to the conclusion that the said association is a duly registered association having Registration No. ES : 4135 of 1960-61 under the Act 21 of West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to Act of 61).
Therefore, the Tribunal did not make any further enquiry on the subject and felt satisfied that the association is in existence and did not dispute that Sri Amar Roy is the President of the association.
It was also accepted that the M/s. Infer (India) Ltd. is a bona fide member of this association.
8.
In this connection it may be relevant to mention here that section 36 of the Act had come up for interpretation before Apex Court in the case of Paradip Port Trust v. Their Workmen, 1976(II) LLJ 40, wherein it was observed as follows :  "If a legal practitioner is appointed as an officer by a company or a corporation and is in their pay and under their control and is not a practising advocate, the fact that he was earlier a legal practitioner or has a law degree will not stand in the way of the company being represented by him.
Similarly, if a legal practitioner is an officer of an association of employers there is nothing in section 36(4) to prevent him from appearing before a Tribunal.
Again, an officer-bearer of a trade union or a member of its executive, even though he is a legal practitioner, will be entitled to represent the workman before the Tribunal under Section 36(1) in the former capacity.
The legal practitioner in these two cases will appear in the capacity of an officer of the association in the case of an employer and in the capacity of an officer-bearer of the union in the case of workmen and not in the capacity of a legal practitioner.
The fact that a person is a legal practitioner will not affect the position if the qualifications specified in sections 36(1) and 36(2) are fulfilled by him."
9.
Therefore, it is evident that any office-bearer of a trade union though he is a legal practitioner can represent workmen likewise a legal practitioner if he is an officer of an association of the employers can also appear before the Tribunal.
The Apex Court has interpreted the provision of Section 36(1) and 36(2) and has taken the view that irrespective of fact that incumbent is a legal practitioner will not affect his position if the qualifications specified in sections 36(1) and 36(2) are fulfilled.
10.
As fact stands that Mr. Amar Roy is the President of the association of the employers, therefore, he is entitled to appear in these proceedings on behalf of the employer.
The whole idea behind preventing the advocates appearing in these proceedings before Tribunal is that the matter should be sorted out between the employee and its employers, on one to one basis but if any advocate is an officer of the employers' association or any officer-bearer of the trade union then just because they are legal practitioners that would not affect their position for appearing before the Tribunal.
11.
In the present case, the question is Sri Amar Roy who is the President of Employers' Association is "officer" or not.
A controversy is sought to be raised that the `officer' does not include the President of association.
This does not appear to be correct interpretation because the dictionary meaning of the word `officer' includes any person who holds the office.
The expression `officer' as has been defined in Concise Oxford Dictionary means "holder of pubic, civil or ecclesiastical office, sovereign's servant or minister appointed or elected functionary."
Similarly, in Webster's New World Dictionary (2nd Concise Edition) `officer' means "anyone holding an office or position of authority in a Government, business, society, etc." Therefore, any person who is holding the office of any society or association or authority can be included in the expression `officer'.
12.
Our attention was also invited to the definition of office-bearer in section 2(iii) in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which reads as under : "Office-bearer" in relation to a trade union includes any member of the executive thereof but does not include an auditor."
Similarly, our attention was also invited to definition of officer as defined under Section 2(e) of the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 whereunder this association is registered which reads "officer" means a member of the Governing Body, the President, the Secretary or any other office-bearer of a society and includes also an employee of the society whose work is not of a purely ministerial nature."
Therefore, Sri Amar Roy being the President (officer) of the association is competent to represent the employer before the Tribunal.
13.
The learned Single Judge has referred to a decision of the case of Kalinga Studios Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal and others, 1994(II) LLJ 108 and it was observed as under :  "While examining the terms of the relationship between the legal practitioner concerned and the association of the company, of which he claims to be a member, the case has to be decided on its own facts.
The legal practitioner must be a regular officer of the employer's association.
If, on facts, a legal practitioner is found to be a regular officer nothing short of an attempt to circumvent the provisions of Section 36(4) would disqualify him from representing as a member of his association."
Therefore, what is required is that one has to find out whether the incumbent representative is member of an association or not.
It is essentially a question of fact and in the present case as already mentioned above the Tribunal was satisfied that Sri Amar Roy was the President of the association irrespective of the fact that he was a lawyer.
Since he was a President of this association therefore, he was entitled to appear on behalf of the employers.
The decision of the Orissa High Court in no way lays down the proposition contrary to what has been already laid down by the Apex Court.
14.
Our attention was also invited to a decision of the Gujarat High Court by a Single Bench judgment in JB Transport Company and others v. Shankarlal @ Mavaram Nathuji Patel, FLR 2000(84) 353 : 2000(2) SCT 112 (Gujarat).
In this case Sri SB Sharma, who was a General Secretary of Akhil Gujarat Employers' Association was representing the petitioner/employer being a member of the Akhil Gujarat Employers' Association in his capacity as an officer of the said association.
This was objected before the Tribunal and Tribunal upheld the objection, same was upheld by the learned Single Judge of Gujarat High Court.
However, with great respect we do not agree with the view taken by the learned Judge.
15.
Any officer of the employers' association can represent like any office-bearer of the trade union representing the workmen.
A distinction was sought to be made between an officer and an office-bearer.
The expression officer under Section 36 has been used in the context of the employer and `office-bearer' in context of a trade union.
The expression `officer' will have to be read in the context where it has been used.
But the same meaning will have to be given to expression `officer' in the context of the trade union or in context of the employers' association.
When the officer appears in context of the employer it means a person who is office-holder of the association and when the `officer' appears in terms of the trade union it is office-bearer of any trade union be it a President or Secretary.
Therefore, with great respect we do not agree with the view taken by the learned Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court.
16.
Our attention was also invited to a decision of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, 1993(II) CHN 1, where it was held that members of the executive committee of employers' association do not come within the expression `officer' as provided under Section 36(2) of the said Act.
It appears that the attention of the Hon'ble Court was not invited to a definition of an office-bearer as defined under Section 2(iii) of the Industrial Disputes Act where the office-bearer in relation to trade union includes a member of the executive committee thereof but does not include auditor.
This definition was introduced by the amendment of the Act by the Act 36 of 1994.
However, in the present case we are not concerned with the member of the executive committee of the association, we are concerned here with the President of the association.
Therefore, this case also does not provide us any assistance.
17.
Our attention was also invited a decision of Rajasthan High Court in the case of Bhawani Art Handicrafts v. Gulab Singh and others, 1999(82) FLR 781.
In the above case the learned Single Judge held that an Honorary Member or Honorary Additional Secretary of the employers' association cannot be permitted.
The learned Judge found that the so-called Honorary Secretary is nothing but a subterfuge and therefore it was held that such person is not entitled to represent the employers' association before the Labour Court.
The decision in that case essentially centered round the question of fact that a subterfuge was employed by association by associating a lawyer as Honorary Additional Secretary of the executive committee.
The learned Judge upheld the objection on facts but that is not the case here.
18.
However, as against this the Karnataka High Court in the case of Hotel Ashok v. Addl.
Labour Court, Bangalore and another, Vol. 64 FLR 1, has taken the view that an officer of the employers' associate can represent the association before the court.
Similarly, Single Bench of this court in the case of Globe Theatre Pvt. Ltd. v. Second Labour Court, WB and others, FLR 1987(55) P. 443, UC Banerjee, J (as he then was) has taken the view that the Vice President of the employers' association can represent the employers' association before the Tribunal.
Similar view has taken by the Bombay High Court in the case of A.D. Shastri v. DL Patil, 1975(1) LLJ 458 (Bom.)
and also same view has taken by the Rajasthan High Court in the case of Daduwalla and Co v. Industrial Tribunal, 1959(1) LLJ 75  19.
Hence as a result of above discussion we are of the opinion that the view taken by the learned Single Judge is not correct.
We are satisfied that Sri Amar Roy is a member of the employers' association and he is competent to represent the employers' association before the Tribunal.
We set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and dismiss the writ petition.
No orders as to costs.
Petition dismissed.