NK Sodhi, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is directed against the award of the Labour Court, Hissar dated 30111992 whereby the termination of services of the workman-respondent was held to be illegal and he was reinstated with continuity of service and back wages with effect from 2831989.
2.
General Manger, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa appointed the workman as a helper on daily wages on 1111981 and it is alleged that the latter absented himself from duty with effect from 16.6.1984 although his appointment had been extended upto 30111984.
The workman, on the other hand, claimed that he worked upto 111984 whereafter his services were terminated without notice and without payment of any retrenchment compensation.
On a dispute raised by him the same was referred for adjudication to the Labaur Court-respondent.
After recording evidence of the parties and on a consideration thereof the Labour Court found that services of the workman were terminated in June 1984 without any notice to him or any enquiry being held by the management.
The order of termination was, therefore, held to be illegal.
Since the workman did not raise the dispute till March 1989, he was directed to be reinstated with back wages only from the date on which he served the demand notice.
It is this award that is now under challenge in this petition.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties and after perusing the impugned award I find no merit in the petition.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioners management did not hold any enquiry against the workman before terminating his services and nor was he paid any retrenchment compensation in terms of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court was, therefore, right in declaring the order of termination as illegal, Mr. Bal, appearing for the workman stated that his client will not claim back wages as awarded by the Labour Court provided the management takes him back on duty.
In view of the statement made by the learned counsel for the workman the award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the workman will not be entitled to the back wages.
The direction to the management to reinstate the workman is, however, upheld and it is further directed to implement the award by reinstating the workman at the earliest but not later than one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid manner leaving the parties to bear their own costs.