MP Singh, J - The entire philosophy of service jursiprudence is based on achieving the efficiency in public service.
In order to generate efficiency and better output from its employees, the Government has to provide promotional avenues which has been recognised as an incidence of service.
Stagnation kills the desire to work.
It affects the total output of the employee.
Who suffers then ?
Not only the Government, but the common man who is directly concerned with the working of the employee.
In order to have good result the promotional avenues have to be provided by the Government.
It will generate a desire to do more work.
2.
Following are the relevant facts.
Petitioners have been directly recruited to the post of Laboratory Assistants in the Office of Directorate of Geology and Mining (UP), Lucknow in the pay scale at 950-1500 revised from time to time.
Their dates of appointment are as follows:  VB Singh 08.01.1969 C.N.
Verma 13.10.1970 Ram Naresh Singh 02021974 Ram Niwas Yadav 09.02.1974 Jagdish Prasad 20.07.1978 Jaswant Singh 21.02.1990 3.
Laboratory Assistants working in Geological Survey of India (GSI) which is under the Central Government, perform the similar nature of work.
The educational qualifications require for being eligible for appointment to the post of Laboratory Assistants both in the office of the opposite party No. 2 and GSI are the same, i.e., Higher Secondary or equivalent examination in science group and two years experience in the scientific laboratory.
These are the essential qualifications whereas desirable qualifications are B.Sc.
Degree with Chemistry.
But their grade is 1200-2040.
4.
There is no promotional avenue for the petitioners whereas the Laboratory Assistants working in GSI have two further promotional posts, one as Junior Technical Assistant and the other as Senior Technical Assistant.
Petitioners have been appointed as Laboratory Assistants in particular pay scale and will retire while working in the same post.
5.
Being dissatisfied with the service conditions the petitioners made representation on 16121991 to the Chief Secretary through the Director, Directorate of Geology and Mining.
6.
The Director examined the demand of the petitioners and vide his letter dated 311992 made recommendation to the Deputy Director General, GSI, Northern Region, Lucknow for considering the case of the petitioners for creating promotional avenues and for granting parity in the pay scale of 1200-2040 but nothing was done.
7.
Petitioners again made another similar representation on 2211992 in the form of a reminder.
8.
A letter was sent on 2911992 by the opposite party No. 3 to the Joint Secretary, Industries pointing out the disparity in the pay scales of Laboratory Assistants working in his office and those Laboratory Assistants working in the office of GSI It was also highlighted that there were no promotional avenues available to the petitioners and recommendation was made for granting pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 to them.
In spite of the recommendations made by the opposite party No. 3 as far back as on 2911992 nothing has been done so far.
The opposite party No. 3 vide its letter dated 10.7.1992 has informed the petitioners that their representations dated 16121991 and 2911992 have been forwarded to the State Government for necessary action.
9.
The admitted position is that the nature of duties and functions of the petitioner as Laboratory Assistant are the same as their counter parts working in the GSI The educational qualifications are also the same.
Then what is the justification for having disparity in the pay scale and denial of promotional avenues to them ?
10.
Two questions arise for consideration in this case :-  (i) Whether the Government is under obligation to create promotional avenues for the petitioners ?
(ii) Are the petitioners also entitled to get the same pay scale which is being paid to their counterparts working as Laboratory Assistants in the GSI under the Central Government ?
Regarding the claim of promotional avenues the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Ms. OZ Hussain v. Union Of India reported in 1990 (Suppl) SC 688 : AIR 1990 SC 311 has held that "provisions for promotion increase efficiency of the public service while stagnation reduces efficiency and makes the service ineffective.
Promotion is thus a normal incidence of service....
In a welfare state it is necessary that there should be an efficient public service and, therefore, it would have been the obligation on the Ministry of Health to attend to the representations of the Council and its manners and provide promotional avenue for this category of officers".
11.
A similar view has already been taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Raghunath Prasad Singh v. Secretary, Home (Police) Department, Government of Bihar reported in 1988 (Suppl) SCC 519 : AIR 1988 SC 1033 wherein it has been held (at p. 1034 of AIR) :-  "Reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of public service.
That generates efficiency in service and fosters the appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of promotional proposals, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly."
In this case also the Government was directed to make provision for promotional opportunities.
12.
In other case reported in (1989) 4 SCC 635 : AIR 1989 SC 1972, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research v. KGS Bhatt, the question of promotional avenue was considered and approved.
13.
The Supreme Court issued directions to frame a set of appropriate rules providing suitable promotional avenues.
It also directed the Government to examine the tenability of the claim of equal pay scale within a limited period.
14.
In view of the judgments of Supreme Court referred to in the preceding paragraphs I am of the view that the petitioners are also entitled for promotional avenues.
By doing so the Government will not only give relief to the petitioner but would be getting a better and efficient service from them.
15.
The second point relates to the question of similar pay for similar work.
The law is well settled now.
I needed not make the judgment unnecessarily lengthy by discussing various cases on this point.
The concept of similar pay for similar work has received the seal of the Supreme Court holding that a person is entitled to similar pay if he is doing similar work.
If the Laboratory Assistants working in GSI are also doing the similar work as is being done by the petitioners and their minimum educational qualification is also the same, then why the disparity in their pay scale?
The contention of the learned Standing Counsel was that the employees of the UP Government cannot claim parity with the employees of the Central Government.
Except raising this bare objection Smt. Asthana has not placed before me any material to substantiate her contention.
16.
Challenging the discrimination the petitioners have already filed two representations, one on 16121991 and the other on 311992.
More than two years have passed but the Government has taken no steps so far.
If they were rejected, then the petitioners would have been in a position to tell the Court the reason for the same.
They are absolutely in dark, though the Director has already made recommendation to the Joint Secretary, Industries on 2911992 justifying the claim of the petitioners.
Inaction on the part of the Government has resulted in grave injustice to them.
Why should the Government sleep over the matter ?
The Government machinery is expected to act in such a way as to infuse confidence in its employees.
17.
The Court would be justified in putting a big question to the Government as to why the representations have not been disposed of so far.
Were they not even worth drawing the attention of the Government ?
Somebody has to be blamed for this inaction but who is that somebody ?
This tells a very sad commentary on the working of the Government.
The files go on moving from one desk to another in the office of the Government without any net result.
The apparent reason for inaction on the part of the Government appears to be that nobody wants to own the responsibility.
Probably the concerned officer is afraid of criticism.
So he adopts the principles of `no work, no criticism', `play safe', ultimately who suffers, the poor employee.
18.
Accordingly I allow the writ petition and direct the opposite party No. 1 to decide the representations dated 16121991 and 311992 in the light of the discussion done by me, by a speaking order within a period of one month from the date of filing of a certified copy of this order before him.
I hope and trust that the question of creating promotional avenues and removal of disparity will receive his serious attention.
Order accordingly.