Jawahar Lal Gupta,J - Does ad hoc service count for seniority?
This is the short question that arises in this petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Employment Officer (Vocational Guidance) Vide order dated October 23, 1969.
This appointment was on purely temporary basis and could be terminated "at any time without any notice or assigning any reason."
The petitioner's services were actually terminated vide order dated September 13, 1972.
On July 9, 1973, the petitioner was again offered appointment on a purely temporary basis for a period of six months or "till such time a candidate recommended by the Punjab Public Service Commission reports for duty in your place whichever is earlier."
On July 26, 1982, the petitioner was regularly appointed through the Punjab Public Service Commission.
In pursuance to this order, the petitioner joined duty on September 3, 1982.
On July 14, 1993, a tentative seniority list was circulated in which the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No.56.
This seniority was assigned to the petitioner on the basis that he had jointed service on September 3, 1982.
The petitioner avers that he represented against it.
Since no action was taken by the respondents, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner prays that "a writ in the nature of mandamus may be issued thereby directing the respondents to grant him the benefit of service with effect from October 24, 1969 after condoning the break of service from October 4, 1972 to July 12, 1973."
3.
In response to the notice of motion issued by this court, the respondents have filed a written statement.
It has been interalia averred that the period of ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining his seniority.
4.
We have heard Mr. Ravi Kapur, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS Kang, Deputy Advocate General (Punjab) for the respondents.
5.
The conditions of service governing the petitioner are laid down in the rules, called `The Punjab Employment (Class I & II) Service Rules, 1963' (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
The method of recruitment to the post of Assistant Employment Officer (Vocational Guidance) has been laid down in Rule 9.
It can either be filled up by transfer or deputation of an official working in any other department of the Government or by direct appointment.
Under Rule 13, the seniority of the members of the service has to be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in the service.
It has been further provided that "in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed."
6.
Admittedly, direct recruitment to the post of Assistant Employment Officer is made as a result of competitive selection conducted by the Public Service Commission.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was appointed in accordance with the rules in the year 1982.
Prior thereto, his appointment had been made only by sending a requisition to the Employment Exchange and without giving the other eligible candidates a chance to compete.
This was an ad hoc arrangement which was to last till a person duly selected by the Public Service Commission was available.
This appointment was not in conformity with the Rules.
It was in July, 1982, that the petitioner was made an offer of appointment on regular basis.
He had joined his appointment in pursuance to this offer on September 3, 1982.
Accordingly, his seniority has been determined in accordance with the provisions of Rule 13.
The action of the respondents is apparently in conformity with the Rules.
7.
Mr. Kapur referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 SC 1607, to contend that the period of service rendered by him on ad hoc basis should be taken into consideration.
In particular, a reference was made to the conclusion recorded in sub-paras (A) & (B) of para 44 of the judgment.
Keeping in view the fact that this decision has been fully interpretted and explained by the Supreme Court in a subsequent decision in State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey & Ors., 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC) : JT 1993(2) Supreme Court 598, it is not necessary for us to examine the matter in detail.
In para 22 of the judgment, their Lordships have categorically held that "to enable seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post has to be initially appointed `according to rules'.
The corollary set out in conclusion (A), then is, that ` where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, `the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
In the present case, it is clear that the petitioner had been appointed vide order dated July 9, 1973" on a purely temporary basis for a period of six months from the date you join duty or till such time a candidate recommended by the Punjab Public Service Commission reports for duty in your place whichever is earlier."
This appointment had not been made in accordance with the Rules.
This was a purely ad hoc appointment.
According to the dictum of the Supreme Court in Aghore Nath's case (supra), the period of service rendered by a person when his appointment had not been made in accordance with the rules, cannot be taken into consideration.
Accordingly, the plea raised by the learned counsel cannot be sustained.
8.
It was then contended that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination.
It was pointed out that a number of employees, who were similarly situated, like Miss Surinder Kaur and Smt. Usha Kapur had been given the benefit of ad hoc service.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that Smt. Surinder Kaur had filed a suit.
She had claimed benefits of the ad hoc service rendered by her.
Her claim was decreed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala, Accordingly, the benefit was given to her.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioner and Smt. Surinder Kaur were not similarly placed.
Even if it was not so, we are of the considered view that a person appointed on ad hoc basis without following the procedure prescribed under the Rules cannot claim the benefit of such service for the purpose of determination of seniority and the mere fact that the department has wrongly granted the benefit to some employee, would not entitle him to claim this benefit in violation of the Rules and the law.
No other points was urged.
Accordingly, we find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed in limine.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.