MP Singh, J - This Court takes a serious view of the manner in which the State has conducted itself in Court.
After the learned counsel for the petitioners had argued the cases for sometime on 17th August, 1993.
Mr. MC Divedi, learned Standing Counsel made a request to the Court for adjournment on the ground that steps were being taken for absorption of all the petitioners.
The matter was accordingly adjourned.
It was listed on 14th September, 1993, Mr. Dwivedi again made a prayer for one month's further time for taking steps for absorption.
It was allowed.
Nothing has been done.
2.
Today when the case was taken up Mr. Dwivedi made a statement that though he has written a letter on 20th August, 1993 to the Principal Secretary, Hill Development, Government of Uttar Pradesh with a copy to the Labour Secretary and Labour Commissioner but there was no response from them.
The way in which the department has been acting was extremely unfair.
Now, the case is being disposed of on merit.
3.
This batch of writ petitions, involves identical questions of law.
Acts are almost similar.
So, it is being disposed of by a common order.
Writ Petition No. 6963 of 1992, Shri Chand and others v. State of M.P. and others, is being taken up as the leading case.
4.
Admittedly the Government of Uttar Pradesh framed a scheme in the year, 1976 known as "Bonded Labourer Rehabilitation Scheme."
5.
The Scheme was primarily framed in order to rehabilitate the bonded labourers working in the Hill region of District Deharadun, Uttar Kashi and Tehri Garhwal, subsequently extended to other districts also i.e. Banda, Ghazipur etc.  6.
Petitioner was appointed on 10.8.1979 as project worker.
It was purely a temporary appointment.
After six years he was promoted to the post of Assistant Development Officer by the Pariyojna Naideshak on 15.1.1985.
Since then he had been continuing as Assistant Development Officer.
All of a sudden, on 2911992 the impugned order of termination has been passed against him.
It was passed under the 'UP Temporary Government Servant Rules, 1975.'
In the impugned order it has nowhere been stated that the said order of termination is being passed on account of the fact that the scheme has come to an end.
This writ petition is directed against the said order.
7.
Heard Sri PC Srivastava and Ranjit Saxena, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. MC Dwivedi, on behalf of the State, who has filed only a short counter-affidavit.
In my opinion it is of no assistance for the controversy involved in this case.
8.
After the Scheme was framed by the State Government a meeting was held on 1321990 under the Chairmanship of the Labour Secretary in which all the five members of the Committee were also present.
It was decided that the post of the Project Officer shall be adjusted in consultation with the Secretary, Gram Vibhag.
9.
In another meeting, which was held on 1921991 it was decided that the retrenched employees of the Bonded Labourers Rehabilitation Scheme shall be adjusted in the Labour Department or in the Harijan and Social Welfare Department.
Instead of adjusting them in some departments, the order of termination have been passed.
10.
The case set up by the State was that the said Scheme has been completed on 29121991.
The appointments of the petitioners were made under the said scheme.
After the completion of the said scheme the petitioner ceased to have any right to continue in service.
Consequently the orders of termination have been passed.
11.
In Writ Petition No. 23359 of 1991, Dhafi Chand v. Project Director and others, the State has filed a different counter-affidavit in which it has been stated that initially on 31st May, 1991 the service of petitioners were terminated as they were no more required, but at that time still 441 bonded labours were there to be rehabilitated in Uttar Kashi and Dehradun.
12.
Admittedly the State Government had taken a decision on 26th August, 1991 that all the employees working under the Scheme should be permitted to continue in service up to 28th February, 1992.
Thereafter a Government order was issued on 3rd July, 1992 for absorption of the employees whose service stood otherwise terminated due to completion of Bonded Labourers Rehabilitation Scheme in Garhwal Region, a copy of which has been filed as Annexure No. 3 to the counter-affidavit.
13.
In view of this Government order the Government has made it clear that all the petitioners will be absorbed in service in due course.
It appears that in pursuance of this Government Order the statement was made by the learned Standing Counsel that the steps are being taken for absorption of the petitioners but on account of certain facts beyond his knowledge the absorption orders have not been passed as yet.
14.
There is no denial to the categorical statement of the petitioners made in Paragraph No. 9 of the writ petition that in Banda and Ghazipur and other districts the Bonded Labourers Rehabilitation Scheme is still in operation under the supervision of Labour Commissioner.
It is wrong to say that the said Scheme has come to an end.
The action of the opposite parties terminating the services of the petitioners amounts to breach of the undertaking given by the Government.
The action of the Government is in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as the Scheme still subsists in some districts but the argument of the learned Standing Counsel is that is has come to an end in other districts.
15.
This fact has also not been denied that most of the petitioners have become overage and they cannot be given appointment in any other department of the Government.
16.
The stand taken by the Standing Counsel was that the termination orders have been passed only on the ground that the scheme has come to an end.
The order shows something else.
It shows that the service of petitioners have been terminated under the UP Temporary Government Servants Rules, 1975.
The Government order issued for reabsorption of the petitioners has not been given effect to.
17.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner's contention was that in view of the Government Order dated 921982, whose copy has been filed as Annexure No. 1 to the rejoinder-affidavit, the petitioners are entitled for reabsorption in the government service.
In addition to that their contention was that under the Directive Principles of the State policy it was the duty of the Government to provide employment to the persons particularly to the persons who have already spent the best period of their lives while working under the said scheme.
18.
In support of his contention the learned counsel has relied upon a decision reported in C Govinda Rajulu v. The Andhra Pradesh State Construction Limited, AIR 1987 SC 1801.
In this case the services of the employees of the Corporation were sought to be terminated on account of closure of the corporation.
The Court held that the employees will be entitled to continue in service on the same terms and conditions either in the government department or in the government corporation.
19.
In another case reported in AIR 1990 SC page 1670, VL Chandra v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
It was alleged by the employees that in order to carry out the research programme and assignment of research projects the petitioners were useful for the purpose of assisting research programme.
20.
The Supreme Court while dealing with the case took a view that the petitioners should be provided employment as researchers or in any suitable alternative employment until their inclusion in a term of researchers was separately considered.
21.
Applying the ratio of these two decisions, I am of the view that the petitioners are entitled to get suitable relief from this Court inasmuch as the opposite parties have already issued a Government Order on 9th February, 1982 making it clear that those persons, who have been working in the department for three years, may be absorbed in the department as and when vacancy arises.
22.
Sri MC Dwivedi, learned Standing Counsel while contesting the case has relied upon a decision reported in Director, Institute of Management Development UP v. Smt. Pushpa Srivastava, 1992(3) SCT 742 (SC) : 1992(65) FLR 571 SC and contended that the petitioner have no right to continue in service.
The orders of termination have been validly passed find no merit in the same.
23.
In the case of Pushpa Srivastava (supra) the appointment was made on contractual basis for a fixed period.
It was an ad hoc appointment.
The Court took a view that the appointment was a term appointment and the appointee could not get any right, it came to an end automatically by the efflux of time.
24.
The order of appointment of the petitioners does not show that it was a contractual appointment or it was for a fixed period so it cannot be held that the appointment came to an end after the efflux of time.
25.
Admittedly the Scheme has not come to an end.
It still subsists in some of the districts of the State.
Mr. Dwivedi has also relied upon the decision reported in Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, 1992(1) SCT 425 (SC) : 1992 AIR SCW 616.
In that case the scope of Article 41 of the Constitution of India dealing with the directive principles of State Policy was considered.
The petitioners were given appointment under the 'Jawahar Rozgar Yajana.'
They were claiming their regularisation on the ground that they had worked for more than 240 days in a calendar year but in the instant case the petitioners are not claiming their regularisation on any such ground.
They are relying upon the government orders (whose reference has already been made in the preceding paragraph) issued from time to time or their absorption in some other department of the Government.
26.
Since the State Government has already absorbed some of the employees appointed under the said scheme the petitioners are also entitled to be absorbed in any department of the Government.
27.
Accordingly the writ petitions succeed and are allowed without any order as to costs.
The order dated 29th January, 1992 is hereby quashed.
I direct the opposite parties to pass suitable orders for absorption of the petitioners in the government departments, even if the scheme has come to an end, within a period of two months from the date of filing of a certified copy of this order before the opposite party No. 2.
Petition allowed.