GS Singhvi, J - By this order we are disposing of 14 connected petitions of which details have been given in schedule `A' appended to the judgment because almost identical facts have been set out in these petitions and a common question of law has been raised for determination by the Court.
2.
Petitioners were appointed as conductors/Adda Conductors in the service of Haryana Roadways.
In the year 1989, the Government took a decision to convert 852 posts of Adda Conductors into that of Sub Inspectors.
Thereafter different officers of the department issued orders from time to time promoting the petitioners on the post of Sub Inspectors on temporary basis.
We may make reference to one of such orders issued on 2121990 for promotion of 26 Adda Conductors to the post of Sub Inspectors.
After the petitioners had worked for about 2 years or more, order dated 4121992 (Annexure P-2) in C.W.P.
No. 16492 of 1992 came to be issued for reversion of the petitioners.
On the same date, another order annexure P-3 (in C.W.P.
No. 16492 of 1992) was issued by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana for promotion of other persons as Sub Inspectors.
In some other cases, orders of reversion were issued on 1811993.
Petitioners have challenged their reversion on the ground that when they had been promoted as Sub Inspectors on temporary basis, service record of their seniors had been looked into by the authorities and the more fact that there has been subsequent improvement in the record of senior Adda Conductors/Conductors, it was not open to the authorities of the Roadways to revert them to the lower posts.
3.
Respondents have filed replies in C.W.P.
No. 16335 of 1992 and C.W.P.
No. 2076 of 1994.
Stand taken by the respondents is that purely ad hoc and temporary promotion had been given to the petitioners.
Their promotions were clearly subject to review after the finalisation of inquiries pending against senior persons and after the inquiries pending against the senior persons were finalised, order for their promotions had to be issued.
This automatically necessitated reversion of the petitioners.
4.
Argument of learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that once the petitioners had been promoted after due consideration of the candidatures of senior persons, it was not open to the respondents to revert them merely because there was subsequent improvement in the record of the senior persons.
Shri Surya Kant, argued that record of the employees should have been looked into as on the date of vacancy and a subsequent change in the record cannot be made a ground for reverting the petitioners.
Shri Nagar who has appeared for the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 11218 of 1994.
Jaspal Singh v. State of Haryana etc, 1995(2) SCT 609 (P&H) raised additional argument that his client was promoted in compliance of the decree passed by a competent Court and, therefore, it was not open to the authorities of the Roadways to have reverted him.
He argued that by bringing about reversion of the petitioner, the respondents have indirectly violated the decree passed by the competent Court.
Shri Sibal, learned Advocate General, Haryana has, on the other hand, argued that promotions given to the petitioners were purely temporary and by way of stop gap arrangement and same were subject to review after the conclusion of departmental proceedings pending against senior persons.
He argued that soon after the finalisation of the inquiries, the respondents undertook the exercise of reconsideration of cases of senior persons and for adjusting them, petitioners had to be reverted.
5.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions and in our opinion the writ petitioners are without merit and are liable to be dismissed.
Reasons for the above conclusion are set out hereunder.
6.
A perusal of the contents of the order of promotion issued in favour of the petitioners shows that their promotions were purely temporary.
It was made clear in the orders of promotion that the same were without prejudice to the rights of the seniors whose cases were under finalisation.
It is thus more than evident that apart from being temporary in nature, promotions of the petitioners were clearly subject to the rights of the senior persons to be reconsidered for promotion on finalisation of the inquiry proceedings pending against them.
At the time when the petitioners were promoted, senior persons were facing inquiries and but for the pendency of the departmental inquiries, these senior persons would have been promoted instead of the petitioners.
On finalisation of the proceedings, the rights of the senior persons which were virtually put in abeyance get automatically revived and the respondent - Corporation had done nothing but to give what was due to the senior persons.
In fact had the senior persons approached this Court by filing a writ petition for their retrospective promotion, there was every likelihood for this Court to make an order directing the respondents to consider the cases of the senior persons from the date their juniors were promoted.
Thus when the senior persons became entitled to be promoted, juniors like the petitioners had to make room for them and we find no illegality in the impugned orders by which the petitioners have been reverted.
7.
Although learned counsel for the petitioners tried to argue that the record of senior persons still continues to be adverse, we find no justification to entertain this submission because these senior persons are not parties before us and no material has been placed by the petitioners to substantiate their allegation that in spite of adverse record, senior persons have been given promotion.
A look at the last column of the order dated 4121992 by which seniors have been given promotions, only shows that some of the confidential reports of the senior persons had not been received and the competent officer has been asked to give requisite certificate etc.
This cannot in any manner be construed as equivalent to adverse entries in the service record of the senior persons.
8.
Argument of Shri Nagar that impugned order of reversion is contrary to the decree passed by the Civil Court is without substance.
Petitioner's promotion in pursuance of the decree passed by the Civil Court could not be treated as a better promotion than the one given to his senior.
His promotion was as tentative as that of his juniors and, therefore, in reverting him for the purpose of promotion of senior person, the respondents cannot be said to have contravened any provision of law or any legal right of the said petitioner.
For the reasons aforesaid, we do not find any merit in any of these petitions and, therefore, the same are dismissed.
Parties to bear their own Costs.
Petition dismissed.