Motilal B Naik, J - The writ petition is filed questioning the proceedings pertaining to Rc.
No. 11/84-85 dated 1981988 on the file of the 3rd respondent, as confirmed by the 2nd respondent by order dated 2511990 made in C.T.A.No.3/88, and seeks to set aside the proceedings on the ground of illegality.
Petitioner further seeks the relief of issuance of mandamus or any other appropriate writ in the circumstances of the case.
2.
The Government Polytechnic for Women Staff Cooperative House Building Society, Kakinada, represented by its President, is the petitioner.
It is stated in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition that the petitioner-society came into existence for the sole purpose of providing house-sites to members who are all women belonging to the Government Polytechnic College for Women at Kakinada.
Though the petitioner-society was formed as early as in 1980, the activities in which the society intended could not be carried out.
Under those circumstances, the Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Societies in proceedings No. 6100/80C dated 3101980 issued to the petitioner a notice under Section 64(2)(b) of the AP Cooperative Societies Act (for short 'the Act') to show cause why the society should not be wound up, as it failed to commence its activity.
Thereafter, the petitioner-society started making, efforts to acquire the land for providing house sites to its members.
In the meantime, several staff members working in the Government Polytechnic for Women, Kakinada were transferred outside the municipal limits of Kakinada and by virtue of their transfer, they ceased to be members of the society in terms of society's bye-law No. 5.
The Executive Committee of the petitioner-society at its meeting held on 1611981 passed a resolution cancelling the membership of those staff members who were transferred to various departments from the Polytechnic College, Kakinada.
The Ist respondent was also transferred from Polytechnic College, Kakinada on 811980 on deputation to Durgabai Deshmukh Women's Technical Training Institute, Hyderabad, which was under the control of private management.
Therefore, her name was also deleted along with others from the rolls of eligible members of the petitioner-society on 1611981 and it was communicated to all those members under certificate of posting on 21.1.1981.
The General Body of the petitioner-society in its meeting held on 2061981 approved the removal of membership of such of those employees including that of the 1st respondent, who were either transferred or sent on deputation from Kakinada.
3.
Subsequently, it is stated, the petitioner-society acquired an extent of Ac.
3-00 of land near the Polytechnic College, Kakinada and amounts were collected from the existing members and the entire sale consideration was paid to the landowners.
While the petitioner-society was taking steps to develop the land, the 1st respondent sent a letter on 2521982 requesting the Principal of the Government Polytechnic College for Women, Kakinada not to cancel her membership on the ground that she was only on deputation.
The 1st respondent also got a letter written by the Director of Technical Education on 231983 to the Secretary of the petitioner-society stating that she was working at Hyderabad on deputation.
It is further stated that after obtaining the necessary layout, on 1851985 the petitioner-society allotted plots to individual members who are on rolls.
The 1st respondent having come to know of the general body meeting, gave a telegram on 1751985 requesting the society to allot a plot to her.
Thereafter, the Ist respondent filed before the 3rd respondent an application under Section 61(l)(b) of the Act, which was numbered as Claim No. 11/85, for a declaration that the resolution passed by the Board of Directors on 1611981 and the subsequent approval by the general body on 2631981 removing her name from the rolls of the petitioner-society as illegal, improper and unenforceable.
Alongwith the claim petition, she also filed IANo.
1/84785 seeking to suspend the operation of the resolution of the general body meeting held on 1851985 allotting plots to individual members, till the disposal of the dispute.
The 3rd respondent, upon hearing the 1st respondent, granted interim order on 2151985.
Petitioner-society thereafter filed a counter denying the allegations of the 1st respondent apart from contending that the 3rd respondent had no jurisdiction to entertain the claim of the petitioner under Section 61(1)(b) of the Act.
The other ground urged by the petitioner-society before the 3rd respondent was that such a claim could not be entertained, as it was hit by limitation.
The 3rd respondent, after hearing the contentions of the petitioner-society, by order dated 17.8.1985 vacated the interim direction granted earlier.
4.
It is further stated that subsequently the 1st respondent filed a petition for amendment of the claim petition, which was allowed.
The 3rd respondent, after holding enquiry, by order dated 1981988 held that the resolution of the Board of Directors dated 1611981 as approved by the general body, is invalid as far as the 1st respondent is concerned and directed the petitioner-society to allot a plot to her.
As against the said order dated 1981988, the petitioner-society preferred appeal, C.T.A.
No. 3/88, before the 2nd respondent.
The 2nd respondent by order dated 2611990 dismissed the appeal.
It is order dated 2611990 of the 2nd respondent confirming the order of the 3rd respondent dated 1981988 which is impugned on this writ petition.
5.
The submission of Sri BSA Swamy, learned counsel for the petitioner, is three-fold.
Firstly, he contends that both the Tribunals below failed to take into account the fact that in terms of bye-law No.5 of the society, the membership is only restricted to women working in Government Polytechnic College for Women, Kakinada; that since the 1st respondent ceased to be a staff member of the said college, automatically her membership ceased; that the Board of Directors by resolution dated 1611981 decided to remove from rolls the names of such of those employees, who were either transferred or sent on deputation to other places; that accordingly the names of nearly 25 to 26 staff members including that of the 1st respondent were removed, which action was approved by the general body on 2061981 and that when once the 1st respondent ceased to be a member of the society, she is not entitled to claim any benefits which accrue to the existing members.
The second submission is that even assuming that the 1st respondent had any right to question the resolution dated 1611981, that should have been done within three years therefrom, as the 1st respondent had chosen to question her removal before the 3rd respondent in 1984 and that, therefore, the claim of the 1st respondent ought to have been dismissed on the ground of laches.
The third submission is that even assuming that the 1st respondent questioned the resolution dated 16.1.81 in time, the subsequent developments have to be taken into consideration, that is to say, land was acquired in 1984, plots were allotted to individual members; that there was no direction either by the 3rd respondent or the 2nd respondent to keep one plot vacant to the 1st respondent during the pendency of the claim petition or the appeal; that at this stage it would be impossible for the petitioner-society to allot a plot to the 1st respondent disturbing the membership in whose favour plots have already been allotted in 1985 and that, therefore, orders of the Tribunals below deserve to be set aside.
6.
Sri V Venkataramanayya, learned senior counsel appearing for the 1st respondent, contended that the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be sustained inasmuch as the 1st respondent had no knowledge of the resolution dated 1611981; that she has filed the claim before the 3rd respondent within time from the date of her knowledge; that there were no laches on her part; that the removal order which is said to have been sent by certificate of posting on 21.1.1981 was not received by her; that even otherwise, in terms of the bye-laws of the society, the action taken by the petitioner-society has to be necessarily approved by the Registrar of the Cooperative Societies; that in the absence of such approval, the order of removal is void and that, therefore, such an order can be questioned at any time and no time limit is prescribed.
Sri Venkataramanayya further contended that admittedly the membership is restricted to only such of those staff members who are working in the Government Polytechnic College for Women, Kakinada; that as on the date of formation of the society, the 1st respondent was a member along with others; that there is no provision in the bye-laws as to meeting the contingency in a situation arising out of either transfer or sent on deputation; that since the 1st respondent is one of the members from the inception or the society, she has been making efforts to get proper reply from the society, which has been turning a deaf ear and that, therefore, it is the petitioner-society that is to be blamed and not the 1st respondent.
It is further contended that both the Tribunals below rightly held that the 1st respondent is entitled to a plot and that it is not open to this Court to reverse that finding in the present proceedings.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the 1st respondent, the question that falls for consideration is whether the Tribunals below properly construed the matter and arrived at a right conclusion in the circumstances of the case ?
8.
I have perused the orders of the Tribunals\below.
In my view, both the Tribunals failed to take note of the time which was running against the 1st respondent.
Even assuming that the petitioner-society has made a mess of the things by not getting the removal order approved by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies, as contemplated in the Act, though such proceedings are void, the Tribunals below ought to have taken into consideration the subsequent developments.
It is not disputed that plots were already allotted to members who are on rolls, in 1985, value of the plots was collected from individual members and many allottees have already constructed houses.
Though the 1st respondent claims to have become a member in 1980s, her name was removed from the rolls on 1611981 on the ground that she was sent on deputation to Hyderabad.
The 1st respondent questioned her removal before the 3rd respondent in 1984, who passed an order in favour of the 1st respondent in 1988 and it was confirmed by the 2nd respondent in appeal in 1990.
The matter has now come up before this Court in 1993.
That means, the period of 13 years has elapsed from the date of cancellation of membership of the 1st respondent.
Therefore, is it reasonable for this Court, at this stage, to upset the entire proceedings which have taken place in 1985 by directing the petitioner-society to allot a plot to the 1st respondent by cancelling plots standing in the name of other members, though the name of the 1st respondent was struck off the rolls way back in 1981 ?
9.
To my mind, in a situation of this nature, the petitioner-society as well as the 1st respondent are equally to be blamed.
Yet, to bell a cat, something has to be done.
Had the 1st respondent insisted the Tribunals below to reserve one plot vacant till the disposal of the dispute and on the basis of such representation had the Tribunals directed to keep one plot vacant, irrespective of the technicalities, an order could have been passed in favour of the 1st respondent though more than 12 years have passed.
The fact remains that no such order is obtained by the 1st respondent from the Tribunals below.
Therefore, I am afraid, at this point of time when so much water has flown, it is not reasonable for this Court to issue a direction to the petitioner-society to allot a plot to the 1st respondent by cancelling a plot allotted to somebody who paid the cost of the plot and is dreaming to have his/her own house.
10.
Sri Venkataramanayya points out to me, during the course of arguments, that one person, who is not eligible to become a member, has been allotted a plot in the society and, therefore, at least the petitioner-society could be directed to cancel the plot allotted to that person and direct the same to be allotted to the 1st respondent.
Even assuming that an ineligible member is allotted a plot, after nine years of allotment, it would not be proper for this Court to direct the petitioner-society to cancel the allotment made in his/her favour.
In my view, that would cause lot of hardship to that person who has paid the sale consideration and obtained a plot in 1985.
The 1st respondent could have questioned the allotment of plot to that person if he/she is really ineligible to be allotted at the earliest.
It is clear from the counter filed by the 1st respondent that she knew about the allotment of plots and cancellation of membership only after filing of the counter by the petitioner-society in the claim petition filed by her before the 3rd respondent.
Even after realising that fact through the counter filed by the petitioner-society before the 3rd respondent, it was open to her to question such proceedings separately.
Therefore, it is too late in the day to seek such a relief.
A clock cannot be put back now to bring to its originality after lapse of 9 years.
Apart from the legalities, equity does not assist the 1st respondent, seeking a relief from this Court for a direction to get a plot allotted in her favour.
11.
In view of the observations made hereinabove, in the circumstances of the case, I consider that order of the 3rd respondent in Rc.
No. 11/84-85 dated 1981988 and the order of the 2nd respondent in C.TA.
No. 3/88 dated 2511990 have to be set aside.
Accordingly, they are set aside.
12.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.