NK Sodhi, J - What is impugned in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is the order passed by the Commandant General, Punjab Home Guards and Director, Civil Defence, Punjab discharging the petitioner from service under Rule 18 of the Punjab Home Guards Rules, 1963 (for short 'the Rules') and also the order in appeal.
2.
Petitioner was selected some time in February, 1968 as a civil defence instructor on whole time basis with the Punjab Home Guards on a consolidated pay of Rs. 150/- per month plus dearness allowance.
According to condition No. 3 of his appointment letter, he was subject to discharge at any time without notice.
However, he was required to give on month's notice if he was to resign or deposit on month's salary in lieu thereof.
He was also governed by the Punjab Home Guards Act, 1947 and the rules and also the Government Servant Conduct Rules as in force from time to time.
After working as a civil defence instructor for some years, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Company Commander in May, 1976 in the scale of Rs. 320-20-460/20-600/-.
As stated in para 3 of the written statement and not controverted by the petitioner, he was a temporary employee all through and was never confirmed or made permanent against any rank.
Although the petitioner contends that he remained on leave from 18.6.1982 to 2861982 and submitted his joining report on the following day, the categoric stand of the respondents in the written statement as also in the impugned orders in that he remained wilfully absent from duty w.e.f.
April 2, 1982 till June 29, 1982.
This stand of the respondents has not been controverted by the petitioner and I shall, therefore, proceeded on the basis that he remained absent.
A number of letters including some under registered post were written to the petitioner asking him to join duty but he did not turn up.
He even did not submit his leave application.
In view of his absence from duty, the Commandant General, Punjab Home Guards and Director Civil Defence, Punjab by an order passed on June 29, 1982 discharged the petitioner from service under Rule 18 of the Rules.
Feeling aggrieved against this order, the petitioner filed an appeal before the State Government and the same was dismissed in view of his unsatisfactory service record.
He challenged the order of discharge as also the order dismissing the appeal in this Court by filing CWP 1810 of 1985 which was partly allowed on June 8, 1990.
The appellant order was set aside and the case was sent back to the State Government with a direction to dispose of the appeal filed by the petitioner by a detailed speaking order giving reasons in support thereof.
In pursuance of the directions issued by this Court the Financial Commissioner (Home) and Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Home Affairs and Justice, disposed of the appeal after hearing the petitioner and dismissed the same by an order dated June 18, 1991.
It is this order as also the order of discharge that have been impugned in the present petition.
3.
Mr. DS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously urged before me that since the service of the petitioner was being terminated on account of his absence from duty, it was incumbent upon the competent authority to have effort to the petitioner an opportunity of being heard as is envisaged in Rule 27 of the Rules.
According to the learned counsel, the Commandant General, Home Guards could not resort to Rule 18 of the Rules and discharge the petitioner from service.
He cited the judgment of AL Bahri, J in Pal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1990(1) R.S.J 79 in support of his contention.
4.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner, I am unable to accept the same.
Rules 18 and 27 of the Rules which are relevant are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :  "18.
Discharge of members - Any member may be discharged at any time by the authority which had appointed him when his services are no longer required.
27.
Dismissal - (1) Any member may, for misconduct or for absence from duty without sufficient cause, be dismissed from service :  Provided that no order of dismissal shall be passed unless reasons of dismissal are recorded in writing and the member concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
(2) The authority competent to pass an order of dismissal in the case of a Gazetted Officer shall be the Government and that in the case of a No. Gazetted Officer and other members, the Commandant General or the Gram Raksha Dal Chief, as the case may be.
(3) An appeal against an order of dismissal passed by the Commandant General or Gram Raksha Dal Chief shall lie to the Government.
(4) The order of the Government passed under sub-rule (2) or Sub-rule (3) shall be final and shall not be called in question in any proceedings whatsoever."
A plain reading of the aforesaid rules makes it clear that any member of the service may be discharged at any time the competent authority when his services are no longer required.
The order situation is that if any member of the service is guilty of misconduct or has remained absent from duty without sufficient cause, he may be dismissed from service provided a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against such a member has been afforded to him.
The petitioner was a temporary employee and wilfully remained absent from duty for about three months and, therefore, the competent authority had two options before it - (i) the petitioner could be discharged under Rule 18 or (ii) the competent authority could proceed to take disciplinary/punitive action against him for having remained absent.
In the present case, the competent authority chose the first option and discharged the petitioner from service.
The question of affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner did not, therefore, arise as the competent authority was being lenient towards him as it was not taking any punitive or disciplinary action against him though it was open to it to do so.
in that even, an opportunity of hearing would have been afforded to the petitioner.
In my opinion, no fault can be found with the action of the competent authority.
5.
The view that I have taken finds support from the observations of the apex Court in Jagdish Mitter v. Union of India, AIR 1964 S.C.449 where the learned Chief Justice observed as under :  "The appropriate authority possesses two powers to terminate the services of a temporary public servant, it can either discharge him purporting to exercise its power under the terms of contract or the relevant rule, and in that case, it would be a straightforward and direct case of discharge and nothing more; in such a case, Art. 311 will not apply.
The authority can also act under its power to dismiss a temporary servant and make an order of dismissal in a straightforward way, in such a case Art. 311 will apply.
This simple position is sometimes complicated by the fact that even while exercising its power to terminate the services of a temporary servant under the contract or the relevant rule, the authority may in fairness enquire whether the temporary servant should be continued in service or not."
Again, in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kausal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SCT 760 : 1991 (1) S.C.C 691, their Lordships made the following observations in para 7 of the judgment :  "A temporary government servant has no right to hold the post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary government servants.
A temporary government servant can, however, be dismissed from service by way of punishment.
Whenever, the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary government servant.
If it decides to take punitive action it may hold a formal inquiry by framing charges and giving opportunity to the government servant in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution."
6.
In Pal Singh's case (supra) a theft of arms and ammunition had taken place and a preliminary inquiry indicated that the petitioner therein was responsible for gross negligence in the discharge of his official duties and also for his undesirable role.
He was also found absent from duty.
For all this serious misconduct the petitioner therein was discharged from service under Rule 18 of the rules.
It was in these circumstances that the order of discharge was quashed and the learned Judge was of the view that the foundation of the order of discharge was punitive and cast a stigma.
In the present case no such inquiry was ever held by the competent authority nor it ever intended to punish the petitioner.
Pal Singh's case is, therefore, on different facts and does not help the petitioner in the present case.
At any rate, in view of the observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases, the competent authority had two options before it, namely, to discharge the petitioner or to dismiss him.
Having exercised the option to discharge the petitioner from service, this Court cannot interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Moreover, a look at the service record of the petitioner makes it clear that his confidential reports for the last several years depicted him as a habitual drunkard and his honesty had also been doubted.
This being the service record of the petitioner and he being a temporary employee is not likely to make a good officer and, therefore, his discharge from service was in public interest.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner has not disputed the adverse entries in his service record that have been referred to by the State Government in the appellate order which were referred to because of the directions issued by this Court.
I am, therefore, not inclined to interfere with the impugned orders in the exercise of my jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
In the result, there is not merit in the petition and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.