AP Chowdhari, J - The question arising for decision in this writ petition is whether the petitioners are entitled to appear in the First Professional examination of MBBS in spite of the provisions of Ordinance 7(ii) requiring the student to have completed 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that both the petitioners took the PMT test for admission to MBBS/BDS Courses in the State of Punjab in the year 1992.
Both having figured lower in merit got admitted to the Government Dental College, Amritsar and Patiala respectively and started attending classes.
The process of finalising the admission relating to MBBS was completed sometimes in August 1992 and classes of MBBS started almost soon thereafter.
It was found that one seat relating to backward area category, to which the petitioner No. 1 belonged, and one open merit seat were available in the MBBS.
The Principal of Shri Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot respondent No. 3 wrote to the Punjabi University respondent No. 1 to notify the seats to the next candidate in order of merit.
The University approved the admission subject to the petitioners' furnishing an affidavit to the effect that they shall be eligible to appear in the First Professional examination only after having undergone not less than 1-1/2 academic years of teaching in the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology and Bio-chemistry as per the Ordinance of the Punjabi University.
Petitioner No. 1 furnished his affidavit Annexure P-3 dated November 27, 1992, and petitioner No. 7 furnished his affidavit Annexure P-6 dated December 23, 1992.
The petitioners were given admission.
The First Professional examination was to commence with effect from January 28, 1994.
Admittedly, the petitioners had not completed 1-1/2 academic years by that date.
They were, therefore, not issued roll numbers.
The present writ petitioner was instituted on January 21, 1994.
The Motion Bench by order of the same day, namely, January 21, 1994 directed the respondents to permit the petition to take the First Professional MBBS examination started from January 28, 1994, at their own risk and responsibility and subject to decision of the writ petition.
The petitioners accordingly appeared in that examination.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that Ordinance 7(ii) is not mandatory but only directory.
It has further been pleaded that even if the provision is taken to be mandatory, the University itself has been granting relaxation to various students from time to time.
A number of instances have been relied on in this behalf by the petitioners.
It has further been stated that the delay in finalising admission to MBBS occurred on the part of the college, for which the petitioners could not be penalised.
The petitioners being not at fault, should not be made to suffer.
It has also been stated that the syllabus and subjects in the First Professional of MBBS are the same as that prescribed in the first year of BDS.
The petitioners had attended that course in BDS and thus for all practical purposes, they should be deemed to have attended the MBBS Course from the very beginning.
They have further claimed that they had attended the required number of lectures in theory as well as practical and they were otherwise eligible to appear in the First Professional examination.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the College (respondent No. 3) a number of preliminary objections were raised.
It was stated that petitioner No. 1 had put in 14 months and one day and petitioner No. 2 had attended the Course only for 13 months and 6 days as against the requirement of 18 months.
The case of Vandana Bhatia in CWP No. 9135 of 1992, on which the petitioners heavily relied, was sought to be distinguished on the ground that Vandana Bhatia had put in 14 months and 23 days before the commencement of the First Professional examination.
On merits, it was highlighted that the petitioners being lower in merit were initially given admission in BDS and for that reason they could not be treated on par with those higher in merit who were initially admitted to the MBBS Course straightway.
It was further submitted that the petitioners had given their affidavits that they would appear in the First Professional examination only on complying with the requirement of the Ordinance of the University of having put in the requisite period before claiming to appear in the examination and they were clearly estopped from putting forward any completed the requisite number of lectures in theory and practical.
A break-up of the lectures in theory and practicals attended by the two petitioners was given in paragraph 8 of the written statement.
According to the said break-up, petitioner No. 1 had obtained 75 per cent attendance only in one subject of Anatomy in both theory and practicals and fell short of 75 per cent attendance in the remaining two subjects.
Petitioner No. 2 on the other hand, had not obtained 75 per cent attendance in theory and practical in any of the three subjects.
It was specifically pleaded that the course content of BDS and MBBS courses was markedly different.
(vide paragraph 11(b) of the written statement).
With regard to the precedents, it was stated that they were distinguishable and in any case if gradually more and more relaxations were given curtailing the requisite period of 1-1/2 academic years, it would affect professional excellence.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University respondent No. 1 it was stated that the Ordinance of the University prescribing the requirement of 18 months period and 75 per cent lectures was mandatory.
The last date allowed by the University for joining the MBBS Course was October 30, 1992.
The case of both the petitioners did not fall within that period and accordingly they were not entitled to appear in the First Professional examination.
6.
I have heard Mr. Rakesh Garg for the petitioners and Mr. Mohinder Singh Sethi, Sr. Advocate, for the University.
7.
The contention of Mr. Rakesh Garg, learned counsel for the petitioners is that the provisions of Ordinance 7(ii) are directory in nature.
He further submitted that even if it is assumed that the Ordinance in question is mandatory in character, admittedly the University itself had been granting relaxation in a number of cases which have been referred by him in the writ petition and in the course of arguments.
Even in the present case itself, the case of six students for relaxation was submitted by the College to the University including that of the two petitioners.
Out of the case of four students, which also involved relaxation, had been approved by the University, while those of the petitioners had been turned down.
He further submitted that admittedly even though the classes in MBBS Course are stated to have commenced with effect from August 17, 1992, the University itself permitted admissions of various students upto October 30, 1992.
He also emphasised the significant fact that in certain decisions, to which reference will be shortly made, even though it was held that the Ordinance was mandatory in character, the students were given relief, primarily on the ground that the shortage in their attending the Course was not of their making.
8.
The contention of Mr. Mohinderjit Singh Sethi for the University, on the other hand, is that once the provision of the Ordinance is held to be mandatory in nature, the Court was bound to give effect to the same.
No equity could be taken into consideration to make a departure from the natural consequence of the rule being mandatory.
He heavily relied on decision of the Supreme Court in Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Punjab and others v. Suchintan and others, 1993(3) SCT 276 (SC) : JT 1993(3) SC 727 which had been followed by a Division Bench of this Court in Jagdeep Singh v. The Punjabi University, Patiala and another, 1994(2) RSJ 67 : 1994(2) SCT.
451.
Mr. Sethi also urged that the petitioners had furnished their affidavits and they must be held bound with the undertaking that they would be eligible to appear in the First Professional examination only on their complying with the requirement of the Ordinance of the University with regard to the attendance of the Course for the minimum prescribed period.
He further argued that departure or an exception made in a case here or a case there did not just violation of the rule itself and in support of the proposition he placed reliance on State of Orissa v. Durga Charan Dass, AIR 1966 SC 1547.
The above rule, it was pointed out, was followed in the matter of admission to an educational institution in Sachindananda Tripathy v. Vice Chancellor, Sambalpur University and others, AIR 1970 Orissa 181.
He further submitted that there was no delay on the part of the University and the petitioners joined the MBBS course with their eyes open that they were required to satisfy the condition with regard to the minimum period which they were required to study before be coming eligible for the First Professional examination.
Mr. Sethi also referred to decision of a Division Bench of this Court in CWP Nos. 5765, 5983 and 6050 all of 1994 which were all dismissed on this point order dated May 31, 1994.
9.
In reply, Mr. Garg submitted that the period of 1-1/2 academic years could not be insisted upon with mathematical precision and, in fact, in practice it was not being strictly and literally followed.
He relief on Sarbjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(3) RSJ 139 : 1994(3) SCT.
450 and decision in CWP No. 10308 of 1992 dated by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
He also emphasised that the petitioners ought not to be discriminated against in the sense that while others were granted relaxation, the petitioners were denied the same, resulting in their wastage of one valuable year.
10.
The Ordinance which is relevant for the present purposes, reads :  "7(ii) has been on the rolls of a medical college admitted to the privileges of this University throughout 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination."
11.
In Sajila Sultana v. Panjab University, 1991(2) RSJ 317, Ashok Bhan, J took the view that the Ordinance requiring 1-1/2 academic years study before becoming eligible to appear in the First Professional examination was mandatory in nature.
Having held that, the learned Judge observed that the University itself had relaxed the rigour of the provisions and it allowed 18 students, who were similarly situated as the petitioner in that writ petition, and had permitted them to appear in the First Professional examination.
In order to avoid injustice, therefore, the petitioner was given relief though the Ordinance was held to be mandatory in character.
12.
In Vandana Bhatia v. Punjabi University, 1993(2) SCT 330 (P&H) : 1993(3) RSJ 6, RS Mongia, J held that the Ordinance in question was merely directory and the petitioner in that writ petition having attended the Course for academic period of 14 months and 23 days was entitled to appear in the First Professional examination.
It appears that the earlier decision in Sajila Sultana was not brought to the notice of the learned Judge while disposing of the writ petition of Miss Vandana Bhatia.
13.
The next decision to which reference may now be made is Jagdeep Singh v. The Punjabi University, Patiala and another, 1994(2) SCT 451 (DB) (P&H) : 1994(2) RSJ 67.
Following decision of the Supreme Court in Suchintan's case (supra) it was held by a Division Bench of this Court that the Ordinance prescribing the minimum period of academic study was mandatory.
It was held that the Ordinance in question was mandatory in character.
With regard to Sajila Sultan's case (supra), on which reliance was also placed on behalf of the University, it was held that the same was decided on its own facts.
Having held as stated above, the learned Judges of the Division bench proceeded to observe that the University had taken a period of over five months in covering the decision of the Syndicate with regard to the entitlement of the petitioner to appear in the First Professional examination.
It was the aforesaid delay on the part of the University which prevented the petitioner from attending the classes relating to the Second Professional examination, resulting in his failure to complete 1-1/2 years of Course or 75 per cent of the lectures as required under Ordinance 15.
In the facts of that case, therefore, the learned Judges directed the University to declare the petitioner's result of the Second Professional MBBS examination and also to regularise his admission to the Third Professional MBBS Course.
14.
From what has been stated above there can be no manner of doubt that the Ordinance in question must be held to be mandatory in character.
The question remains as to what is to be done with the petitioners in the facts and circumstances of this case.
15.
I have given my anxious consideration to the above contentions.
I am of the view that once the provisions of Ordinance 7(ii) are held to be mandatory very little is left for what is to follow.
The logical consequence of such a conclusion is that where the condition of that provision is not satisfied, the student is not eligible to appear in the examination.
It also follows that in deciding the case in the light of the mandatory nature of the Ordinance, the question of equity does not tilt the balance.
Moreover, in the facts of the present case, the University which is required to grant relaxation cannot be held to be guilty of any delay.
In the case of Ravinder Kumar petitioner, the College wrote to the University vide Annexure P-1 dated November 17, 1992, and the University conveyed its approval by letter dated November 23, 1992.
In the case of Rakesh Goyal petitioner No. 2 no date when the college wrote to the University is available.
However, the only date which is available on record is December 18,1992.
Annexure P-4 when the University approved that the seat may be offered to the said petitioner.
It was rightly pointed out by Mr. Sethi that there was no recent decision of any relaxation and the various decisions related to an earlier period when the Courts took the view that the provisions of Ordinance 7(ii) were not mandatory.
Moreover, the petitioners themselves furnished affidavits undertaking to be bound by the requirement of their fulfilling the condition of undergoing the Course of study for the period required by the Ordinance and they must be held bound by their undertaking.
They are estopped to plead otherwise.
For the foregoing reasons, however reluctantly, I have no choice but to dismiss the writ petition.
This would mean that the petitioners would be entitled to appear in the next ensuing examination of the First Professional of the MBBS Course and they cannot be permitted to take advantage of the examination which commenced from January 28, 1994, and in which the respondents were directed to permit the petitioners to appear at their own risk and responsibility.
In the facts and circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.