SP Kurdukar, C.J.
(Oral) - This letters patent appeal is filed by the appellant (the original petitioner) challenging the legality and correctness of the judgment and order dated September 15, 1989 passed by the learned Single Judge, in Civil Writ Petition No. 5079 of 1981.
The learned Single Judge negatived the claim of the appellant for back wages/salary and consequently dismissed the writ petition.
2.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Various contentions were raised before us.
In order to appreciate the same, a few facts are required to be set out.
3.
The appellant was originally recruited in the police constabulary in the then State of PEPSU.
His services came to be terminated by the erstwhile State of PEPSU on October 17, 1952.
The appellant filed a suit for a declaration and consequential reliefs.
The appellant's suit came to be decreed and consequent thereto, he came to be reinstated on March 4, 1960 as selection grade constable.
In the meanwhile, the states Reorganisation Act, 1956, came into force and the State of PEPSU came to be merged with the former State of Punjab.
It is now common premise that the appellant in 1960 was belonging to the police constabulary of the State of Punjab.
4.
It so happened that again on December 16, 1960 the appellant's services came to be terminated.
The appellant was again required to file a suit for declaration and back wages/salary for a period of three years.
The learned Subordinate Judge, vide his judgment and decree dated January 29, 1968 dismissed the suit.
The appellant's appeal before the District Judge was allowed and the suit came to be decreed vide judgment and decree dated November 11, 1970.
It may be stated that the appellant was granted wages/salary for the past three years preceding the suit.
Regular Second Appeal No. 567 of 1970 filed by the State of Punjab was dismissed by this Court on July 21, 1980.
After successful completion of these innings by the appellant, he came to be reinstated on June 2, 1981 (See Annexure P-5) Although the appellant was reinstated, yet the issue of arrears of his back wages/salary was not decided and the same was, kept pending.
From the record, it appears that the authorities of the State of Punjab took the view that the appellant is not entitled to back wages/salary after the date of the suit on the ground that the termination order was set aside on technical grounds.
The appellant submitted representations to the authorities of the State of Punjab requesting them to grant him back wages/salary from the date of the suit till his reinstatement.
His representations were again not considered by the respondents sympathetically and as a result thereof the appellant was constrained to file Civil Writ Petition No. 5079 of 1981 in this Court.
The writ petition was heard by the learned Single Judge and vide order dated September 15, 1989, the said writ petition came to be dismissed.
It is this order which is sought to be challenged in this letters patent appeal.
5.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, vehemently urged that the appellant is entitled to the wages/salary from the date of the suit till his reinstatement since the termination order was set aside by a competent civil Court.
He further urged that it was not necessary for the appellant to claim future salary from the date of the suit inasmuch as he had file the suit for declaration that the termination order be declared illegal.
Once the termination order is declared illegal, the appellant, he contended, stands reinstated and if he is so reinstated, he is entitled to salary/wages from the date of the suit as if he was in service.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, the learned counsel, further submitted that the respondents be directed to pay salary/wages from the date of the suit till the date of his reinstatement.
6.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, the learned Additional Advocate-General, Punjab sought to support the impugned judgment.
According to the learned counsel, the respondents have complied with the judgment passed by the Civil Court and since the appellant had not claimed any relief of future salary from the date of the suit he is not entitled to claim the same.
He further urged that the appellant having failed to claim such appropriate relief in the earlier suit, no relief can be granted to him in the present proceedings.
The learned counsel, therefore, urged that the impugned judgment suffers from no vice and no interference is called for.
7.
The learned Single Judge denied the relief to the appellant on the ground that the appellant ought to have claimed the relief of salary from the date of the suit till his reinstatement.
Having not laid such a claim in the civil suit, it is not open to the appellant to claim such relief in the writ petition.
The learned Single Judge applied the principle of res judicata in the present case.
The learned Single Judge has tried to distinguish the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4815 of 1974 (Devinder Singh v. State of Punjab) decided on September 8, 1982.
8.
As far as the first contention raised on behalf of the appellant is concerned, we are of the opinion that notwithstanding the fact that the appellant had not claimed the salary prospectively from the date of the suit, yet in law, when the order of termination of services has been set aside and held to be illegal, legal effect of such decision is that he is entitled to the salary prospectively from the date of the suit.
As indicated earlier, the order of termination passed against him was held to be illegal by the Civil Court and he was ordered to be reinstated.
It is not disputed before us that under the said decree, the appellant was reinstated in service and if this be so, it must follow, that the appellant is entitled to salary from the date of the suit.
The suit was filed on October 10, 1966, bearing suit No. 124/268 T of October 10, 1966/May 26, 1967.
With great respect, we are unable to agree with the findings of the learned Single Judge that the claim of the appellant was barred by res judicata.
9.
Coming to the second limb of the argument relating to applicability of the ratio of the decision in Devinder Singh's case (supra), it may be stated that although issue raised before us did not directly fall for consideration in the said case, yet the principles laid down therein by way of extension will apply to the present case.
After going through the impugned judgment and having heard the learned counsel for the parties, in our opinion, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
10.
In the result, the appeal succeeds.
The impugned order is quashed and set aside.
The respondents are directed to determine the appellant's wages from the date of the suit, i.e. October 10, 1966, till reinstatement, i.e. June 2, 1981, and play the same to him within three months from today.
In the event the respondents fail to pay the amount of salary so determined, as indicated above, the respondents shall pay to the appellant interest thereon at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
The respondents to pay appellant's costs in both the Courts.