Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioners who are presently employed as Headmasters in various government schools in the State of Punjab seek an order from this Court that the directions in their favour already given in the case reported as Nirmaljit Kaur and others v. Union of India, 1972 S.L.R.
809 be complied with and they like other members of their class (unadjusted B.T./B.Ed teacthers) be appointed to the post of masters in the regular cadre to the extent of 25 per cent quota reserved for them in each year in accordance with the memorandum dated 7th November, 1958 Annexure P1 to the petition.
The case of the petitioners is that despite the order in the aforecited case as also similar directions in CWP No. 4748 of 1974 (Brij Lal Goyal and others v. The State of Punjab and another) decided on 8th April, 1985, this benefit has not been given to them.
2.
The case of the State and the private respondents who were directly recruited however is that the directions given by the Court in Nirmaljit Kaur's case (supra) had been complied with in letter and spirit as would be apparent from the pleadings on the file and further that as the private respondents were not parties in the proceedings in Brij Lal Goyal's and Amar Nath Barisal's case (supra) those decisions were not binding on them, and were in view of the facts even otherwise redundant.
It has also been asserted that an identical matter inter parties i.e. promotee and directly recruited masters, had come up to this Court in the case reported as Kartar Singh Master and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1979(1) SLR 544 and the Division Bench of this Court while considering the facts of Nirmaljit Kaur's case, dismissed the writ petition on the ground that the claim of the petitioners was highly belated.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
There appears to be positive merit in the stand of the respondents that the directions issued in Nirmaljit Kaur's case (supra) had already been complied with and the decisions tendered in Brij Lal Goyal's and Amar Nath Barisal's case were as a matter of fact redundant.
In this connection, it is relevant that while disposing of Criminal Original No. 231-C of 1972 (Parshotam Lal Nirmal etc. v. G L Bakshi, DPI Punjab etc.) vide judgment dated 16th July, 1973 appended as Annexure R-15/1, the learned Judge had taken note of the fact that the directions issued in Nirmaljit Kaur's case had been complied with, with the result that it would not be said that any contempt of the court's order in that case had been committed.
For arriving at this conclusion the court had relied on the affidavit in reply filed by Shri G L Bakshi, DPI, Punjab in the said contempt petition in which it had been specifically pleaded that the necessary relief flowing to the petitioners had been granted.
It is, therefore, apparent in, the light of the order in the contempt petition that the directions issued in favour of the petitioners stood fully complied with way back in 1973.
4.
We are further of the opinion that even assuming that there had been non-compliance with the order of this Court in Nirmaijit Kaur's.
case (supra), yet the present petitions having been filed in the year 1987 seeking a relief from 1958 onwards, are grossly belated.
It will be seen that in Kartar Singh's case (supra) a similar relief had been declined to the petitioners on the ground of laches though the writ petition had been filed in the year 1976 and decided in July 1978.
We are, therefore, of the view that the present petitions deserve to be dismissed not only on merits but also being highly belated.
Petitions are accordingly dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.