VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, Petitioners who are Accounts Assistants in the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited, Chandigarh, (hereinafter referred to as the Leather Corporation), are seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari, for seeking parity with Accountants, Assistants-cum-Accountants, Accounts Assistants etc. in the State of Punjab.
2.
As per the case set up by the petitioners, petitioners were appointed in the year 1984, in the pay scale of Rs. 450-800/- to begin with and in scale of Rs. 510-800/- after two years, w.e.f.
8/9/10/11/15.10.1986.
Petitioners have alleged that the duties of the Accounts Assistants in the Leather Corporation are similar to the Accounts Assistants in the State of Punjab.
The Third Punjab Pay Commission in para 2515 of its report recommended to the following :  "The Employees performing the duties of Assistant or almost similar duties have been given different designations viz.
Accountant, Assistant-cum-Accountant, Accounts Assistants etc. in different departments.
All such cadres who are in the scale of 570-1,080 should be given the scale recommended by us for the category of Assistant.
Government may, however, consider rationalization of their designations also since the employees working on these posts are interchangeable.
In this connection, a generic designation of Assistant is proposed to be adopted.
The specialisation Accounts may be mentioned in brackets after the word Assistant."
On finalisation of the said report and the report of the Anomalies Committee, the Accounts Assistants who were in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1,080/- were given the scale as recommended by the Pay Commission for the category of Assistants.
Petitioners made a grievance to the management of the Leather Corporation that they be also given revised pay scale in pursuance to the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, as being given to the employees of the Punjab Government.
The petitioners have further alleged that the management of the Leather Corporation recommended the grant of pay scale on the Punjab Government pattern, to the committee which was constituted to go into demands of the employees of the Corporation, but the Committee rejected the recommendation of the management vide their minutes of the meeting held on 1171989.
The Committee held as follows :  "The Committee also did not approve of the proposal to fix up the Accounts Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/-, Which is equivalent to the pay scale of Assistants, as suggested through a separate agenda item as it was felt that it would amount to promoting the entire category of officials from a lower pay scale to the higher pay scale.
The Committee recommends the revised pay scale for Accounts Assistants as Rs.
1,200-2,100/-."
The Board of Directors of the Leather Corporation accepted the recommendations of the Committee, and the Managing Director was authorised to fix the pay of the employees w.e.f.
111986 in accordance with State Government's rules in the revised pay scale as recommended by the Committee.
Petitioners felt aggrieved of the decision of the Board and raised demand with the Leather Corporation through their union and individually.
The representation of the petitioners was rejected.
Vide letter dated 2131991, petitioners were conveyed that the Punjab Government had revised the pay scale of those Accounts Assistants who were in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1,080/-, to the pay scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- (now revised to Rs. 1,800-3,200) whereas in the Leather Corporation, the unrevised pay scale of Accounts Assistants was Rs. 450-800/- and Rs. 510-800/- w.e.f.
1.7.86 which was lower to revised grade of Rs. 570-1,080/-.
They were also informed that the Board of Directors in their meeting dated 371990, had decided that six posts of Accounts Assistants be upgraded to that of Junior Accountants and the scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- be given to them, in regard to which Punjab Government's approval has been sought.
Accordingly the petitioners were informed that it is not feasible to grant the revised scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- to whole category of Accounts Assistants as it would tantamount to upgradation of the category as a whole and that as such, there is no anomaly in their case.
This rejection (Annexure P-3/1) is being impugned here in the present writ petition.
3.
In reply, the Leather Corporation in its written statement, has stated that there are two different cadres in the corporation - one of Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- corresponding to the unrevised scale of Rs. 600-1,120/- and the other of Accounts Assistants, i.e. the cadre to which the petitioners belong, in the scale of Rs. 1,200-2,100/-, equivalent to unrevised scale of Rs. 450-800/-.
The Leather Corporation has further stated that the duties of Assistants are of higher responsibilities and, therefore, they are given higher pay scale, whereas the duties of Accounts Assistants are of lower responsibilities and, therefore, they have been placed in a scale lower to that of Assistants of the Leather Corporation itself, and Assistants, Accountants, Assistant-cum-Accountant etc., of the Punjab Government.
Petitioner, by claiming the scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- are seeking parity with the Assistants without shouldering the higher responsibilities, which is not permissible under the law.
4.
Mr. G L Sadana, Advocate, counsel for the petitioners, contended that on the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work', the petitioners who were Accounts Assistants of the Leather Corporation are entitled to the pay scale of Assistants of the State of Punjab.
He also submitted that the duties of the petitioners are uniform/similar to the duties performed by the Accounts Assistants in the State of Punjab.
He also contended that the Board of Directors in its meeting dated 371990, decided that only six posts of Accounts Assistants out of the present strength of 20, be given the pay scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/-, and this decision tantamounts to creating discrimination within the class of the petitioners, which must be struck down as was done by the Supreme Court in P Savita and others v. Union of India and others, 1985(3) SLR 29.
5.
In answer to the contentions of learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. AL Bahi and Mr. Sumeet Mahajan, Advocates, for the respondent-Leather Corporation, contended that the petitioners are not performing the similar/uniform duties as compared to the Assistants of the Punjab Government.
As regards the second contention of counsel for the petitioners, they contended that none of the Accounts Assistants has been given the revised scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640, rather they have been placed in the revised scale of Rs. 1,200-2,100/-.
Thus, according to them the judgment of the Apex Court in P Savita's case (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.
6.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that there is no merit in the writ petition.
The Third Punjab Pay Commission in Para 2515 of its report, as reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment, recommended that Accounts, Assistant-cum-Accountants, Accounts Assistants etc. in different departments and who were in the pay scale of Rs. 570/-1,080/-, be given the scale as recommended for the category of Assistants.
It is important to mention here that the scale of Assistants before the.
revision of pay scales was Rs. 570/-1,080/- and above, whereas the petitioners were in the scale of Rs. 450-800/-.
It is, thus, clear that prior to 111986, there was no parity in the scale of Assistants, Accountants, Assistant-cum-Accountants etc., working in the state of Punjab and the Accounts Assistants working in the Leather Corporation.
According to the respondents, the scale of Accounts Assistants in the Leather Corporation/Department, at best was equal to that of Senior Clerk of the Punjab Government.
There are two categories, one of the Assistants and the other of Accounts Assistants.
The duties of Assistant are of higher responsibilities and, therefore, they are given higher pay scale, equivalent or more, to the Assistant, Accountant, Assistant-cum-Accountant etc., in the State of Punjab, who were in the revised pay scale of Rs. 570-1,080/-.
Petitioners are not performing the duties of higher responsibilities as compared to the Assistants etc., of the Punjab Government, and it is for this reason that the petitioners were in the lower scale of Rs. 450-800/- in comparison to that of Assistants who were in the unrevised scale of Rs. 570-1,080/- and above.
For the application of doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work', the petitioners were required to demonstrate that their counterparts are equal in every respect, in educational qualifications, duties, functions and 'measure of responsibilities, and yet they are denied equality in pay.
Petitioners have failed to discharge this onus, rather the respondents have successfully brought out on record that the employees with whom parity is being sought by the petitioners, are not performing the same duties and functions and also that the responsibilities shouldered by the petitioners are not of higher degree, compared to that of Assistants etc., of the Punjab Government.
Otherwise too, the Expert Body like the Punjab Pay Commission who was the best Judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts, recommended that the employees performing the duties of Assistants or almost the similar duties, but have been given different designations and are in the scale of Rs. 570-1,080/-, be given the scale as recommended by the Pay Commission for the category of Assistant.
The Supreme Court in State of UP and others v. IP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19, has held that "the equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best Judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it.
The court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration."
In the present case, the petitioners have failed to demonstrate as to why the recommendations of the Pay Commission should not be accepted.
As regards the second contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that six posts of Accounts Assistants have been upgraded to that of Junior Accountants and the scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- has been given to them, which has created discrimination within the class of the petitioners, I find that this contention is not factually correct.
Respondent-corporation in its written statement has not only denied this fact, but has also stated that none of the Accounts Assistants has been given the revised scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/-.
All of them have been placed in the revised scale of Rs. 1,200-2,100/-.
Further, the respondent-corporation has filed an additional affidavit dated 3594 of Sh. P S Bajwa, Managing Director of the Corporation, stating thus :-  "1 That it is incorrect that six out of the entire cadre of Accounts Assistants, working in the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited have been granted the scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640/- or Rs. 1,800-3,200/-.
The allegation of discrimination within the cadre on account of higher scale of pay being granted to the six Accounts Assistants is absolutely incorrect and misleading."
In view of this stand of the respondent, I find that it is not a case of discrimination within the class of the petitioners and, therefore, judgment of the Apex Court in P Savita's case (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.