VK Bali, J - Mr Puneet Sardana through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order permitting migration of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 to Dental College, Rohtak in preference to his claim being eligible for migration and higher in merit.
The relief aforesaid has been asked for on the following facts :  2.
Petitioner was pursuing his B.D.S.
course at the North-Bengal Dental College, Siliguri (West Bengal) (hereinafter to be referred as the said college) which is stated to be duly approved by the Dental Council of India.
He qualified his 1st Professional Examination of the B.D.S.
course and got 391 marks out of 600 marks.
As he was not enjoying good health, he applied to the respondent-University for migration from the said College to Dental College, Rohtak.
The relevant ordinance dealing with migration to Dental College, Rohtak, reads thus :-  "MIGRATION TO MEDICAL COLLEGE, ROHTAK :-  Except when authorised by the academic council, migration of a candidate from a Medical College whose B.D.S.
degree has not been recognised by the Medical Council of India, shall not be permitted.
The application for migration must be made by the applicant within three months of declaration of Maharshi Dayanand University result.
In case the request received after three months, the approval of the Medical Council of India be obtained.
The applicant - (a) must have passed : (i) the first professional B.D.S.
examination of the other University; (ii) the medical entrance examination or where the medical entrance examination is not held, the Pre-medical or its equivalent examination with at least 50% marks in the aggregate of the subjects of English, Chemistry (Organic and Inorganic), Physics and Biology; (b) must belong to the State of Haryana or to the State Government whose candidates are admitted on reserved seats, and are recommended by them for migration to the Medical College, Rohtak.
(c) produces all such certificates and pays all fees as may be demanded by the Director-Principal of the College."
He submitted all his documents required for the purpose of migration.
Vide orders dated October 19, 1993, respondent-University permitted migration of seven persons to the respondent College.
It is pleaded that respondent Nos. 4 to 7 had been permitted migration from different colleges to the Dental College, Rohtak, despite the fact that they had obtained lesser marks than him.
Whereas, petitioner had obtained 391 marks out of 600, respondents-Sumeet Malik, Ms. Monika Bhasin, Mr. Manoj Mittal and Mr. Tarun Kumar Bhutani had obtained 369, 372, 355 and 340 marks respectively out of 600.
In the meeting held on February 20, 1991, respondent University had laid down that migration would be allowed strictly on the basis of marks obtained in the first professional examination and that too in the second year of B.D.S.
course only.
Copy of the said decision has been placed on the records as Annexure P- 3.
The claim of petitioner was not being earlier considered at all as respondent-University and College were of the opinion that the North-Bengal Dental College, Siliguri (West Bengal), from which he wanted to be migrated, was not approved by the Dental Council of India.
It is pleaded that the said College is approved by the Dental Council of India.
The University later realising that it was recognised, intimated the petitioner that it had decided to consider his case for migration against vacant seats in B.D.S.
II year at D.A V Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
He immediately addressed a letter to the respondent-University that before accepting the offer, he would like to be reassured that his application for migration to Dental College, Rohtak was considered.
No reply was given to him and he was informed that he had been granted migration to D.A.V Centenary Dental College at Yamunanagar.
Petitioner immediately wrote another letter seeking reply to his earlier representation with regard to his claim for migration to Government Dental College, Rohtak.
When no decision was taken in the matter, he approached this court for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner, on the basis of pleadings, referred to above, contends that the action of respondents in permitting migration to petitioner at Yaumnanagar in spite of his preference to be migrated to Dental College, Rohtak and preferring respondent Nos. 4 to 7 to be migrated to dental College, Rohtak, even though they had lesser marks than him,is not only against the guidelines formulated by the University itself but is also arbitrary as there were no special circumstances available for giving precedence to respondent Nos. 4 to 7 and it was only a method of pick-and-choose which was adopted.
4.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 4, 6, 7 and 5.
However, inasmuch as the cause of petitioner has been opposed on identical grounds, it shall be enough to notice the defence projected in the written statement field on behalf of respondent No. 2.
By way of preliminary objections, it is pleaded that even though request of petitioner for migration from the said College to Dental College, Rohtak for BDS IInd year was received within the stipulated period but the Dental College, Rohtak while sending the applications of the students numbering 49 had pointed out that petitioner was not eligible to be migrated for the reason that the college from which he was seeking migration was not recognised by the Dental Council of India.
The Rules that have been laid down for the purpose of migration to BDS course specifically provide that migration shall not be permitted if the College from which migration shall not be permitted if the College from which migration is sought, is not approved by the Dental Council of India.
It was, thus, a condition precedent.
The respondent-University in spite of rejecting the request of petitioner for migration from the said College to Dental College, Rohtak, on the basis of the remarks given by the Dental College, Rohtak, considered his request sympathetically and decided to allow him migration to DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar provided he was to submit the following documents :-  "(i) No objection certificate from the Principal, DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
(ii) No objection/clearance certificate by the Dental Council of India, New Delhi regarding his migration from the North-Bengal Dental College, Siliguri (West Bengal) to this University."
Accordingly, petitioner was asked to submit the aforesaid documents vide letter Annexure P-4.
In the meanwhile, respondent-University received clarification from the Dental Council of India, New Delhi in a similar case of Miss Kamna Vij that the migration from approved Colleges is also permissible.
Though, the rules laid down by the respondent-University speak very clearly that such migrations are permissible only of those Dental Colleges whose BDS degree has been recognised by the Dental Council of India, yet the respondent-University taking lenient view in the matter, allowed migration to petitioner from the said College to DAV Centenary Dental College at Yamunanagar.
It is further pleaded that migration could not be claimed as a matter of right.
It is pleaded that a candidate must have valid reasons for migration and that there was no mention in the rules that migration would be allowed on merit as alleged by petitioner.
Rather, it has been mentioned categorically in the Rules that a candidate must have valid reasons for migration.
The validity of the reasons is to be examined by the University as the proviso to consider/allow migration to Dental College, Rohtak is within its discretion and it was competent to decide such cases as deemed fit and proper under the valid reasons and circumstances of each individual case.
Reliance has also been placed upon some orders passed by this Court holding that migration could not be claimed as a matter of right.
Insofar as the facts of the case are concerned, the same have not been disputed nor has it been disputed while giving reply on merits that four respondents, who have been arrayed in the present petition, were having lesser marks than petitioner in BDS first professional course.
It has also been admitted that in the committee constituted by the Vice-Chancellor, it was decided that precedence would be given to those who had better score in the first professional course but when the proceedings were placed before the Vice-Chancellor the same were not approved/accepted.
5.
During the course of arguments, Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 has sought to defend the action of respondents solely on the ground that BDS course of North-Bengal Dental College, Siliguri has not been approved by the Dental Council of India and that being the first condition precedent for migration, petitioner should think lucky that he has been permitted migration to D.A.V Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the view that even though it be not permissible for any one to ask migration as a matter of right but if the same is permitted and has actually been done in number of other cases relating to different persons, method of pick and choose could not be adopted.
The University- authorities were duty-bound to follow the procedure laid down by it and allow migration of only those candidates who fulfilled the conditions so laid down.
If the number of seats available were more than the persons applying and all those who had applied, had fulfilled the criteria, there would have been no difficulty in the matter.
However, when the seats offered for migration were less and the candidates seeking migration were for more in number, the authorities could not prefer the one at the cost of other when there were no special circumstances made out in favour of the latter.
I have decided another matter today (Civil Writ Petition No. 13507 of 1993 title as Nitasha Paul v. The Director/Principal, Dental College, Rohtak & Ors., 1994(2) S.C.T.
193) wherein it has been noticed that approximately all candidates had made prayer for migration on the ground of their bad health.
Once the reasons asking for migration were the same, then all of them must to treated alike.
It was not open to the University authorities in such circumstances to choose any one they liked for migration and, likewise, ignore whom they thought should ignored.
The only relevant factor, once other things are alike, was to see the merits of the candidates in their first professional course.
It is not disputed that at one stage a sub-committee was constituted by the Vice-Chancellor, which recommended that those who scored more marks in first professional course would be given precedence over others.
Even if the said report was not approved/accepted by the Vice-Chancellor, there was no other better method to be adopted by it.
The one who had scored more marks had, thus, necessarily to be preferred.
Any other approach in the matter would leave the authorities with unguided powers which would result in discriminating the persons who are equally situate.
The action of the State has to be fair and arbitrary action, which offends Article 14 of the Constitution of India, has necessarily to invite adverse comments.
This court while dealing with identical situation in Meenakashi Singla v. State of Punjab & Ors., 1991(2) SCT 720 (P&H), held that "both in principle and in equity the stand of the respondents appears to be unfair.
The petitioners being higher in order of merit than respondent Nos. 5 to 8, had a better claim for being allowed to shift to a college of their choice.
The action of the respondent-authorities in not permitting them to do so is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India."
In Rajiv Puri and another v. Punjab University & Ors., 1992(1) RSJ 47, it was held that "even in the matter of grant of concession/subsidy the instrumentality of the State even in the matter of exercise of discretionary power must be confined and structured by rational relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the Government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government was liable to be struck down."
These observations were made while considering the case of migration only.
Again the Supreme Court in Khalid Hussain Commissioner & Secretary to Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors, 1987(4) SLR, 598 held that "when while governing admission in reserved categories, it is found that those who have applied are more or less equal, the best method is to go by marks obtained at the qualifying examination.
In such a case, the selection must necessarily depend upon their academic merits.
"Even though Khalid Hussain's case (supra) was a case of admission and not of migration but the same principle would apply.
7.
Petitioner is vitally interested in seeking migration to dental College, Rohtak as, admittedly, the fee payable at DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar is manifolds than that which is payable at Dental College, Rohtak.
Petitioner was, admittedly higher in merit than respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
The ground' on which petitioner and respondent Nos. 4 to 7 sought migration were the same.
The precedence in migration had, thus, necessarily to be given on the basis of marks obtained in the first professional course.
8.
The contention of Mr. Ashok Aggarwal that the B.D.S Course of the said College from where petitioner wanted to be migrated, was not recognised by the Dental Council of India, has to be summarily rejected.
In their written statement it has been admitted by the official respondents in no uncertain terms that respondent-University had received letter from the Dental Counsel of India in a similar case of Miss Kamna Vij that migration from an approved college is also permissible.
It was only after the clarification was received that petitioner was permitted migration to D.A.V Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar.
It is too late for the respondents now to take a contrary stand.
That apart, learned counsel for the petitioner has shown me list on Institutors that have been recognised or approved by the Dental Council of India and in the list aforesaid the North Bengal Dental College, North Bengal Medical College & Hospital Campus, Sushrutanagar, Siliguri is mentioned at Sr. No. 50 and it has been mentioned that the same stands approved.
In the note appended to the said list it has been mentioned that those Colleges which have been approved, have been granted prior approval by the Dental Council of India for starting the BDS course.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to permit migration to petitioner in Maharshi Dayanand University and Government Dental College, Rohtak forthwith.
This Court is not inclined to give directions to the University to cancel migration of the last person so allowed as this course is not suggested by the learned counsel for the parties for the reason that the person to be affected must have already studied for quite some time and cancellation of his/her migration at this stage would result in tremendous loss to him/her.
10.
However, before I part with this judgment, I would like to observe that students who seek migration simply by having some influence or for any other extraneous consideration should not be leniently dealt with.
If such a case comes to the notice of this Court in future, there will be no choice left with this Court but for to cancel such migration and even to condemn the action of University authorities and in given cases, even to punish them by inflicting costs upon them.
In the wake of directions given above, if any additional seat is to be created so as to accommodate the petitioner, the same be created by the University authorities.
Petition allowed.