VK Bali, J - Nitasha Paul through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order migrating respondent Nos. 4 to 11 to the Dental College, Rohtak in preference to her claim for migration being higher in merit.
The facts, on which the relief aforesaid rests, need a brief mention.
2.
Petitioner got admission in KLES Dental College and Hospital, Belgaum (Karnataka) and after passing her first professional year of Bachelor of Dental Surgery applied for migration to BDS IInd year at Dental College, Rohtak.
Alongwith her application, she attached a certificate dated July 22, 1993 from the Principal Dental College & Hospital, Belgaum certifying that she was bona fide student of the college studying in IInd year BDS course for the year 1993-94.
She also stated that the Dental College, Belgaum was recognised by the Dental Council of India and she had been admitted in the first year BDS on the basis of her 10+2 marks.
Alongwith the application, she also annexed no objection certificate as also the Marks-sheet from the Karnataka University of the first year BDS examination and domicile certificate of Haryana.
Her application was received in the office of Dental College, Rohtak at serial No. 4298 on August 4, 1993.
There were in all 49 applicants who had prayed for their migration from different Dental Colleges throughout India to Dental College, Rohtak for the IInd year profession BDS Course.
On scrutiny of the said 49 applications, the sub-committee consisting of the Dean of the College Dr. (Mrs.) MK Chadha, Dr. BR Arora and Dr. VK Grover, found only 23 candidates to be eligible and obviously the cases of remaining 26 applicants were summarily rejected.
In order of merit, the following candidates were recommended for their migration to Dental College, Rohtak by the sub- committee :-  1.
Aradhna Mishra 2.
Umand S Nayyar, 3.
Nitasha Paul, 3.
Naveen Chhabra, 5.
Puneet, 6.
Puneet Batra, 7.
Rashi Majithia.
The marks obtained by each of the candidates in the first year profession BDS course were also mentioned against their names.
It requires to be mentioned that there were in all eight seats and inasmuch as the 8th candidate had since already been admitted in the Dental College, Rohtak, even before the expiry of three months period, the names of only seven candidates were recommended by the Sub-Committee for their migration of Dental College, Rohtak.
The Vice Chancellor of the MD University, Rohtak had earlier in point of time i.e. on February 20, 1991, constituted a committee for laying down the criteria for migration and the report submitted by the committee it is stated was accepted by the Vice Chancellor.
The extract of the MD University Calendar, VII.
I, 1987 page 109 insofar as the same is relevant with regard to rules governing migration to BDS course runs thus :-  "The migration of a candidate from a Dental College, whose B.D.S.
degree has not been recognised by the Dental Council of India, shall not be permitted.
The application for migration must be made by the applicant within three months of the date of declaration of MDU, Rohtak result.
In case the request is received after three months, the approval of the Dental Council of India be obtained.
The applicant : (a) must have passed :- (i) the first professional BDS examination of other University; (ii) the medical entrance examination or where the medical entrance examination is not held, the pre-medical or its equivalent examination with at least 50% marks in the aggregate of the subjects of English, Chemistry (Organic and Inorganic), Physics and Biology.
(b) Must belong to the State of Haryana or to the State Govt. whose candidates are admitted to reserved seats, and are recommended by them for migration to the Medical College, Dental College, Rohtak.
(c) Produce all such certificates and pays all fees as may be demanded by the Principal/Director of the College.
A candidate must have valid reasons for migration.
Migration cannot be claimed as a matter of right and may be refused by the University without assigning any reason.
Migration will be allowed against the vacant seat, if any, out of the sanctioned strength in the year of admission.
(d) the migrating student must join the new College within 30 days of the sanction of the migration by the University.
Otherwise, his migration will automatically stand cancelled unless the period from sufficient cause, is extended by the Vice Chancellor."
Even though the recommendation made by the sub-committee contained the name of petitioner at Serial No. 3 as per her merit and the report of the sub- committee as also the recommendation of petitioner were in consonance with the rules of migration as also the report of the committee that was constituted in the year 1991, she was not allowed migration and instead respondent No. 11, Mr. Munish Madan was granted migration.
It was on the orders of the Vice Chancellor that Mr. Munish Madan was allowed migration even before the expiry of stipulated period of three months.
The recommendations of the sub-committee were ignored and vide impugned order dated October 19, 1993 (Annexure P.4), the Vice Chancellor granted migration of respondent Nos. 4 to 10 against remaining seven seats excluding the seat of Mr. Munish Madan, who was granted migration on September 14, 1993.
Petitioner has give a cooperative chart of the marks obtained by her and the respondents No. 4 to 10 in so far as it is known to her and the same are as follows :-  "1.
Nitasha Paul (Petitioner) 416/660 2.
Ms. Puneet (Respondent No. 4) 409/600 3.
Sumeet Malik (Respondent No. 6) 369/600 4.
Ms. Monika Bhasin (Respondent No. 7) 372/600 5.
Mr. Manoj Mittal (Respondent No. 9) 355/600 6.
Mr. Tarun Kumar (Respondent No. 10) 340/600."
3.
It is further pleaded that though one Pooja Batra was declared ineligible by the sub-committee yet she was allowed migration.
On the facts aforesaid, it is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that by ignoring the rightful claim of petitioner and giving precedence to those who did not deserve migration either on the basis of the rules or recommendations of the sub-committee, the respondents and in particular the Vice Chancellor have proceeded in the matter in a wholly arbitrary manner.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed in five sets of written statements, one filed by respondents No. 2 and 3, second by respondent No. 5 third by respondent No. 7, fourth by respondent No. 11 and fifth by respondents No. 4, 6 and 8 to 10.
Inasmuch as the defence projected in the written statements is similar, it would be sufficient to note the averments made by respondents No. 2 and 3.
By way of preliminary objections, it is pleaded that migration of respondents No. 4 to 11 on the strength of decision rendered by this Court of Civil Writ Petition No. 5954 of 1992 decided on 361992 cannot be challenged as in the subsequent judgments, it has been specifically held that migration is not a legal right.
It is further pleaded that there is no violation of any Rule or Regulations, laid down under the Ordinance for migration to Medical/Dental College Rohtak.
As per provisions laid down in the relevant Ordinance, migration cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
According to the said provisions, a candidate must have valid reasons for migration from other Medical Colleges to Medical/Dental College, Rohtak.
It is further pleaded that there is no mention in the relevant rules that migrations will be allowed on merit.
It has rather been mentioned that a candidate must have valid reasons for migration.
The validity of the reasons is to be examined by the respondent-University as the power to consider migration to Dental College is with the respondent-University and the same is competent to decide such cases as it deems fit and proper under the valid reasons/circumstances of each individual case.
It is further pleaded that one of the conditions is that a candidate must be a domicile of the State of Haryana.
Even though the petitioner had submitted such certificate but the same was found not convincing as she had herself mentioned her address of Delhi and prima facie she was, thus, not domicile of Haryana.
It is further pleaded that the medical certificate issued by the Civil Surgeon, Faridabad to the effect that the petitioner was found to be suffering from enteric fever and bronchial allergy was also not convincing.
For bronchial allergy, the petitioner was to remain under constant treatment and a proper follow-up was necessary.
There was nothing on the record that she was getting constant treatment.
The case as pleaded on merits is not different from the preliminary objections as have already been noticed above.
The respondents have justified the migration of Mr. Manish Madan and Miss Pooja Batra.
In the other sets of written statements filed by respondents No. 4 to 11, it has been pleaded they were suffering from various diseases and certificates showing that they were actually having some ailment have been produced.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that the petitioner deserves the relief claimed by her.
There were 49 applicants who had submitted their applications for migration from different Dental Colleges throughout the country.
All these applications were scrutinised by the sub- committee consisting of the Dean of Dental College, Rohtak, Dr. (Mrs.) MK Chadha, Dr. BR Arora and Dr. VK Grover.
The sub-committee recommended, after scrutinising all the documents submitted by the respective candidates the name of seven persons and admittedly Nitasha Paul, the present petitioner was at No. 3 in accordance with the marks obtained in the first professional of B.D.S.
Course.
6.
Migration to B.D.S.
course is governed by Maharishi Dayanand University Calendar Volume I It is provided under the relevant provisions of the Calendar that the migration of a candidate from the Dental College, whose B.D.S.
degree has not been recognised by the Dental Council of India shall not be permitted.
The application for migration was to be made within three months of the date of declaration of Maharishi Dayanand University result.
In case the request is received after three months, the approval of the Dental Council of India was to be obtained.
There are further necessary conditions for migration which are as follows :-  The applicant (a) must have passed :- (i) the first professional BD S Examination of other University; (ii) the medical entrance examination or where the medical entrance examination is not held, the pre-medical or its equivalent examination with atleast 50% marks in the aggregate of the subjects of English, Chemistry (Organic and Inorganic), Physics and Biology; (b) must belong to the State of Haryana or to the State Government whose candidates are admitted on reserved seats, and are recommend by them for migration to the Medical College, Rohtak/Dental College, Rohtak.
(c) produces all such certificates and pays all fees as may be demanded by the principal/director-principal of the college.
A candidate must have valid reasons for migration.
Migration cannot be claimed as a matter of right and may be refused by the University without assigning any reason.
Migration will be allowed against a vacant seat, if any, out of the sanctioned strength in the year of admission; (d) the migrating student must join the new college within 30 days of the sanction of the migration by the University.
Otherwise, his migration will automatically stand cancelled, unless the period of sufficient causes is extended by the Vice-Chancellor."
7.
Migration from one college of the University to another is also dealt within the Ordinance of the Maharishi Dayanand University.
The same runs as under :-  "Migration from one College of the University to Another.
1.
A student who has joined one college of the University and wishes to migrate to another college of the University during the same course shall be permitted to do so only if the principals of both the colleges agree to the migration and the application is forwarded to the Registrar for sanction through the principals of both the colleges, accompanied by a fee of Rs. 5/- which shall not be refunded."
8.
The case of petitioner as spelled out from the pleadings is further that the Vice Chancellor for making admissions and migration constituted a committee and the said Committee in its meeting held on 2021991 submitted its report Annexure P-3.
It is specifically laid down in report Annexure P-3 that migration should be allowed strictly on the basis of marks obtained in the first professional examination.
The positive case of the petitioner is that the report of the Committee was accepted by the Vice Chancellor.
In the written statement that has been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 even though the constitution of the Committee and report Annexure P-3 given by it is admitted but fact that the same was accepted by the Vice Chancellor has been denied.
Once the Committee constituted to go into the merits of all the applicants seeking migration had recommended the case of petitioner who was at serial No. 3 in accordance with the marks obtained by her in the first professional of B.D.S.
Course, it is presumed that the Committee had gone into the details with regard to eligibility of all the candidates and finding them eligible recommendation were made.
It is not disputed in the written statement that the case of petitioner was not considered on merits as also on the basis of the eligibility criteria as spelled out from the relevant Ordinances contained in Maharishi Dayanand University Calendar.
However, besides opposing the cause of the petitioner on the ground that migration cannot be asked for as a matter or right, it is further pleaded that the particulars given by the petitioner especially with regard to her address prima facie point towards the fact that she was not domicile of Haryana as also that the reasons asking for migration i.e. ailment from which she was stated to be suffering also created doubts in the minds of the authorities concerned.
9.
During the course of arguments, it is the right of the petitioner asking for migration as also her eligibility on account of being not domicile of Haryana which is being pressed.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal has not chosen to oppose the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the cause given by her i.e. ill-health was a made up affair.
Scrutiny of the record also shows that in almost all the cases where migration was granted, the reasons was ill-health only and in quite a few cases, the certificates were issued by the private doctors and the ailment mentioned was also such which could be easily mentioned by any doctor simply on the asking of person concerned.
For this precise reason, Mr. Aggarwal, has not addressed arguments on this ground.
10.
In so far as the contention of Mr. Aggarwal that migration is not a right and it is not necessary for the authorities to grant migration even if criteria spelled out for migration is made out is concerned, there cannot be any dispute.
However, what requires adjudication in this case is as to whether the action of the respondents in refusing migration to the petitioner and granting the same to the persons who either did not answer the criteria for migration or were less meritorious and the reasons asking for migration were the same on which the petitioner has asked for migration is arbitrary, thus, offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
As mentioned above, the only ground for ignoring the recommendations of the Committee constituted for the purpose of migration was that prima facie petitioner was not a domicile of Haryana.
Petitioner, in the very first instance, while making her application submitted domicile certificate misused by the Sub Division Officer (Civil), Ballabgarh reads as follows :-  "Certified that Kumari/Shrimati/Shri Nitasha Paul daughter of Rupla Kukreja wife of Sat Paul is a resident of C H C Kaurali Tehsil Ballabgarh District Faridabad and is domicile of Haryana State in terms of sub para of para No. 2 of Chief Secretary Haryana's Letter No. 4663-6GSI-77/19856, dated 26th July, 1977, as amended by letter No. 62/29/84-6GSI, dated 8th May, 1985.
This certificate is issued on the basis of verification made by the Civil Surgeon, Faridabad."
11.
The petitioner has filed replication by way of affidavit wherein she has further pleaded that her real mother (Mrs Rupla Kukreja) is posted as Senior Medical Officer at Government Primary Health Centre, Kurali, Tehsil Ballabgarh, District Faridabad Dr. Rupla Kukreja is the permanent regular employee in the Health Department of Haryana Government for the last more than 22 years.
She is resident of Kurali where she is posted.
She has a regular ration card holder at Kurali.
In the ration card of Dr. Rupla Kukreja, the petitioner's name is specifically mentioned alongwith other members of the family.
Even Maharishi Dayanand University has specified the persons who would be eligible for being considered to possess the Haryana bona fide residence/domicile.
The Prospectus of 1991 issued by the University for MBBS/BDS Entrance Examinations specifies the persons to be bona fide residents/domicile of Haryana State.
The relevant extract of the Prospectus is as follows :-  "A Haryana Bona fide Residence/Domicile.
The following categories of persons would be eligible for being considered to possess the Haryana Bona fide Residence/Dominic : i) Candidates who have passed the qualifying examination from an institution/School/College located in Haryana (See Chapter IV Paragraph IV) ii) Children/wards (if parents are not living/dependents : a) of the employees of Haryana State in or outside Haryana State or working on deputation; b) of the employees of the Government of India posted in Chandigarh or in Haryana in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
12.
Domicile certificate Annexure P-6 was issued to the petitioner by specifically mentioning that she was daughter of Rupla Kukreja.
Normally it is the name of the father which is mentioned but in the present case it was the name of mother which was mentioned in domicle certificate.
This was not without any purpose.
As mentioned above Rupla Kukreja mother of the petitioner was permanent employee of Haryana State for the last several years.
Even though this was the situation and the Committee constituted to go into various aspects of the matter with regard of eligibility of the candidates who had applied for migration had recommended the case of petitioner by obviously construing that the domicle certificate Annexure P-6 is in correct perspective, the Vice Chancellor has chosen to deny migration considering that she was not domicle of Haryana as address given by her was of Delhi.
If there was some doubt in the mind of the Vice Chancellor and he was not to believe the report of the Committee, in all fairness, the petitioner should have been called to clarify the position.
instead, she was denied migration in preference to those who had applied for migration on the same very grounds and those who had obtained less marks than her in the first professional examination.
13.
Once applicants qualify eligibility criteria as also the compassionate reasons on which migration is asked for in similar way and manner, the only plausible way inter se such candidates for migration is to see the merit in the examination of first professional course.
This course was admittedly adopted or sought to be adopted in making recommendations by the Sub-Committee constituted on that behalf in the year 1991 but for no valid grounds spelled out in the written statement, the report of the Sub-Committee was not accepted.
Even though the report was not accepted yet the University could not simply adopt a method of pick and choose.
If this course is accepted, this will vest the authorities with the discretion to indulge in favouritism.
It is settled law that even in the matter of discretion, the authorities concerned have necessarily to apply the principle of fairness.
Neither there is any plea nor an argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that there were special circumstances in the case of respondents No. 4 to 11 entitling them migration in preference to the petitioner.
If the case of the petitioner asking for migration was the same as asked for by respondents No. 4 to 11, the University was enjoined to treat them alike.
Taking up students of its own choice without there being any additional ground would be an act of arbitrarioness and even though migration may not be a matter of right, the action of the respondent has to be construed and styled to be discriminatory, thus, offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
14.
This Court while dealing with identical situation in Meenakshi Singla v. State of Punjab and Ors., 1991(2) SCT 720 (P&H), held that "both in principle and in equity, the stand of the respondents appears to be unfair.
The petitioners being higher in order of merit than respondent Nos 5 to 8, had a better claim for being allowed to shift to a college of their choice.
The action of the respondent-authorities in not permitting them to do so is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In Rajiv Puri & Anr. v. Panjab University & Ors., 1992(1) SCT 148 (P&H) : 1992(1) RSJ 47, it was held that even in the matter of grant of concession/subsidy the instrumentality of the State even in the matter of exercise of discretionary power must be confined and structured by rational relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case of cases, the action of the Government was liable to be struck down. "
These observations were made while considering the case of migration only.
Again, the Supreme Court in India in Khalid Hussain v. Commissioner & Secretary to Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors, 1987(4) SLR, 598, held that "when while governing admission in reserved categories, it is found that those who have applied are more or less equal, the best method is to go by marks obtained at the qualifying examination.
In such a case, the selection must necessarily depend upon their academic merits.
"Even though Khalid Hussain's case (supra) was a case of admission and not of migration but the same principal would apply.
15.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to permit migration of the petitioner in Maharishi Dayanand University and Government Dental College of Rohtak forthwith.
The Court is not inclined to give directions to the University to cancel migration of the last person so allowed as this course is not suggested by the learned counsel for the parties for the reasons that the persons to be affected must have already studied for quite some time and cancellation of his her migration at this stage would result in tremendous loss to him/her.
16.
However, before I part with this judgment, I would like to observe that students who seek migration simply by having some influence or for any other extraneous consideration should not be leniently dealt with.
If such a case comes to the notice of this Court in future, there will be no choice left with this court but for to cancel such migration and even to condemn the action of the University authorities and in given cases,even to punish them by inflicting costs upon them.
In the wake of directions given above, if any additional seat is to be created so as to accommodate the petitioner, the same be created by the University authorities.