GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - In this petition the petitioner has questioned the legality of the order (Annexure P-3) dated 31.1.1981 passed by the Director, Agriculture, Punjab, terminating his service after he had served as Sub Inspector in the Department of Agriculture, Punjab for a period of nine years.
The petitioner has prayed that the impugned order be quashed and a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise his services.
2.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner joined the service of the Department of Agriculture, Government of Punjab, on his appointment as Sub Inspector vide order dated March 25, 1972, of the Oil and Seeds Extension Officer, Punjab, Ludhiana.
This appointment of the petitioner was purely ad hoc.
As already mentioned above, he had rendered nine years of service when the impugned order came to be issued by the Director, Agriculture, Punjab, terminating his services on the ground that the departmental committee has found him to be ineligible for the purposes of regularisation in service.
3.
The petitioner has made reference to the policy decision of the Government of Punjab regarding regularisation of the services of the ad hoc appointees.
He has placed reliance upon Annexures P-1 and P-2 in support of his assertion that the Government of Punjab has taken a policy decision for regularisation of the services of the existing ad hoc employees.
He has pleaded that even though he fulfilled the conditions prescribed by the Government which entitled him to be regularised in service, the respondent- Director, Agricultural, Punjab, has passed the impugned order and this has been done without hearing him.
4.
Writ petition has been opposed by the respondents, who have in their reply stated that the petitioner did not fulfil the conditions prescribed by the Government in its Circular dated 351977 (Annexure P-1) and, therefore, his service could not be regularised.
In substance the plea of the respondents is that the petitioner had not been appointed through the Employment Exchange or through open advertisement and, therefore, he could not be regularised in service.
5.
While issuing notice of motion on February 19, 1981, this Court had stayed the termination of the services of the petitioner.
After hearing the parties, the Court admitted the writ petition on 1041981 and ordered that the stay shall continue.
It is thus clear that under the stay order passed by the Court, the petitioner has rendered continuous service for the last thirteen years.
In all he has completed more than 22 years of service as on date.
6.
A perusal of Annexures P-1 and P-2 clearly shows that the Government of Punjab had taken a policy decision to regularise the services of the ad hoc appointees who had rendered a particular length of service as ad hoc employees, while Annexure P-1 postulated regularisation of the services of those who had completed one year's service as on 3131977 on the condition that such employee fulfils the condition of eligibility which included a condition that the appointment was made through Employment Exchange or by open advertisement, Annexure P-2 further provided for regularisation of service of ad hoc employees who had completed three years of service on 3091980.
This category of employees could be regularised even though they did not fulfil the prescribed condition with regard to eligibility, age or mode of their initial recruitment.
The only rider was that the Department service rules must have contained a provision for relaxation of those conditions of recruitment.
It can thus be said that the Government had thought it fit to confer the benefit of regularisation of service to those employees who had completed one year's service as on 3131977 and also on those who had completed three years' service as on 3091980 in ad hoc capacity.
It is true that the petitioner was not appointed through Employment Exchange or from open market but it is equally true that the petitioner has not been charged with the allegation of having played fraud or of having made any misrepresentation in securing appointment as an ad hoc appointee in May, 1972.
It is also not the case of the respondents that his work, conduct or efficiency had been adversely commented upon by his superior authorities.
In the background of these facts, it is not possible to uphold the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioner.
The respondents have not placed any material before the Court to show that the candidature of the petitioner was considered for regularisation in terms of para 2 of Annexure P-2 dated 28101980.
This lapse on the part of the respondents has certainly caused serious prejudice to the petitioner.
In my considered opinion, failure of the respondents to take action in accordance with the policy decision of the Government for regularisation of the services of the petitioner cannot be made the basis for passing an adverse order against the petitioner on the premises that he had been appointed in service without his name having been sponsored by the Employment Exchange or without consideration of his case through open market competition.
For this reason, the impugned order of termination of the services of the petitioner is liable to be quashed.
7.
An additional reason for quashing of the order of termination of the services of the petitioner is that after having rendered nine years of service as on 31.1.1981 without any blemish, the petitioner had acquired sufficient experience which ought to have been taken note of by the respondents for waving the requirement of recruitment through Employment Exchange or by inviting applications through open market.
In Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Municipal Development Corporation, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 371, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that even though the petitioner may not be possessing the minimum prescribed qualification at the time of appointment, he had gained sufficient experience after three years service so as to become entitled to be confirmed in the service.
Though the principle laid down in Bhagwati Prasad's case (supra) may not be applicable to the facts of this case in exact terms, taking note of the fact that by now the petitioner has rendered more than 22 years of service, I find sufficient justification for quashing order Annexure P-3 and at the same time for giving a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of service in terms of Annexure P-1 read with Annexure P-2.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, order Annexure P-3 dated 31.1.1981 is declared illegal and is hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of service in the light of Annexures P-1 and P-2 and also the decision of the Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad's case (supra).
Necessary action in this regard should be taken within three months of the filing of the certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.