SK Jain, J - The petitioner has challenged the order of disciplinary authority/General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal dated January 23, 1990, terminating his services and the appellate order dated September 22, 1993 passed by the State Transport Commissioner, Haryana affirming in appeal the order of the disciplinary authority dated January 23, 1990, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a Conductor in Haryana Roadways.
He was posted as such with bus bearing Registration No. 3449 on May 20, 1986.
Sh. Jia Lal Inspector and Bicha Ram, Adda Conductor checked the bus at Fairan and found that the petitioner had charged full fare of Rs. 36/- from 18 passengers from Narwana to Naher and Rs. 93/- from 31 passengers from Narwana to Kaloda, but had not issued any tickets to the passengers.
He embezzled the Government money to the tune of Rs. 129/-.
The Inspector submitted a complaint to the disciplinary authority.
The petitioner was placed under suspension.
Charge memo was served upon him, but he did not file reply to the same.
A regular enquiry was ordered against him.
The petitioner did not join the enquiry proceedings.
The Enquiry Officer, after recording evidence, came to the following conclusions :-  "After reading all the documents including the report and statement given by the complainant present on the enquiry file I have reached the conclusion that the complainant has been able to prove the allegations levelled against the employee.
Because the employee was directed to join the enquiry vide registered letters of this office but the employee did not come present knowingly before the enquiry officer.
The non-attendance of the enquiry by the employee is proof of the fact that he accepts the allegations levelled against him and wants to say nothing in his defence.
After carefully perusing the enquiry file and all the relevant facts and after seeing the registered letter and their acknowledgement I have no option but to hold the employee guilty.
I consider Shri Dev Dut Conductor No. 243 fully guilty of the above case because he knowingly did not come present in the enquiry even after receipt of the letters pertaining to the enquiry.
The enquiry file from pages 1 to 160 are sent to you for necessary action."
3.
On receipt of the enquiry report, the disciplinary authority issued him a second show cause notice as to why the proposed punishment be not inflicted upon him.
The petitioner was duly served with the show cause notice, but he did not file reply to the same.
The disciplinary authority found that the charge of embezzlement of Govt. money stood proved against the petitioner and it ordered termination from service.
The relevant portion of the order of the disciplinary authority dated January 23, 1990, reads as under :-  "After receipt of the show cause notice the employee submitted no reply to that notice.
Acknowledgement is available on the file.
But before taking final decision I thought proper in the interest of justice to hear the employee personally on which a letter for personal hearing was issued vide this office memo No. 15190/ECC dated 18.12.89 to the effect that he should come present for personal hearing on 12190 at 900 am otherwise ex-parte departmental proceedings would be taken against him.
Even after receipt of that letter the employee did not come present for personal hearing due to which it is clear that he wanted to say nothing in his defence.
Before taking any decision I have carefully perused the file.
The employee was given full opportunity to defend himself.
But he did not take advantage of any opportunity.
Even on receipt of the letter he neither submitted a written reply nor came present.
The allegations levelled against the employee were that on 20586 when he was on duty on Bus No. 3449 then after charging Rs. 36/- from 18 passengers as fare from Narwana to Naher and Rs. 93/- from 31 passengers from Narwana to Kaloda he had not issued the tickets.
By embezzling Rs. 129/- he had caused financial loss to the department.
During the enquiry Shri Dev Dutt conductor did not come present even after affording opportunity a number of times; then Jia Lal Inspector gave his statement and proved the allegations levelled against the employee.
Even otherwise also, in the report which was submitted against the Conductor it was clearly mentioned that 18 passengers were travelling from Narwana to Naher and he did not issue tickets after charging Rs. 2/- each and embezzled Rs. 36/- and had not issued tickets to 31 passengers from Narwana to Kaloda by charging Rs. 3/- each and has embezzled Rs. 93/-.
In this manner Rs. 129/- were embezzled in all.
The Inspector submitted unpunched tickets alongwith the report.
Briefly I have reached the conclusion that the allegations levelled against the employee are fully proved.
The employee despite the opportunity wanted to say nothing in his defence.
Therefore I considering Dev Dutt Conductor No. 60/243 as guilty and do not think it proper to retain him in service due to the serious allegations of embezzling of Rs. 129/-.
Therefore I order the termination of the services of Shri Dev Dutt No. 60/243 with immediate effect in public interest (Sewa Hit) and confine emoluments for the suspended period of 22586 to 31.10.86 to the subsistence allowance."
4.
The petitioner challenged the order of the disciplinary authority dated January 23, 1990 in appeal before the State Transport Commissioner, Haryana.
Before the appellate authority, it was represented that the petitioner had a clean record of service to his credit.
The appellate authority sent for the annual confidential reports of the petitioner and after perusing the same found that from June 9, 1983 to January 23, 1990, the petitioner was awarded the following punishments :-  Warning : 5 Censure : 5 Stoppage of annual Increment : 12 He was also awarded the following punishments from June 7, 1976 to December 18, 1980 :-  Warning : 6 Censure : 6 Stoppage of  annual : 2 increment The petitioner's services were terminated earlier also on December 18, 1980 but he was taken back in Service on March 28, 1983.
The petitioner has challenged the order of the appellate authority in this petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made the following submissions :- (i) That the order of the disciplinary authority is based upon no evidence; (ii) The petitioner was not associated with the enquiry; and (iii) The enquiry report was not supplied to the petitioner.
5.
The Enquiry Officer recorded the statement of Shri Jia Lal Inspector, who had inspected the bus on which he was deputed to work.
The bus was carrying passengers.
The petitioner had charged fare from the passengers but did not issue the tickets.
The accusations against him stood proved.
Relying upon the statements of the Adda Conductor and the Inspector, the Enquiry Officer found that the charges levelled against the petitioner stood proved.
6.
The petitioner was served with a notice by the Enquiry Officer, but despite service he did not join the enquiry proceedings.
The disciplinary authority also served him with a second show cause notice, but the petitioner did not choose to file any reply.
The disciplinary authority even made attempts to grant personal hearing to the petitioner before inflicting the proposed punishment upon him.
Notices were served upon him, but he did not appear before the disciplinary authority.
7.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report dated July 26, 1989 to the disciplinary authority.
The disciplinary authority took action against the petitioner pursuant to the enquiry report vide its order dated January 23, 1990.
In Union of India and others v. Moh.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471, the apex Court held that the report of the Enquiry Officer had to be supplied to the delinquent official when the enquiry had not been conducted by the disciplinary authority.
But in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : JT 1993 (6) SC 1, the apex Court held that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case would apply prospectively, meaning thereby that it would be applicable to the orders of punishment passed after November 20, 1990.
It will be relevant to reproduce the following observations of the apex Court :-  "Hence till 20th November, 1990, i.e. the day on which Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) was decided, the position of law on the subject was not settled by this Court.
It is for the first time in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) that this Court laid down the law.
That decision made the law laid down there prospective in operation, i.e., applicable to the orders of punishment passed after 20th November, 1990.
The law laid down was not applicable to the orders of punishment passed before that date notwithstanding the fact that the proceedings arising out of the same were pending in courts after that date.
The said proceedings had to be decided according to the law prevalent prior to the said date which did not require the authority to supply a copy of the Inquiry Officer's report to the employee.
The only exception to this was where the service rules with regard to the disciplinary proceedings themselves made it obligatory to supply a copy of the report to the employee.
The judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) was rendered by the apex Court on November 20, 1990.
The disciplinary authority had passed the order of termination from service on January 23, 1990, i.e. before the judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case was rendered by the apex Court.
The order of the disciplinary authority will not be vitiated merely on the ground that a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer was not supplied to the delinquent official.
8.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in the writ petition.
The same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.