GR Majithia, J - This appeal under Section 19 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1952 is directed against the order of the learned Single Judge in C.O.C.P.
No. 905 of 1991, dated October 20, 1991.
2.
A reference to relevant facts is necessary for adjudicating the question of law arising in this appeal.
The respondent challenged the order of the State Government, dated February 18, 1991 communicated to him by endorsement No. 1/45/90-4 Labour-1/1659, dated February 19, 1991 in Civil Writ Petition No. 6835 of 1991 in this Court.
Copies of these orders will be Appendix A & B to this judgment.
Vide first order, dated February 18, 1991, the respondent after reinstatement was posted in Circle No. 2, Amritsar.
Vide order of the same date, respondent after his reinstatement was posted as Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer in Circle No. 2, Amritsar.
The order by which the respondent was posted in Circle No. 2, Amritsar was appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition (C.W.P.
No. 6835 of 1991) and the order by which he was posted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer in Circle No. 2, Amritsar was annexed as Annexure P-10/A to the said writ petition.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing on May 7, 1991 and the Motion Bench passed the following order :-  "Contends that since the petitioner has been officiating against the only post of Assistant Labour Commissioner in the department since 941987, he should be deemed to have been confirmed in terms of Rule 8 of the Punjab Labour (Class-II) Service Rules, 1982 and, therefore, the impugned order, Annexure P-10/A, posting the petitioner as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, cannot be sustained.
Notice of motion for 3071993.
The operation of Annexure P-10/A stayed till further orders."
On July 30, 1991, the Motion Bench passed the following order :-  "Notice.
Stay to continue."
3.
The respondent moved this Court through C.O.C.P.
No. 905 of 1991 for initiating contempt proceedings against the appellants for non-implementing the orders of the Motion Bench in the Civil Writ Petition reproduced above.
4.
The appellants in their written statement pleaded that the Motion Bench which was seized of the writ Petition did not stay the operation of the order, appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition and at no point of time, the respondent had pointed out that this Court had stayed the operation of the order, a copy of which was appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition.
The learned Judge, who was seized of the Contempt Petition found that no case for initiating contempt proceedings against the appellants was made out.
The rule against them was discharged.
However, while discharging the rule, the learned Single Judge observed in the order under challenge thus :-  "After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records, I am of the considered view that Annexure P-10 was superseded by order, annexure P-10, and therefore, the petitioner should be sent to Amritsar in view of the fact that annexure P-10/A was specially stayed by the Division Bench of this Court.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner is being proceeded in departmental proceedings for disobeying the order, Annexure P-10.
Inasmuch as the operation of Annexure P-10/A was stayed, there does not appear to any case for proceeding against the petitioner.
A direction is, therefore, issued to the respondents to drop the proceedings against the petitioner in pursuance of charge sheet dated 23rd August, 1991.
It is made clear that if there be any other charge, but for disobedience by the petitioner so as to join at the place where he has been transferred on that account the proceedings can go on against him.
No further orders are required to be passed in this contempt petition and the same is disposed of in the manner indicated above.
The rule against the respondents is discharged."
5.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the direction issued by the learned Single Judge that the departmental proceedings initiated for non-compliance of the Government order, dated February 18, 1991, a copy of which was appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition (C.W.P.
No 6835 of 1991) should be dropped, could not be issued in exercise of contempt jurisdiction.
This direction was not necessary for deciding the contempt petition.
There is substance in the submission made.
The learned Judge found that no case for initiating the contempt proceedings against the appellants was made out and he discharged the rule.
The order observations reproduced above should not have been issued in view of the indisputed facts of the case.
Admittedly the operation of the order, a copy of which was appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition, was not stayed by the Motion Bench.
The respondent's posting in Circle No. 2, Amritsar was not stayed.
The Motion Bench had only stayed the posting of the respondent as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer in Circle No. 2, Amritsar.
It is not even remotely suggested that in Circle No. 2, there was no post apart from the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer against which the respondent could be adjusted.
Order dated February 18, 1991, a copy of which was appended as Annexure P-10 to the writ petition, enjoined upon the respondent to join the Circle No. 2, Amritsar after his reinstatement as Assistant Labour Commissioner, Punjab.
The respondent did not comply with this order and for this, the departmental proceedings had been initiated against him.
The respondent, if he so desired, could have challenged the validity of the departmental proceedings launched by the State Government for non-compliance of order, dated February 18, 1991 by which he was posted at Circle No. 2, Amritsar through separate petition in this Court.
The validity of the proceedings could not be challenged in the contempt petition.
The observations in the order except to the extent that rule has been discharged, could not have been made in view of the admitted position of the case.
6.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal succeeds.
The order of the learned Single Judge observing thus :  "I am of the considered view that Annexure P-10 was superseded by order Annexure P-10/A and, therefore, the petitioner should be sent to Amritsar in view of the fact that Annexure P/10/A was specifically stayed by the Division Bench of this Court.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner is being proceeded in departmental proceedings for disobeying the order, Annexure P-10.
in as much as the operation of Annexure P-10/A was stayed, there does not appear to any case for proceeding against the petitioner.
A direction is, therefore, issued to the respondents to drop the proceedings against the petitioner in pursuance of charge sheet, dated 23rd August, 1991."
Is quashed.
Order accordingly