R S Mongia, J(Oral) - The petitioner joined the MBBS Course in the year 1987 in Government Medical College, Patiala which is affiliated to Punjab University, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the University).
After clearing the 1st professional examination of MBBS the petitioner appeared in the 2nd Professional examination of MBBS held by the University in December, 1990.
When the result was declared he got 're-appear' in one subject, i.e.
Pathology.
He applied for rechecking of marks in Papers A and B in the subject of Pathology.
2.
The petitioner received a notice from the University, dated 18th April, 1991, charging him under Ordinance 38 of the Punjabi University Calendar, Volume II (pertaining to the use of unfair means), alleging therein that the petitioner along with some other boys went to the office of the University in connection with the re-checking of their answer-books and added figure '+3' to the marks already awarded by the Examiner against Question No. 3 on Page 1 of the answer book.
Through this notice, the petitioner was required to appear before the Committee dealing with unfair means cases on 23rd April, 1991.
The meeting of the Committee was postponed and the petitioner appeared before the said Committee on 20th August, 1991.
Another sitting of the Committee was held on 9th September, 1991, but the petitioner did not appear on the said date before the Committee.
The matter was put up before the Syndicate in its meeting held on 25th October, 1991, and it was resolved that the petitioner be punished by debarring him from appearing in the University examination for two years.
A translated copy of the Resolution of the Syndicate, dated 25th October, 1991, which has been appended with the amended writ petition as Annexure P-2, may be reproduced here :-  "26.
The case of use of unfair means by the candidate Vinay Kumar Sharma (Roll No. 738, MBBS IInd Prof. Dec 1990),  The Vice-Chancellor told the house that this candidate had given an application for re-checking.
The candidate came along with 4 or 5 boys to see his answer book.
They while seeing the answer book with the Superintendent added with their hand +3 marks to mark 1 of Q.No.
3 which has done as first one.
The case was sent to the UMC Committee and the decision which was given by the Committee after taking into consideration all the relevant factors is given on (Antika).
This case is not covered under the U.M.C.
Ordinance, therefore, the UMC Committee has under ordinance 38, which is given as under, sent this case for the consideration of the Syndicate.
Ordinance 38 : For a case of unfair means not covered by these Ordinances the Syndicate may, or the recommendation of the Committee dealing with unfair means cases, impose such punishment as they deem fit according to the nature of the offence.
It is resolved that Vinay Kumar Sharma, candidate of MBBS IInd Professional Roll No. 738 December, 1990 be debarred from appearing in the University examinations for two years for this offence."
According to the averments made in the petition, the above-said Resolution was endorsed to the petitioner on 22nd November, 1991, which was received by him on 27th November, 1991.
It may be noticed here that before the communication of the decision of the Syndicate, referred to above, to the petitioner, he had re-appeared in the Pathology papers of 2nd Professional Examination held in June, 1991(the subject in which he got reappear in the examination held in December, 1990).
In view of the decision of the Syndicate to punish the petitioner, the result of the Pathology papers concerning the petitioner, was not declared.
The decision of the Syndicate dated 25th October, 1991 was impugned by the petitioner by way of C.W.P.
No. 591 of 1992.
Various grounds were taken to assail the impugned decision of the Syndicate in that writ petition.
After dealing with various points raised by the counsel for the petitioner, the writ petition was allowed by a learned Single Judge of this Court on 12th June, 1992.
It will be appropriate at this stage to notice that part of the learned Single Judge, which would be relevant for the decision of this case :-  "It is specifically recorded in notice, Annexure P-1, that the petitioner while being shown the answer book of the subject snatched the same from the hands of the official of the University when he was accompanied by 4/5 boys and added the figure of +3 to the marks already awarded by the examiner against the answer to Question 3(a).
It is on the basis of this report, action was initiated against the petitioner which resulted in the issuance to show cause notice and the appointment of the Committee by the Syndicate to examine the matter and made a report.
The petitioner did appear before the Committee where various questions were put to him.
He answered all the questions, Report of the Committee, Annexure P-3 clearly records that the Superintendent of the Secrecy Branch had given a report of this incident and the same was available on record.
This report of the Superintendent was never put to the petitioner as is apparent from the questions put to him when he appeared before the Committee on August 20, 1991.
The only allegation against him is that when he appeared before the officials of the university, he snatched the answer book and added the figure of +3 to the marks already awarded by the examiner.
Neither the official of the Secrecy branch nor the Superintendent of that Branch was examined in the presence of the petitioner.
As noticed earlier, even the report of the incident made by the official or the Superintendent was not put to the petitioner when he appeared before the Committee.
In any case, the report of the Committee nowhere records that report of the official or the Superintendent was shown to the candidate.
The petitioner while appearing before the Committee did state that the University had communicated to him through a letter that he got three more marks as a result of re-checking.
He was asked to produce the letter on the next date of hearing.
It is the definite case of the University that no such letter was ever written to the petitioner.
The petitioner was required to appear before the Committee on September 9, 1991 vide letter Annexure A-2, but he did not appear.
It seems obvious that he did not appear as he was unable to produce the letter as stated earlier by him.
The Superintendent of the Examination Branch and a Clerk of Secrecy Branch were summoned by the Committee on September 9, 1991 but no material adverse to the petitioner was collected on that date.
They only gave certain clarifications to the Committee regarding which it was perhaps in doubt.
These officials only brought to the notice of the Committee that the effect of adding the figure of +3 to the marks already awarded would be that the candidate would get through the examination by getting grace marks.
The answer book was shown to the petitioner as he had deposited double fee as required by the Ordinances.
The answer book containing the addition of three marks as also the award list were shown to the petitioner by the Committee.
The Committee in its report noticed that there was a difference between the ink of figure 1 and figure of +3 in the answer book of the petitioner and that Question No. 3(a) carried a total of four marks and the answer did not show that he could carry 100% marks.
The Committee also noticed that there was no cutting in the award list and his total marks in the award were only 20 on the basis of one mark obtained by him against Question No. 3(a).
It is on the basis of these circumstances, the Committee recommended to the Syndicate that the petitioner was guilty of using unfair means, the fault was of a serious nature and that he be debarred from appearing in the University examination for two years, which report in turn was accepted by the Syndicate.
The totality of the circumstances as noticed above leads to the conclusion that the petitioner may be guilty of misconduct but the entire material as noticed by the Committee in support of its conclusion has not been put to the petitioner.
Thereby the principles of natural justice have been violated.
To notice some of these are (i) difference of ink in the figure : 1 and figure of +3; (ii) question No. 3(a) carried 4 marks; (iii) answer to this question was of ordinary standard and he could not get 100% marks; (iv) absence of cutting in the award list; (v) total marks in the award list on the basis of which only one mark was obtained by the petitioner for Question No. 3(a) (vi) the report of the official and/or Superintendent, Secrecy Branch available on the file; and (vii) different mode of writing '3' by the examiner and the candidate.
This is more so as the order of the present type would blast the entire career of the candidate who is a student of medical college and has already studied for more than three years.
In the circumstances, order, annexure P-4, deserves to be quashed being violative of the principles of natural justice which I hereby do.
The matter is remitted back to the respondent-authorities to decide it afresh in accordance with law.
The petitioner has already suffered for a period of one and a half years.
Under these circumstances pending final disposal of the matter by the University afresh, the petitioner be permitted to appear in the subject/subjects of the 2nd Professional MBBS examination going to take place in June, 1992, in which he may be entitled to appear.
This direction is being given as the petitioner is even otherwise eligible to appear in the 2nd Professional MBBS examination going to take place in December, 1992.
The result of the examination will be subject to the decision of the Syndicate in the matter.
I hope and trust that the authorities will take all possible precautions to finalise the matter as early as possible, preferably within three months.
The Syndicate will have due regard while awarding penalty, if any, to the candidate to the fact that the petitioner has already suffered for one and a half year.
With the above observations and directions, the writ petition is allowed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs."
It may be observed here that no Letters Patent Appeal was filed by the University against the above-said Judgment and, therefore, it attained finality.
3.
As no decision was taken by the University after the case was remanded back by this Court till 2nd November, 1992, the petitioner filed the present writ petition on 2nd November, 1992, inter alia praying that his result of the Pathology papers of the 2nd Professional examination, which the petitioner took in June, 1991, may be ordered to be declared and further the petitioner should be allowed to appear in the 3rd Professional examination of MBBS The Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition on 26th November, 1992, gave interim directions to the University to declare the result of the petitioner of 2nd Professional examination in the subject of Pathology held in June, 1991 and further directed that the petitioner be allowed to appear in the 3rd Professional Examination of MBBS, but the result was not to be declared.
However, these directions were made subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition the Syndicate in its meeting held on 14th January, 1993, again considered the case of the petitioner and decided that its earlier decision dated 25th October, 1991 should not be changed in any manner.
This decision was endorsed to the petitioner by the Superintendent, Examination on 14th January, 1993.
The petitioner amended the writ petition and assailed the decision of the Syndicate dated 14th January, 1993, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-6 to the amended writ petition.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the learned Judge, while allowing the earlier writ petition of the petitioner, had specifically held that the earlier decision of the Syndicate was violative of the principles of natural justice as the entire material which was taken into consideration by the Committee in support of its conclusions was not put to the petitioner.
He referred to the specific findings recorded by the learned Judge to that effect, which have already been reproduced above by me.
The argument proceeded that after the case was remanded back, the Committee or the Syndicate of the University never put to the petitioner the adverse material taken into consideration by the Committee, which was pointed out by the learned Judge while allowing the earlier writ petition of the petitioner.
It was also submitted that the Syndicate had, without any application of mind, just reiterated its earlier order without caring for the findings and the directions in the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 591 of 1992.
The decision dated 14th January, 1993 of the syndicate suffered from the same vice as its earlier decision dated 25th October, 1991 i.e. the order is violative of principles of natural justice.
6.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that after the remand the University-Authorities were to decide the matter expeditiously, preferably within three months of the decision of the earlier writ petition.
However, the decision was taken after more than six months of the judgment, which is in violation of the directions of this Court.
7.
The learned counsel on behalf of the respondents submitted that the entire material had earlier been shown to the petitioner and according to the judgment, only the syndicate had to reconsider the matter, which it did, had reiterated the earlier decision.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As is clear from the judgment in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner (the relevant part of which has already been reproduced above) that the entire material had not been put to the petitioner before the Committee/Syndicate decided to punish the petitioner.
It was under these circumstances that it was held by the learned Judge that the decision of the Committee/Syndicate was violative of the principles of natural justice.
After remand, it was required that the material, as pointed out by the learned Judge, should be put to the petitioner and thereafter the concerned Authorities should take a decision.
The decision, dated 14th January, 1993 of the Syndicate has not been passed after complying with the directions of this Court.
The decision is again violative of principles of natural justice.
The defects which were pointed out in the earlier judgment, were not removed and yet the Syndicate decided to reiterate its earlier decision.
The latter decision dated 14.1.1993 of the Syndicate suffers from the same illegality and vice as its earlier decision dated 25th October, 1991 and I have no hesitation in quashing the same.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents then submitted that the case should be remanded back again, so that the defects pointed out in the earlier judgment dated 12th June, 1992, may now be removed.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with the learned counsel for the respondents.
The cases cannot be remanded again and again to the same Authority to remove the defects which were once pointed out earlier.
Apart from that I am not prepared to remand the case to the University Authorities for the reason that the petitioner had in fact by now completed his entire MBBS Course and has also appeared in the 3rd Professional (Final Examination) of which his result has also been declared in pursuance of the orders of this Court dated 7th May, 1993 (Of course, the declaration of the result was subject to the decision of the writ petition).
Moreover, respondent-University was given three months' time in the earlier judgment to consider the matter, but the University Authorities took their own time to pass the impugned order more than six months after the judgment and that too without complying with the directions of the Court in the earlier judgment.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of the Syndicate, dated 14th January, 1993 (Annexure P-6) disqualifying the petitioner from appearing in the University examinations for two years, is hereby quashed.
The result of the petitioner of 2nd Professional examination of MBBS (Pathology papers) which the petitioner took in the year 1991 and of the 3rd year Professional examination, which was declared provisionally in pursuance of the order of this Court, be now declared on regular basis forthwith.
I make no order as to costs.