V K Bali, J - Amar Singh through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated May 25, 1992, Annexure P-3, vide which the Labour Court answered the reference against him by holding that his services had been legally terminated by the Corporation and, therefore, he was not entitled to any relief.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner was appointed as Tractor Operator in the Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Limited, Chandigarh and was then promoted as Custom Supervisor.
He had put in more than twelve years of continuous service when he was all of a sudden asked to quit vide orders dated December 6, 1978, Annexure P-1.
When the demand notice and conciliation proceeding failed, the matter was referred to the Labour Court by the Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act for adjudication.
Petitioner filed a statement of claim on April 6, 1981 in which he challenged the termination orders on various grounds, such as, non- compliance of standing orders and Statutory Rules and the mandate contained in Sections 25N(a) 25N(c) 25N(2) 25N(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court after trial, answered the reference against the petitioner and it is against this order, as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment, that the present petition has been filed.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been contested by the respondent-management and in the written statement filed on its behalf all the points taken in the petition have been controverted.
4.
Mr. Arora, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has raised twin arguments, one that while terminating the services of petitioner, the respondent management had not complied with the provisions contained in Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 inasmuch as retrenchment compensation for three months or in lieu thereof three months, notice was not given to him.
His second contention is that even though later in point of time, a number of people junior to petitioner were employed, this concession was not given to him which would be violative of Section 25-N of the Act.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am, however, of the opinion that none of the contentions raised by Mr. Arora have any merit.
The services of workman-petitioner came to an end due to closure of Custom Unit and all the workers of the unit were asked to quit from service.
All those, who were retrenched, were paid compensation as also were issued retrenchment notices or were paid in lieu thereof.
So was the case of petitioner.
It may be true that they were paid only one month's salary or were given notice for one month, whereas provisions of Section 25-N of the Act warrant three months, notice or pay in lieu thereof.
However, for showing violation of Section 25-N of the Act, it had to be proved that respondent- Corporation had employed 300 people, as was the provision, when retrenchment order was passed.
Mr. R L Manchanda was examined as a witness on behalf of the management.
He stated that the workmen of the Corporation might be numbering 700/800 and he was not certain of the strength of the workmen but it may have been 700/800 workmen during the last five years.
He further stated that the Head Office of the Corporation is situated at Chandigarh and it has twelve branches in the different districts of the State of Punjab.
A workman can be transferred from one branch to another.
Even if this statement is to be read so as to mean that there was 700/800 workmen employed by the respondent- management, yet it would not support the case of petitioner as it had to be proved that the unit from which he was retrenched, had strength of workmen to the extent of 300 or more.
It has been held by a Division Bench of this Court in Dayal Singh & others v. State of Haryana, (1992(1) SCT 136) : 1991(5) SLR 209, that the total strength of the entire Corporation cannot be taken into account and it has to be confined to the individual units.
Insofar as the unit where the workman-petitioner was employed, is concerned, Mr. Sharma states that there were only 86 people.
It is true that there is no evidence to that effect on the records of the case and it is so asserted by Mr. Sharma while arguing the case, yet it was for the workman, who is alleging violation of Section 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, to prove the strength of the unit in which he was working.
It is made out from the reading of the award passed by the Labour Court that all the workmen employed in the Custom Unit, where the petitioner was employed, were retrenched on closure of the said unit.
5.
Insofar as the argument with regard to violation of Section 25-N of the Act, is concerned, suffice it to say that it has been held by the Labour Court that even on the basis of the statement of workman it is clear that the persons who were given fresh employment in different jobs, had applied in pursuance of fresh requisition but petitioner never applied for the same.
Finding no merit, I dismiss the petition.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.