VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of this writ petition as well as Civil Writ Petition No. 16465 of 1992 as common questions of fact and law are involved in the same.
Facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 2648 of 1993, Pritam Singh v. Haryana Land Reclamation and Development Corporation Limited, Chandigarh, 1994(1) SCT 441 as written statement has been filed in the same.
2.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be mentioned that claim in all the cases is for grant of equivalent pay to a particular post with at one particular time was having the same pay scales as that of the petitioners in each case.
3.
It is pleaded that the scale of pay of Head Clerk and the Accountant was always the same, so much so that when a revision was made in the same, it attracted the same hike for both the posts i.e. Head Clerk and the Accountant.
The Haryana Land Reclamation and Development Corporation Limited, respondent herein, however, recently revised the pay scale of the post of Accountant but the same was not made available to the petitioner who was working as Head Clerk and, therefore, it is this non hike commensurate to the one which was given to the other post that has been highlighted in the present petition.
4.
The parity in the pay scale of both the posts has been enumerated by pleading that the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 1261974 created and sanctioned the post of Head Clerk and Accountant in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
It was revised to Rs. 700-1250 from 141979 vide orders dated 19111981.
At that time as well, both the posts were kept in the same pay scale.
Subsequently, however, the respondent, Corporation vide its agenda item No. 4 in the meeting of Board of Directors held on 961987 further revised the pay scale of the posts of Head Clerk and Accountant to Rs. 1640-2900.
Once again vide orders dated 2721991, the respondent-Corporation further revised the pay scale of Accountants (Section Officer) from Rs. 1640-2900 to 2000-3200 with effect from 151990.
However, in the case of the petitioner who as referred above, was Head Clerk, no commensurate increase in the pay was given it is this action of the respondent-Corporation which has been styled to be arbitrary, thus, violating Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Mr. Arora learned counsel appearing for the petitioner on the basis of two single Bench decision of this Court in Kirpal Jeet v. The State of Punjab and another, 1987(4) SLR 594 : 1994(1) SCT 1 (P&H) (DB) and Dr. Sukhdev Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and another, 1991(2) Services Law Reporter 336 contends that if two posts were in the same pay scale at one time, and such subsequently as well pay scale of both the posts was revised, it shall be presumed that the two such posts were equated and any further revision in one post would attract same revision in the other post.
6.
The matter has been contested and in the written statement filed on behalf of the Corporation, it has been pleaded that the grant of pay scale has been denied to the petitioner by the Pay Revision Committee appointed by the Government vide recommendations dated 1311988 and as per said recommendations, the post of Head Clerk is to carry the pay scale of Rs. 1600-2060 instead of Rs. 1640-2900 as proposed by the Corporation.
These recommendations, it is pleaded, were accepted by the Government and conveyed to the Corporation vide letter dated 2931988 which were accepted by the Managing Director of the Corporation on 551988.
The petitioner made representation on 15111991 after a period of more than three years when even a civil suit was not competent.
It is, thus, averred that the cause of petitioner is belated and the petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
It is further pleaded that the action of the Corporation is based upon the recommendations of the Pay Revision Committee appointed by the Government.
Fixation of pay of employees of various categories is an executive function for which expert bodies like Pay Fixation Pay Revision Committees are constituted unless it can be shown that such a Committee has made recommendations with malafide intention or like, their recommendations cannot be made subject matter of judicial review under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I do not find any merit in these petitions and the same, thus, deserves to be dismissed.
It shall be seen from the facts of two cases relied upon by Mr. Arora in Kirpal Jeet's and Dr. Sukhdev Singh and others, (supra) that two posts regarding which comparison was made were equated either by the Government or some competent authority.
It is true that once two posts are equated, revision in the pay scale of one would attract similar revision in the other but simply because for the period of ten years or even more, the incumbents of two posts were drawing pay in the same scale.
It would not be necessary to revise the pay scale of one if a better pay scale is given to the other post.
In State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 19, the Apex Court while dealing with similar matter held as under :  "The answer to the question whether two posts are equal or should carry equal pay depends upon several factors.
It does not just depend upon neither the nature of work or volume of work done.
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
The would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the court should normally accept it.
The court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration."
In view of the observations of the Supreme Court as mentioned above, there is no merit in these petitions and the same are, thus, dismissed.
There shall however, be no order as to costs.