Ashok Bhan, J - Plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for declaration claiming that he was appointed as Sales Assistant-cum-Store-keeper under Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) w.e.f.
12.12.1974 and his post was equated with that of Assistant for the purposes of seniority.
That in the year 1979, the Board issued an advertisement inviting applications for appointment by way of direct recruitment to the post of Manager, Text Books, Sales Depot (hereinafter referred to as the Manager).
Last date of receipt of applications was August 26, 1979.
The qualifications prescribed were post-graduate with five years' experience as Clerk/Assistant or degree in BA from a recognised University with ten years' experience as Clerk including two years' as Assistant.
Knowledge of Punjabi up to Matric was also a condition.
That the appellant was selected to the post of Manager and he joined as such on May 7, 1980.
Later on he was confirmed from this date on the post of Manager.
It was pleaded that the cadre of Assistants is quite separate from the cadre of Managers and there is no question of inter se seniority.
That according to the resolution of the Board dated March 21, 1979, the 11th vacancy for the post of Superintendent was to be filled in by promotion from Managers, Text-books, Sales Depot.
That there were no further avenues of promotion available to the Managers and, therefore, it was provided that Managers be promoted to the post of Superintendent to give them further avenue of promotion.
That one Jasbir Singh was promoted to the post of Superintendent from the cadre of Managers and the next incumbent from the cadre of Managers to be promoted as Superintendent would be one at Serial No. 41 in the roster and the appellant being the seniormost Manager was entitled to be promoted against the 41st vacancy; that his claim was not considered by the Board and instead Babu Ram from the cadre of Assistants was promoted as Superintendent and the next vacancy was given to Hari Singh.
Representation filed by the appellant was ignored and, therefore, he was forced to file the suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to 11th vacancy for promotion to the post of Superintendent falling in the share of Managers at roster point 41.
2.
The suit was contested by the respondent-Board as well as the private respondents separately.
In the written statement filed by the respondent- Board it was alleged that resolution dated March 21, 1979 was amended on January 24, 1984 and the resolution dated March 21, 1979 was kept in abeyance and as such the 11th vacancy of the Superintendent falling at roster point 41 could not be given to the Manager.
It was further pleaded that there were 12 posts of Managers out of which 8 posts were on diminishing cadre and other posts were from a different cadre; that on account of unforeseen developments in the cadre of Superintendents, it was considered that the provision of 11th vacancy so resolved by the Board on March 21, 1979 was doing injustice to the Assistants who were much more senior to the appellant.
That according to the provisions of Section 24 of the Punjab School Education Board Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), the resolution dated March 21, 1979 did not carry force of a notified regulation so also that this resolution is a matter of dispute and, therefore, having no binding force.
That Jasbir Singh did not supersede anybody when he was promoted to the post of Superintendent and if the appellant was given 11th vacancy, he would be superseding 32 Assistants who were much senior to him in the earlier cadre as Assistant.
Respondent-Board supported the seniority of Babu Ram at serial No. 40 and that of Hari Singh at serial No. 41 on the plea that Hari Singh was a Scheduled Caste candidate and his claim could not be affected by any resolution.
Private respondents filed their separate written statements, more or less taking the same or similar pleas as were taken by the Board.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1) Whether the resolution dated 21379 has legal force having not been covered by the provisions of Section 24 of the Punjab Act No. 24 of 1969 as alleged in para 8 of the written statement ?
OPD.
(2) Whether the plaintiff is not entitled to relief claimed in view of the order/resolution dated 2411984 as alleged in para 2 of the legal objection ?
OPD.
3.
Relief.
The suit of the appellant was dismissed with the finding that resolution dated March 21, 1979 was not notified under the provisions of Section 24 of the Act, and therefore not a regulation and this resolution stood superseded by a subsequent resolution dated January 24, 1984.
The appellant was not found entitled to the declaration and the injunction prayed for.
This decision of the trial Court was challenged in appeal and in appeal the judgment and decree of the trial Court was affirmed.
Appellant being aggrieved, has come in second appeal to this Court.
3.
I have heard the counsel for the appellant.
The appellant is litigating on the force of resolution dated March 21, 1979 passed by the Board.
In order to appreciate the resolution, it is reproduced below :  "The question of further avenues of promotion to Managers Text-book Depots recruited by the Board was also considered.
It was decided that they be kept in a separate cadre but may be made eligible for promotion to the posts of Superintendents.
It was decided that the posts of Superintendents may be filled by promotion from amongst the Assistants and the Managers in the ratio of 10 : 1, i.e., every 11th vacancy of Superintendent should be filled by promotion of a Manager.
In the case of present incumbent of the post of Manager, Text Book Sales Depot, Chandigarh, it was decided that he may be given the option either to accept this, formula of being placed in a separate cadre or be integrated in the general cadre of Assistants from the date of his appointment as Sales Assistant-cum-Store-keeper.
In the later case, the order of his confirmation as Manager should be cancelled."
The resolution dated January 24, 1984 vide which the resolution dated March 21, 1979 was superseded, is also reproduced below :-  "With a view to providing further avenues of promotion to the Managers recruited by the Board, the Board in its meeting held on 21379 decided that every 11th vacancy of Superintendent, should be filled by promotion of a Manager.
This decision was taken at the time when there existed no further avenue of promotion for the Managers, and their grade was the same as that of the Assistant in senior grade.
Now the position has changed.
The Managers scale is the same as that of the Superintendents minus special pay of Rs. 100/- and they can compete for the post of Senior Manager which did not exist earlier.
Later on it was noticed that an implication of the above decision was that sometimes the Managers who have put in lesser years of service as compared to the Assistants of the general cadre, would become eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent.
So the implementation of the above decision has been kept, in abeyance at present (although the affected persons have challenged it in the court).
In future more avenues of promotion for the Manager may come into existence.
So in view of the above facts, the change may be allowed."
Section 24(1) of the Act is also reproduced below as it would be relevant for adjudication of the dispute between the parties :  "24(1).
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board may, by notification and with the previous sanction of the State Government, make regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Act."
4.
A perusal of Section 24(1) reproduced above would show that resolution dated March 21, 1979 did not carry the character of notification of the Board.
It did not have any previous sanction of the State Government to become a regulation which could have any legal force.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that in the absence of any rules or regulations, the instructions issued by the department shall prevail; that the 11th vacancy of the Superintendent which was to fall in the share of the Managers at roster point 41 was to be given to the Managers as per resolution dated 2131979 which had come into existence much earlier to the subsequent resolution passed by the Board i.e. on 2411984 and, therefore, shall be covered by the earlier resolution dated 2131979; that the petitioner had filed the suit in the year 1982 and the subsequent resolution dated 2411984 was not on the statute at that time; that the resolution dated 2131979 was unambiguous because it was stated in the resolution as under :  "....It was decided that the posts of Superintendents may be filled by promotion from amongst the Assistants and the Managers in the ratio of 10 : 1, i.e. every 11th vacancy of Superintendent should be filled by promotion of a Manager....."  that the resolution dated 2131979 was not in the nature of proposal but a decision taken by the Competent Authority and hence enforceable and the observations made by the Courts below to the effect that it was in the nature of proposal was absolutely wrong and contrary to the language of the resolution dated 2131979.
6.
I find force in these submissions of the counsel for the petitioner.
There is ample authority for the proposition that in the absence of rules and regulations, the department can issue administrative instructions and these can be regarding the principles to be followed for promotions.
Reference in this context can be made to a judgment of the Supreme Court in Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1967 S.L.R.
906.
7.
Another point to be determined is as to whether the petitioner would be governed by the resolution dated 2131979 or by the amended resolution dated 2411984.
Admittedly the vacancy had occurred before 2411984.
A Division Bench judgment of this Court in Krishan Lal Bhatia v. The State of Punjab, 1985(2) SLR relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Y V Rangaiah v. Sreenivasa Rao, A.I.R. 1983 SC 852, held that the vacancy which occurred prior to the enforcement of the rules is to be filled up in accordance with quota prescribed in the executive instructions and not in accordance with the rules.
The resolution dated 2131979 is clear and it specifically states that the authorities had decided that a post of Superintendent be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistants and the Managers in the ratio of 10 : 1 thereby giving 11th vacancy to the Managers to be filled by promotion.
Courts below have clearly erred in observing that the resolution dated 2131979 was in the nature of proposal and not a decision.
To my mind, the resolution dated 2131979 is in the nature of a decision and not a proposal.
The executive instructions in the absence of rules and regulations could be issued which in this case were in the form of resolution dated 2131979.
When the vacancy in the cadre of Superintendents at roster point 41 came into existence, the appellant was eligible to be promoted and appointed against the vacancy of the Superintendent from the quota meant for the Managers.
The resolution dated 2411984 came into existence later and a perusal of this would show that it is prospective in nature and not retrospective.
8.
Resolution dated 2131979 may not take the character of notification issued by the Board under Section 24(1) of the Act but all the same it was in the nature of executive instructions which could be issued in the absence of statutory rules or regulations.
Respondent-Board could not refuse to enforce the resolution dated 2131979 only because it had not been notified under Section 24(1) of the Act.
The resolution dated 2131979 was in the nature of executive instructions and it carried the same force as that of resolution till the later came into being.
No other point was urged.
9.
For the reasons stated above, I find force in this appeal which is accepted.
The respondent-Board is thus held to be bound by the resolution dated 2131979., the impugned judgment and decree of the Courts below are set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant is decreed.
The respondent-Board is directed to promote the petitioner to the post of Superintendent against the vacancy falling at roster point 41 as prayed for by the plaintiff-appellant.
In case 41st vacancy cannot be given to the appellant because a member of SC/ST has been promoted at that point then the appellant be given the vacancy which falls due as per his entitlement in the cadre of Managers as per ratio proposed.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.