AL Bahri, J - Vide this order two writ petitions (C.W.P.
No. 16426 of 1992, Ram Sarup v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) SCT 773 (P&H) and CWP No. 16642 of 1992, Mastan Singh Rana v. the State of Haryana & Ors.) are being disposed of.
Judgment is prepared in Mastan Singh Rana's case.
2.
Challenge in both the writ petitions is to order dated December 8, 1992, passed by State of Haryana vide which representation of S L Verma-respondent having been accepted by the State, he was shown as senior as Labour-cum- Conciliation Officer to several others including Mastan Singh Rana.
Deemed date of promotion of S L Verma-respondent was given as August 23, 1989 and that of Mastan Singh Rana as December 31, 1990.
In between them there were four other persons shown.
It was further ordered that there being no other post of Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer being available against 10 per cent quota of Superintendent Head Assistant/Legal Assistant, Ram Sarup (writ- petitioner in one of the cases) who was earlier promoted as such on May 1, 1992 stood reverted to the post of Head Assistant.
Thus Ram Sarup and Mastan Singh Rana being aggrieved of the aforesaid orders have filed these writ petitions.
Further facts are given from the writ petition of Mastan Singh Rana.
The petitioner-Mastan Singh Rana was appointed as Clerk in 1970.
He was promoted in due course as Stenographer, Legal Assistant and in the year 1983 as Superintendent.
A copy of the order of promotion as Superintendent dated August 30, 1993 is Annexure P.1.
At that time Punjab Labour Service (Class I & II) Rules, 1955 were in force.
Under these Rules promotion to the post of Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer was restricted from amongst the Labour Inspectors.
There were two separate cadres in the service i.e. ministerial cadre and the field cadre or the technical cadre.
The promotional avenue to the aforesaid post was not available to the ministerial cadre.
It was in 1987 that the Haryana Labour Department (Group B) Services Rules, 1987 came into force and 10 per cent promotional quota for the post of Labour Officer-cum- Conciliation Officer was reserved from the ministerial cadre.
The petitioner- Mastan Singh Rana was given promotion from the aforesaid quota of 10 per cent and appointed on ad hoc basis as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Copy of the order is Annexure P2 dated December 31, 1990.
Vide this order Sham Lal Verma, respondent No. 3, was also appointed as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer.
The petitioner-Mastan Singh Rana being aggrieved with the promotion with effect from December 31, 1990 made a representation and he filed C.W.P.
No. 3359 of 1990, in this Court which was disposed of vide order Annexure P.3 dated March 16, 1990 with the direction to the respondent to dispose of the representation of the petitioner in accordance with the Service Rules and the promotion policy.
Such a decision was required to be taken within 3 months.
The representation of the petitioner Mastan Singh Rana was accepted vide order dated June 19, 1991 and he was given promotion with effect from August 23, 1989 and was thus to be over and above Rama Nand Khosla, copy of the order is Annexure P4.
One Sukhbir Singh Chohan who was also mentioned in the order Annexure P4 and senior to S L Verma challenged the aforesaid order in CWP No. 12195 of 1991.
Civil Writ Petition was dismissed in limine by passing a detailed order on August 7, 1991-Annexure P.5 S L Verma filed C.W.P.
No. 15352 of 1991 claiming to be belonging to ministerial cadre prior to 1980 and his representation for promotion to the post of Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer was still pending.
He challenged order Annexure P4.
The said writ petition was disposed of vide order dated November 15, 1991.
Annexure P.6 with the direction that his representation be decided after giving him a hearing.
It was also directed that Mastan Singh Rana would also be given a hearing before a decision is taken on the representation of S L Verma.
This representation of S L Verma was decided vide the impugned order Annexure P.9 as referred to above.
3.
The stand of the petitioner-Mastan Singh Rana, inter-alia, is two- fold; firstly that S L Verma gave option to go out of the cadre service as Labour Inspector and ultimately was confirmed there.
He lost his lien on the post of Head Assistant and thus could not claim seniority vis-a-vis the petitioner, secondly, Mastan Singh Rana having been promoted as Superintendent and his promotion was not challenged by S L Verma and otherwise affirmed on the writ petition of Sukhbir Singh, the petitioner-Mastan Singh Rana is to stand senior to Verma even if he had lien in the ministerial cadre.
The post of Superintendent being a promotional post in the ministerial cadre, persons appointed as Superintendent is to be senior to the persons working as Head Assistant.
The official as well as the private inter-alia asserting that the lien of S L Verma did not automatically terminate even on his confirmation on the post of Labour Inspector.
There was no order passed for terminating the lien of S L Verma on the post of Head Assistant.
Thus a representation of S L Verma was rightly accepted and taking into consideration the seniority of S L Verma vis-a-vis the petitioner M S Rana, it was held that S L Verma was senior and thus entitled to promotion to the post of Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer, a post within 10 per cent quota reserved for the ministerial staff.
4.
It has been argued on behalf of the petitioner that S L Verma gave option for the post of Labour Inspector much prior to the enforcement of 1987 Rules.
He continued working as Labour Inspector for a number of years and should be deemed to have been confirmed there after expiry of the period of three years maximum period of probation provided under the Rules.
On this confirmation as such, his lien on the post of Head Assistant should be deemed to have been terminated.
In support of this contention reliance has been placed on the Rules of 1982 (Group 'C' Service Rules).
Rule 10 which provides a period of 2 years and probation if appointed by direct appointment and one year if appointed by otherwise.
Sub-rule (3) Rule 10 further provides that on completion of period of probation to confirm such person against a permanent vacancy or to confirm such a person from the date when permanent vacancy occurred or to declare completion of the probationary period as satisfactory for want of any permanent vacancy.
Sub-rule (3) further provides the total period of probation including extension, if any, is not to exceed three years.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, 1968 S.L.R.
247.
The Supreme Court held that where maximum period of probation is provided under the Rules, on completion thereof an employee should be deemed to have been confirmed even in the absence of any written order of confirmation.
Reference has been made to the Gradation List of Class III and IV officials of the Haryana Labour Department as it stood on January 1, 1989 (shown at the time of arguments).
This shows that the name of S L Verma in the seniority existed at Sr. No. 8.
There were fifteen permanent posts of Labour Inspectors.
From the above data and the ratio of the Rule of Law as laid down in the apex court in Dharam Singh's case (supra) it can be noticed that S L Verma should be deemed to have been confirmed on completion of his probationary period on the post of Labour Inspector.
The Gradation List shows that he was shown in the seniority in respect of the permanent post.
The case T R Sharma v. Prithvi Singh & another etc., 1976(1) SLR 55, related to the interpretation of Rules 212, 314 and 315 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I Part I. T R Sharma originally belonged to the cadre of Agriculture Inspectors.
Subsequently he was appointed as Block Development and Panchayat Officer in a substantive permanent capacity.
He was confirmed on this post subsequently.
Thus, the question arose whether his lien on the post of Agriculture Inspector stood automatically terminated on his confirmation on the post of Block Development and Panchayat Officer.
The competent Authority had not passed any order suspending his lien on the permanent post of Agriculture Inspector which he had held substantively.
It was observed that the appellant (T R Sharma) could not be penalised because of the omission of the Competent Authority to act in accordance with the mandatory provisions of the Rules aforesaid.
It was observed that the suspended lien of the Government servant concerned may not except on the written request of that Government servant be terminated while he remains in Government service.
In that case no written request was made by Shri T R Sharma for terminating his suspended lien on the post of Agriculture Inspector.
It was observed in para 6 of the judgment as under :-  "As such, we find it difficult to uphold the finding of the majority of the learned "Judges that the lien of the appellant on the post of Agricultural Inspector had stood terminated.
In our opinion, the third judge who was in the minority took a correct view of the matter when he observed that the Government servant is not to be penalised and cannot be deprived of the safeguards provided by Rule 314 because of the fact that the competent authority had not taken the necessary steps."
The aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court was distinguished and explained by the Supreme Court in Ram Lal Khurana v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(4) SLR 243.
In para 7 of the judgment, while making reference to Rule 314 aforesaid, it was observed as under :-  "Rule 314 provides that a competent authority shall suspend the lien of a Government servant when he is appointed in a substantive capacity to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne.
It seems to us that this rule cannot be operated to the prejudice of a Government servant who or his own has acquired legal right to an ex-cadre post.
Indeed, the rule is for the benefit of a Government servant who intends to return "back to his parent department.
That was also the view expressed in T R Sharma's case.
But then, the appellant never wanted to return back to his parent department.
He was stoutly opposing repatriation and asserting his right to remain in the ex- cadre post.
He has thus denied himself of the benefit of that Rule."
In para 8 of the judgment the following observations were made with respect to the retention of lien on a substantive post :-  "Lien is not a word of art.
It just connotes the right of a civil servant to hold the post substantively to which he is appointed.
Generally when a person with a lien against a post is appointed substantively to another post, he acquires lien against the latter post.
Then the lien against his previous post automatically disappear.
The principle being that no Government servant can have simultaneously two liens against two posts in two different cadres.
It is well accepted principle of service jurisprudence.
Applying the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Ram Lal Khurana's case (supra) to the facts of the present case, there is no scope left for holding that S L Verma still holds lien on the post of Head Assistant after his deemed confirmation on the post of Legal Assistant.
There was opportunity for S L Verma to revert to the post of Head Assistant and claim promotion to the post of Superintendent when Mastan Singh Rana was promoted in the year 1983.
He did not choose to do so.
Rather he did not challenge the promotion of Mastan Singh Rana as Superintendent.
5.
Even if S L Verma is held to have retained lien on the post of Head Assistant he cannot be considered to be senior to Mastan Singh Rana who stands promoted as Superintendent and his promotion having not been challenged by S L Verma.
A Superintendent cannot be held to be junior to the Head Assistant.
It is too late in the day for S L Verma to claim promotion against 10% quota of posts reserved for Superintendent/Head Assistant etc.
He should feel contended to claim promotion against remaining 40% quota for promotion to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Order Annexure P. 9 thus cannot be sustained in law with the result that Mastan Singh Rana is held to have been rightly promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer with effect from December 31, 1990, against 10% quota posts and is not to be reverted.
Further, result would be that in the other writ petition Ram Sarup is not to be reverted.
Hence both the writ petitions are allowed.
Order Annexure P. 9 reverting the petitioners is quashed.
No order as to costs.