JB Garg, J - Dalip Chand and 50 others skilled/unskilled casual labourers moved a petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India challenging their removal and this writ petition was dismissed on 10.5.1990.
Aggrieved against this judgment of the learned Single Judge, the present Letters Patent Appeal has been attempted.
2.
Briefly, the facts are that there is Border Roads Organisation and a workshop attached to it at Pathankot in District Gurdaspur.
It is, however, under the overall control of the Director General, Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi.
The work which is carried out at the aforesaid border is, however, under the control of the Commander, Western Base Workshop, Pathankot.
The services of some skilled and un-skilled casual paid labourers were no longer required and keeping in view the "overall interest and economy of the workshop" the services of skilled as well as unskilled casual paid labourers which were no longer required were dispensed with, with effect from 18121989 (Annexure A-1).
This order was challenged alleging that the impugned order was an abuse of power and the reasons assigned were non-existent and a kind of cloak to cover up the wrongful act.
It was also averred that the petitioners had been working continuously except for the notional break and that the petitioners too were entitled to regularisation like other employees working in various departments of the Government of India.
3.
In reply, it has been averred that the regular employees in the organisation are recruited subject to fulfilment criteria prescribed like minimum educational and technical qualifications, age, experience etc. and recruitment is based on All India Advertisements of vacancies, whereas the petitioners were casual labourers.
The comparison of trades and duties of casual personnel with regular employees made in the writ petition is incorrect and misleading; that it was wrong that the petitioners were Group `C' employees.
On the contrary, the petitioners were casual employees and were to be governed by the provisions of para 501 of the Code of Border Roads Regulation.
It was specifically averred that the petitioners were no longer required on account of reduction of budget and the workload.
The construction and maintenance of some roads, mainly for the use and occupation of the Army personnel is by nature a kind of job which may not require a large number of casual workers for a continuous period.
There are regular employees of the department known as Pioneers and also the Casual Workers and attention has been invited to this distinction in para No. 2 of the written statement and the relevant part thereof is reproduced here as well and it is as under :-  Pioneers Casual workers  1.
Minimum educational requirement is 5th class 1.
No educational qualification is required.
2.
Age requirement between 18 to 25 years.
2.
No age requirement.
Only minimum age should be 16 years 3.
Selection on all India basis by advertisement and through Employment Exchange 3.
No selection process.
To be engaged as and when required.
4.
Central Civil Services (Classification, Control Appeal) Rules are applicable.
4.
Not applicable.
5.
24 hours duty 5.
Only fixed duty hours.
6.
No overtime allowed.
6.
Overtime allowed.
7.
Transferability throughout the country 7.
Not liable to transfer.
8.
Training courses are compulsory 8.
No training courses.
9.
Army Act applicable.
9.
Not applicable.
10.
Desertion not permitted.
10.
Only day to day duty.
11.
Subject to the provisions of court martial.
11.
Court Martial not applicable.
12.
Employment of women prohibited.
12.
Women also allowed to work.
13.
War liability of GREF 13.
No liability.
14.
Handling of explosives, guarding of property 14.
Not permitted to handle any material at all.
15.
Accountable and answerable.
15.
Not accountable.
A perusal of this distinction would show that there was no age requirement or any fixed duty hours nor any women were expected to work as labourers nor the workmen were subject to the Court Martial and all these circumstances strengthen the version of the respondents that the petitioners were casual labourers as they were doing the same work.
This judicial precedent cannot advance the petitioners' case keeping in view the distinction brought out earlier.
The facts in the case cited clearly bear no resemblance to the matter involved here.
4.
Similarly distinguishable are the other authorities sought to be relied upon by the counsel for the appellants.
Govt.
Branch Press v. DB Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429 concerned a matter pertaining to termination of services of temporary employees while Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1626 was a case involving the termination of the services of the petitioner on the expiry of his term of appointment on the basis of adverse remarks and allegations of embezzlement.
Next, there was Delhi Transport Corporation v. D T C Mazdoor Congress, AIR 1991 SC 101 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
675.
This was with regard to Regulation authorising the removal from service of permanent employees and Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 537 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
575 where the action of Government challenged was removal en bloc of all Government counsel appointed by the State Government.
5.
A plain reading of the judicial precedents sought to be relied upon by the counsel for the appellants would show that none of them can be construed to have any bearing on the issues raised in this appeal and are thus of no relevance.
6.
No exception can indeed be taken to the learned Single Judge holding GREF to be integral part of the Armed Forces and not thereby falling within the definition of `industry' under the Industrial Disputes Act.
We also with respect endorse the view.
"Since the very nature of duties required to be performed by the two sets of personnel, casual as against the Pioneers and their qualification, manner of recruitment etc. are different, the question of their being equated for the purpose of payment of wages etc. does not arise nor is there any violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as the petitioners do not fall in the category of pioneers, which form a class by themselves."
In the result, we hereby affirm the judgment of the learned Single Judge and dismiss this bunch of letters Patent Appeals.
In the circumstances, however, there will be no order as to costs.