Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This petition is directed against the order of the petitioner's reversion passed on November 22, 1982 as also the failure of the respondents Nos. 2 and 3 to comply with the directions of the Government giving vide letter dated February 2, 1987.
Facts as given by the learned counsel for respondent Nos. 2 and 3 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clear on January 27, 1956.
In the year 1967, the petitioner, was working as a Head Clerk-cum-Accountant.
On October 16, 1967, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
A charge-sheet was given to him almost two years later in the year 1969.
After receipt of petitioner's reply to the charge-sheet, a sub-committee was appointed to enquire into the matter.
This sub-committee submitted a report.
The primary charges levelled against the petitioner were not established.
However, the sub-committee opined that the petitioner was guilty of negligence.
As a result, the Market Committee, Mansa (respondent No. 3) which was the petitioner's employer, passed a resolution on April 2, 1973 accepting the sub-committee's report.
It ordered that the petitioner's two increments be stopped with cumulative effect.
On April 4, 1973 this resolution was communicated to the petitioner and he was ordered to be reinstated.
The operation of this resolution was suspended by the Chairman of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred to as the Board).
The petitioner's attempt to challenge this action of the Chairman through Civil Writ Petition No. 1438 of 1973 having failed, the Board annulled the resolution on June 22, 1973.
It is not disputed that this resolution was annulled by the Board only on the ground that the matter regarding the petitioner's case was not on the agenda of the committee for its meeting held on April 2, 1973.
The action of the Board in annulling the resolution of the Marketing Committee as also that the Committee allowing the petitioner to continue on reinstatement was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 2324 of 1973.
This writ petition was allowed by this Court on March 15, 1982.
A copy of this judgment is at Annexure P.1.
The learned Judge found that there was no justification in keeping the petitioner under suspension and his fate "hanging so callously".
As a result, it was directed that the petitioner be reinstated and the Market Committee was directed to "decide the case of the petitioner within a period of three months....".
Accordingly, the Committee passed an order dated April 15, 1982 reinstating the petitioner.
It further proceeded to hold a de novo enquiry into the allegations against the petitioner.
This time, the petitioner was held to be guilty of the charges levelled against him.
As a result, a resolution was passed on November 22, 1982 ordering that the petitioner be reverted from the post of Head Clerk-cum-Accountant to that of Mandi Supervisor, and further that the subsistence allowance paid to the petitioner during the period of suspension should be treated as salary for the period.
The order was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated November 23, 1982 by which he was only informed of his reversion and not regarding the fact that he would not be paid anything besides the subsistence allowance for the period during which he had remained under suspension.
Mr. Gupta has further pointed out to me in the narration of facts that the petitioner had actually stated before the enquiry committee that he was willing to accept the order of reversion and that he would not file any appeal against the punishment imposed on him.
However, after the communication of the order dated November 22, 1982, the petitioner submitted a petition dated January 3, 1983 to the Chairman of the Board under section 33(4)(1) of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) praying for the annulment of the order of punishment.
In this representation, it was categorically mentioned by the petitioner that the 'writing' had been obtained by the sub-committee from him under coercion.
The order of punishment and the proceedings that preceded it were challenged inter-alia on the ground that the committee had no jurisdiction to order a fresh enquiry and that the major penalty has been imposed without following the procedure laid down under the rules, as also without giving him a show cause notice.
It appears that this representation was not decided by the Board for a considerable length to time.
The petitioner was compelled to submit a representation to the Govt.
This representation appears to have been submitted on July 15, 1986.
In pursuance thereto, the Govt. of Punjab issued an order dated February 2, 1987.
The petitioner thereafter submitted certain other representations.
When no action was taken and the order of the Govt. dated February 2, 1987 which had been passed was not implemented by respondent No. 2 viz. the Board, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The order of reversion dated November 22, 1982 (Annexure P-7) and the action of the respondents in not paying the petitioner the full salary for the period of suspension have inter alia been challenged on the grounds that the action is without jurisdiction and violative of the principles of natural justice.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab.
However, a written statement has been filed on behalf of the Board and the Market Committee by the Secretary the Market Committee.
Besides a preliminary objection of delay, it has been inter-alia mentioned that the petitioner having given an undertaking in writing before the enquiry committee "that he has got no objection if he is posted as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector", it has been averred that the petitioner is estopped from challenging the impugned order.
It has further been averred that the order of reversion as also the action of the Committee in not allowing full pay and allowances for the period during which the petitioner remained under suspension is absolutely legal and valid.
On these points, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
4.
I have heard Mr. Deepak Agnihotri, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SP Gupta, for respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
Mr. Agnihotri has vehemently contended that the resolution passed by the Committee on April 2, 1973 by which it had been decided to stop two increments of the petitioner had been annulled by the Board on the limited ground that the matter was not on agenda of the committee for its meeting fixed for April 2, 1973.
This sub-committee had already enquired into the matter and thereafter the committee had no jurisdiction to order a de novo enquiry unless it was held that the proceedings before the committee had not been conducted in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
No such finding having been recorded, the Market Committee could not have ordered a fresh enquiry into the charges.
On this premises, it is contended that the enquiry proceedings conducted by the committee after the order of this Court passed on March 15, 1982 are wholly illegal and any order of punishment based thereon cannot be sustained.
Further, the learned counsel contends that the Government had accepted the petitioner's representation by its order dated February 2, 1987 and respondents Nos. 2 and 3 were bound to give all the reliefs to the petitioner in pursuance thereto.
The learned counsel has also submitted that the petitioner was entitled to the grant of an opportunity before he could be denied full salary for the period of suspension.
No such opportunity having been admittedly given to the petitioner, the learned counsel submits that he is entitled to the grant of full arrears of salary for the period during which he remained under suspension, i.e. from October 16, 1967 till April 15, 1982.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. SP Gupta has submitted that the resolution of the Market Committee having been annulled by the Board, the committee was entitled to hold a de novo enquiry and the action taken against the petitioner is strictly in conformity with the law.
6.
A perusal of the sequence of events as delineated above clearly shows that the sub-committee appointed by respondent No. 3 had submitted its report which was accepted by the Market Committee in its meeting held on April 2, 1973.
It is further evident on the record that the committee had accepted the report of the sub-committee without any resolution and passed an order inflicting the punishment of stoppage of two increments only against the petitioner.
This resolution of the committee was annulled by the Board only on the ground that the matter was not on the agenda of the committee for its meeting held on April 2, 1973.
Accordingly, the committee was at best entitled to place the matter on agenda and pass a fresh resolution.
It was not the case of the committee at any stage nor has it been stated in the written statement that the proceedings held before the sub-committee prior to the resolution of April 2, 1973 suffered from any illegality.
Nothing has been produced on record, even in this petition to show that the committee had ever resolved that the sub-committee had not conducted the proceedings in accordance with law.
Even at the Bar, it has not been suggested during the hearing that the proceedings before the committee suffered from any illegality.
In this situation, it is apparent that the Market Committee had no justification in ordering the de novo enquiry.
In this situation, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that a fresh enquiry could not have been held has to be accepted.
That being so, the committee had at best to consider the sub-committee's report and to decide about the punishment to be inflicted on the petitioner.
This was admittedly not done.
On the contrary, a fresh finding was recorded by the newly appointed sub-committee to the effect that the charges against the petitioner were established.
As a result, the impugned order of punishment was passed.
Since the enquiry itself was not justified, the impugned order passed on that finding cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the resolution and the order dated November 22, 1982 (Annexures P-6 and P-7) to the writ petition cannot be sustained.
7.
The petitioner has further asserted that the decision to deny him the full salary for the period during which he remained under suspension was arrived at without giving him any opportunity to show cause against it.
This plea has been specifically raised in the petition in paragraph 17(iv).
The averment that no show cause notice was ever served on the petitioner with regard to this matter has not been denied in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
In this view of the matter, it appears to be factually established that no opportunity was given to the petitioner before declaring that he would be paid only subsistence allowance for the period of his suspension.
It is well-settled that principles of natural justice have to be followed before a person can be deprived of his salary for the period of suspension.
Admittedly, this was not done.
The action of the respondents was apparently violative of principles of natural justice and cannot be such be sustained.
8.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had submitted a representation to the Board as also the Govt.
While the Board had failed to take appropriate action, the Govt. had vide its order dated February 2, 1987 (Annexure P-9) directed that all reliefs be given to the petitioner.
The Govt. clearly had the power to do this under section 41(a) of the Act which authorises, it to give appropriate directions.
In spite of the issue of clear directions by the Govt., the respondents failed to do the needful.
The petitioner was unnecessarily compelled to have resort to the present proceedings.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, the preliminary objection regarding delay raised on behalf of the respondents deserves to be noticed.
It is contended that the petitioner had been ordered to be reverted vide order dated November 22, 1982 and that the writ petition having been filed only in February 1990 deserves to be dismissed on this short ground of delay alone.
Apparently, the argument seems to be attractive.
However, a close scrutiny of factual position reveals that soon after the impugned order was passed, the petitioner had submitted a representation under section 33(4) of the Act before the Chairman of the Board.
When this did not yield any results, the petitioner submitted a representation dated July 15, 1986 before the Govt.
The petitioner's representation was apparently accepted vide order dated February 2, 1987.
If the respondents had implemented this order, the petitioner would have had no grievance and would have got all the reliefs claimed by him in this petition.
He submitted various other representations and it is only when he found that the Board was not implementing the directions of the Govt. that he approached this Court through the present writ petition.
In such a situation, the petitioner cannot be accused of delay in approaching this Court.
The Board and the Market Committee took time and kept the petitioner waiting.
Accordingly, I have no hesitation in rejecting the objection raised on behalf of the respondents.
10.
Learned counsel for respondent Nos. 2 and 3 has also raised the plea that the petitioner having given an undertaking not to challenge the order of his reversion is now estopped from filing this petition.
The sequence of events as delineated above clearly shows that enquiry proceedings initiated by the committee after the order of this Court were wholly illegal.
Any undertaking given by the petitioner during those proceedings cannot, as such, be relied upon.
Further, the copy of the undertaking given by the petitioner was not produced with the written statement but has now been given in Court.
A photo copy is placed on record as Mark 'A'.
It does not bear any date.
Still further, the petitioner had averred in his representation to the Board that it had been obtained from him under coercion.
Be that as it may, there is nothing on record to indicate that the committee had ever accepted this undertaking and thereby imposed a punishment lesser than the one it originally intended to.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the committee acted to its disadvantage on account of the undertaking given by the petitioner.
In these circumstances, when the committee has not at all acted to its own disadvantage on the basis of that undertaking, the plea of estoppel cannot be raised or sustained.
11.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed.
The resolution and the order dated November 22, 1982 are set aside.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued as Head Clerk-cum-Accountant.
He shall also be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
The order withholding the salary and allowances during the period of his suspension is also set aside.
Arrears of salary on that account for the period for which he remained under suspension viz. October 16, 1967 to April 15, 1982 shall also be paid to be petitioner.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.