NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's Regular Second Appeal.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated July 6, 1984, passed by defendant No. 2 is void, illegal and that he continues to be in service and is thus entitled to all the benefits.
Briefly put the case of the plaintiff is that he was working as Forest Guard at Bhatinda.
He was charge-sheeted by defendant No. 2 on March 23, 1981.
He submitted his reply to the charge-sheet and thereafter, one Harbhajan Singh, Deputy Ranger, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer, who submitted his report on May 13, 1984.
A show-cause notice was issued to the plaintiff on June 21, 1984 and thereafter, order of termination of his service was served which is being impugned on the grounds :-  i) that order is no speaking one,  ii) that report of Enquiry Officer was not supplied to the plaintiff,  iii) that Enquiry Officer was biased against him.
2.
Defendant put in appearance, controverted various averments made in the plaint and maintained that the impugned order is perfectly valid and binding on the plaintiff.
3.
From the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether order dated 6.7.1984 dispensing with services of the plaintiff is void, illegal for reasons alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Relief.
The trial Court decided all the issues in favour of the plaintiff and accordingly, decreed the suit.
4.
Before the Appellate Court, State of Punjab, appellant assailed the findings of the trial Court.
It was contended that the dismissal order is perfectly legal and just.
The plaintiff was charge-sheeted on the ground that while working as Forest Guard at Jhuneer Beat, trees in large number were illegally cut but he did not take any action.
When checking was done, the plaintiff submitted report which was ante-dated.
Ultimately, Harbhajan Singh, Deputy Ranger, was deputed as Enquiry Officer, who conducted the enquiry and it is thereafter a show-cause notice was issued to the plaintiff and after considering his reply, the plaintiff was removed from service, vide order dated July 5, 1984 (Exhibit P-4).
Thus no fault can be found with the enquiry report in any manner.
The Appellate Court, however, referred to the statement of Harbhajan Singh, Enquiry Officer who admitted in his cross-examination that no Presenting Officer on behalf of the department appeared during the enquiry proceedings.
This way, the Court came to the conclusion that Harbhajan Singh was the Presenting Officer as well as the Enquiry Officer.
Accordingly, it came to the conclusion that Enquiry Officer was biased against the plaintiff and such an enquiry cannot be said to be in accordance with the Civil Service Rules.
Not only this, the finding of the enquiry report was not supplied to the plaintiff.
This fact has also been admitted by Harbhajan Singh, Enquiry Officer.
This way, the Court came to the conclusion that the plaintiff has been denied a proper opportunity to explain his case and otherwise too, the Enquiry Officer was biased.
Resultantly, the Additional District Judge, also found no merit in the appeal and dismissed the same.
5.
Learned counsel for the State, has tried to justify the order of dismissal by contending that due opportunity was given to the plaintiff by the Enquiry Officer to explain his viewpoint.
This way, the Courts below have erred in law in observing that the plaintiff has not been given a just hearing in the case or that he was prejudiced as the report of enquiry was not given to him.
Even the observations of the Courts below that the impugned order is a non-speaking one, is not borne out on mere reading of the order.
6.
Admittedly, the order of dismissal has been assailed on the grounds :-  (i) that Enquiry Officer was biased against the plaintiff;  (ii) that report of enquiry was not supplied to him; and  (iii) that the order of dismissal is a non-speaking.
Admittedly, the grounds No. (i) and (ii) are proved on record.
The Enquiry Officer has created a doubt by acting himself as a Presenting Officer of the department.
This itself establishes that Enquiry Officer was biased against the plaintiff.
There is no denying the fact that copy of the enquiry report was not supplied to him.
Mere perusal of order Exhibit P-4 reveals that Enquiry Officer had made up his mind to terminate the services of the plaintiff.
Even if we take that ostensible reasons were given by the Enquiry Officer, yet, the order of termination is unsustainable on the other two grounds.
Both the courts below after examining the oral and documentary evidence led by the parties have recorded the findings that the impugned order Exhibit P-4 is illegal, hence unsustainable.
This being finding of fact, does not call of any interference, I hereby affirm the judgment and decree of the courts below and consequently, dismiss the appeal.
Learned counsel for the appellant has, however, prayed that the appellant may be permitted to initiate fresh enquiry in respect of same charges.
This has not been objected to by the counsel for the respondent.
Accordingly, I allow the appellant to initiate fresh enquiry against the plaintiff, if the rules so permit.
In any case, the permission to initiate fresh enquiry will not be construed as bar to the grant of all permissible reliefs in terms of judgments and decrees affirmed in this appeal.
No costs.