Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined as a Clerk in the Department of Development and Panchayat, Punjab on 2551965.
Vide order dated 16.1.1968, he was ordered to work as an Accounts Clerk and he was removed from service while working on that post on 9.6.1972.
The petitioner thereafter challenged his removal from service by way of a civil suit.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court, but the appeal was allowed vide judgment dated 1611978, a copy of the decree sheet being appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition.
It was held by the lower appellate court that the order impugned before it was liable to be quashed as it was not valid.
The petitioner was thereafter reinstated vide order dated 21.2.1979, Annexure P-2 to the petition, and in compliance therewith he joined his duties on 23.2.1979.
The order is reproduced below :  "In pursuance of judgment dated 1611978 of the Additional District Judge, Ludhiana, in Civil Appeal Nos. 141-424 and 1980 of 1976-77 S Sadhu Singh Clerk, Block Office Jagraon, District Ludhiana is hereby reinstated and posted at Lehragaga Block, District Sangrur vide Smt. Mukhtiar Kaur Clerk (working on ad hoc basis) whose services are terminated with immediate effect, He will be entitled to back salary for 38 months from the date he resumes duty."
2.
The petitioner once again represented against the stipulation in the afore-quoted order to the effect that he would be given only 38 months back salary.
It appears that District Development and Panchayat Officer, Ahmedgarh, did recommend the case of the higher authorities for the grant of the entire arrears i.e. from 9.6.1972 to 21.2.1979 instead of the arrears of 38 months as ordered, but this suggestion was not acceded to by the Department.
The petitioner persisted and continued to represent against the stipulation but the final order passed by the Department Annexure P7 dated 1251980 was communicated to the petitioner declining his request.
Annexures P-2 and P-7 have been challenged by the petitioner byway of the present writ petition.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that on reinstatement he was entitled to the payment of salary and other emoluments as if the services had not been terminated and he had continued in service throughout.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner has cited Maimoona Khatun and another v. State of UP.
and another, AIR 1980 SC 1773, two Full Benches of this court in Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983 PLR 21 and Parkash Chand v. SS Grewal, Chief Secretary, Punjab etc., ILR (1974) 11 Punjab and Haryana 56 and Kulbir Singh v. The State of Punjab and another, 1990(2) RSJ 714.
4. on the other hand, the stand of the respondent as taken in the written statement was that in accordance with the decision of the Full Bench of this Court in Jagdish Mitter.
v. Union of India, AIR 1969 Punjab 441 the petitioner was entitled to recover only 38 months back wages as mentioned in the order, Annexure P-2.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties and taking into consideration the law cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
It would be seen that this point was specifically taken in Radha Ram's case (supra) and relying upon the observations of full Bench in Parkash Chand's case (supra) the Full Bench had this to say :  "Once the relief of setting aside or quashing the order of termination has been granted, or a declaratory decree has been passed to the similar effect, it necessarily follows that the employee in the eye of law continues to be in service and as a necessary consequence thereof would be entitled to all the emoluments flowing from that status.
He must be deemed to be in a position identical with that existing prior to the passing of the order of termination of his service.
In the felicitous language of their Lordships the emoluments of the post are a Iogical consequence of setting aside the order of termination."
The learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the following observations in Parkash Chand's case (supra) :  "From these observations, it is quite clear that when the dismissal of a Government servant is declared to be illegal, void or ineffective, a declaration as to his legal status of having remained a government servant throughout is given as if the order of dismissal never existed.
The result is that he is restored to his status of a government servant and becomes entitled to, enjoy all the benefits and privileges including emoluments for the entire period during which his dismissal remained in operation subject to the law of limitation or other defences open to the Government."
The point in issue was specifically raised before a Single Judge of this Court in Kulbir Singh's case (supra) as well and relying upon the Full Bench judgment in Radha Ram's case (supra).
the case cited by the respondents was distinguished as being not applicable to a situation where the finding was that the order of termination of service was null and void.
It would be seen from the earlier part of the judgment that even in the present case, the lower appellate court had found that the order impugned before it was not valid.
6.
It would thus be seen that a government employee on reinstatement by a court of law is entitled to recover all wages and other emoluments as if his services had never been terminated if a finding is recorded that the order impugned was void.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay to the petitioner all sums due to him from 9.6.1972. to 22.2.1979 instead of the 38 months wages ordered by the respondents ignoring the fact that the petitioner had remained out of service for that period.
He would be entitled to such amount with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date it fell due till the date of payment.
The entire calculations and the payment shall be made to the petitioner within a period of six months from today.
No costs.