V Sivaraman Nair, J - The two petitioners in Writ Petition No. 8333/91 commenced service in the respondent Company on 16676 and January, 1981, respectively as Badli Fillers.
They were matriculates.
They have been confirmed in that category.
Petitioners claim that they were assigned clerical duties whenever occasions arose thereafter.
They submit that they have graduated from Maithili University in the year 1987.
2.
The four petitioners in Writ Petition No. 8524/91 commenced service in the respondent's Company as Badli Fillers on 9382, 14.10.1986, 30985 and 21.10.96 respectively.
All the petitioners were matriculates.
All of them have been confirmed in the respective categories, they claim that they were officiating as clerks whenever such arrangements became necessary.
Petitioners graduated from Maithili University in the year 1987.
They submit that they thus became eligible to apply for appointments as Clerk-Grade-II.
3.
On 2321988 respondents issued a notification inviting applications for appointment as Clerks-Grade II.
Qualification necessary for the candidates was notified to be graduation in Arts/Science/Commerce of any recognised University.
Petitioners applied pursuant to that notification.
By orders dt. 1651988/2161988 they were appointed as Clerk-Grade II, since they have succeeded in the tests and interview.
On 271088 they were charge-sheeted for misconduct under clause 16(2) of the Standing Orders of the Company, for having committed fraud or dishonesty in connection with the business of the company, their services were terminated thereafter by order dt. 5.4.1989.
Petitioners challenged their dismissal in Writ Petition Nos. 6782/89 and 7752/89.
The matter was heard at some length and was about to be allowed.
At that stage, respondents took time to reconsider the matter.
Thereafter, fresh orders were passed on 2161991 reverting the petitioners as General Mazdoors.
When the matter came up before my learned brother Syed Shah Mohammad Quadri, J, on 25691 he dismissed the Writ Petitions as infructuous, since orders impugned in those Writ Petitions were cancelled by the respondents.
It was, however, observed that Petitioners would be free to challenge the validity of the said orders in appropriate proceedings.
What is now challenged in these Writ Petitions are the orders reverting the petitioners from the posts of Clerks-Grade II to the substantive category in which they were working prior to their appointment on 1651988, 2161988.
4.
Petitioners submit that the Company had sent a letter to Maithili University on 30588 to ascertain whether the degree certificates which the petitioners had produced were genuine and whether the University was recognised by the University Grants Commission, and that the Registrar of Maithili University relied on 961988 affirming both the points.
Reference was made to the communication of the Union Public Service Commission dt. 11.4.1985 which replied to St Philomena College, Puttur, South Kanara to the effect that Maithili University, Bihar is 'one of the recognised Universities, the degree awarded by the University are acceptable to the Commission for admission to various examinations conducted by them'.
Reference was as made to the communication from the Lok Sabha Secretariat dt. 21.12.1989 to the General Secretary, Maithili Vishwavidyapith Students' Association to the effect that the question of recognition of Maithili University was pending with the Committee on Petitions (Eight Lok Sabha).
Reference was also made to the letter of State Bank of India, dt. 9988 to the Branch Manager, Bangalore, granting additional increments to persons who graduated from Maithili University, the communication from the Karnataka Bank Limited, dt. 11.4.1986, and the letter of the Syndicate Bank dt. 8486 sanctioning additional increments to its staff, the letter of the Registrar of Kerala University, dt. July, 1987 to the Public Relations Officer, Spices Board, Cochin, and letter from the Registrar, University of Calicut to the Registrar of Maithili University, dt. 10.10.1986 to the above effect.
On the basis of this material it is submitted that the assumption leading to the orders of reversion of the petitioners for misconduct under clause 16(2) of the Standing Orders is illegal and unsustainable.
Yet another submission is that inasmuch as they have produced degree certificates genuinely issued by the recognised.
University, they could not have been reverted on the ground of misconduct.
5.
The 1st respondent has filed a counter affidavit.
It is stated that graduation is an essential qualification for appointment as Clerk-Grade-II, in accordance with the Industrial Settlements applicable to the petitioners.
A higher percentage of marks and successful completion of typewriting examination are prescribed for outside candidates; for the internal candidates only graduation from a recognised university was prescribed.
No person who does not have this basic qualification is entitled for appointment or continuance in a post of clerk.
Respondent maintains that petitioners were appointed subject to verification as to whether Maithili University and graduation degree awarded by it were genuine.
Even though the Registrar of Maithili University asserted that these were genuine, the company found on further verification that it was not a recognised University nor was it empowered to award its own degree in terms of the provisions of Section 22 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
Company received a letter to this effect from the University Grants Commission on 12th September, 1988 that Maithili University is neither a University established by a Central or a State Act nor deemed to be University under Section 3 of the UGC Act, as such it is not empowered to award its own degrees in terms of the provisions of Section 221 of the said Act "and information in this regard has already been given in the Newspapers, Akashvani and Doordarshan on 21st November, 1986."
Respondent invited my attention to the publication in 'The Hindu' dt. 22.7.1988 to the effect that the MRTP Commission restrained Maithili University from describing itself an university by issuing a notification through various publicity media.
Another publication Hindu dt. 20121988 was regarding fake institutions, one of which was Maithili University.
It is submitted that the respondent decided to proceed against the petitioners on the basis of such information.
Respondent also submits that the petitioners produced the fake graduation certificates, knowing that Maithili University was not recognised and could not have awarded graduate degrees.
It was on this basis that the misconduct under clause 16(2) of the Standing Orders was alleged against the petitioners for suspending them and conducting an elaborate enquiry giving them ample opportunity to prove their defence, and they were later dismissed from service as a result of those proceedings.
The fact that during the course of hearing of the two Writ Petitions viz. 6782/89 and 7752/89 the Company found that it would be expedient to reinstate the workmen in the posts which they were holding prior to their appointment as Clerks-Grade-II, is admitted.
Respondent submits that petitioners not being qualified in terms of the Industrial Settlement to hold the posts of Clerks-Grade II, they are not entitled to any relief in this Writ Petition, even assuming that the entire disciplinary proceedings against them were vitiated.
Reliance was placed on RN Nanjundappa v. I Thimmaiah, 1972 SLR 94, Eranalloor Service Co-operative Bank v. Labour Court, 1986(2) LLJ 492 and Ramakant Shripad Slnai Advalpalkar v. Union of India, 1993(3) SCT 586 (SC) : 1991 AIR SC 1145.
Reliance was also placed on a decision of this court in Writ Petition Nos. 10748 and 3160 of 1988 dt. 26.10.1988 wherein this court held that graduate degree of Maithili University was not a recognised degree as the University was not established by the University Grants Commission.
This court held that termination of service of a person who obtained appointment on production of degree certificate alleged to have been issued by the Maithili University was not illegal or in proper.
6.
There is no dispute before me that the qualification necessary for an internal candidate for appointment to the post of Clerk-Grade II was graduation from a recognised University.
This clear from the circular dt. 2321988.
It is now clear the petitioners did not have this qualification at the time when they were appointed by orders 1651988 and 21.6.88.
The fact that they were appointed subject to verification as to whether the degrees which they produced were recognised is evident from the very fact that the respondent-Company wrote to the Registrar of the University on 30588, to which the University relied on 961988.
It is clear from the letter of the University Grants Commission which has got the power to recognise Universities, that Maithili University (sic) Grants Commission Act.
If that be so, it could not have awarded any degree in terms of the provisions contained under Section 22 of that Act.
The letter dt. 1291988 from the University Grants Commission also clarifies that information in this regard had already been given to newspapers, Akashavani, Doordarshan on 21st November, 1986.
The letter of the Union Public Service Commission dt. 11.4.1985 which the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 8524/91 have produced, may not be very material in view of the letter of the University Grants Commission dt. 1291988, to the effect that Maithili University was not a recognised University nor was it competent to issue degree certificates in November, 1986.
The letter of the Registrar of the Osmania University dt. 2586 being prior to November, 1986 when the University Grants Commission issued the above information cannot also be determinative, the communication dt. 21.12.1989 of the Lok Sabha Secretariat enclosing copy of the report of the Committee on Petitions cannot be of avail to the petitioners against the letter of the University Grants Commission referred to above.
The fact that some of the Public Sector Banks have been accepting graduate certificates issued by the Maithili University for the fact that the University of Calicut in its letter dt. 10.10.1986 had informed the Maithili University of recognition by the former of degrees of the latter, will not to be of any assistance to the petitioner, because of the positive statement contained in the letter of the University Grants Commission to the contrary.
7.
On a careful examination of the material produced by either side, I am satisfied that the respondent was right in his submission that Maithili University was not, at the relevant time, recognised by the University Grants Commission or was it established by the Central or State Government to competently issue the Degree Certificates, under Section 22 of the University Grants Commission Act.
8.
The next question is whether the petitioners produced fake certificates fraudulently and dishonestly ?
I do not think it is necessary to enter a finding in this regard, because petitioners were not graduates of a recognised university at that time and they were reverted to the posts of General Mazdoor which they were holding prior to their promotion as Clerks-Grade II and the same cannot be faulted.
It is true that disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioners and they were dismissed from service and later reverted in substitution of dismissal on the basis of a charge of misconduct falling under clause 16(2) of the Standing Orders.
9.
Need consider the question of legality or propriety of the order of reversion only if I hold that the petitioners were entitled to hold the post of Clerk-Grade II.
10.
After hearing counsel for the petitioners and perusing the materials which were produced before me, I am not persuaded to hold that their reversions were in any way vitiated.
11.
I am of the opinion that the respondents are right in the submission that the only fact that petitioners were required occasionally to officiate as clerks during the period of five to ten years does not confer on them any right to continue in the post of Clerks.
In Ramakant Shripad Sinai Advalpalkar's case (supra) the Supreme Court held that officiation in a higher post in the exigencies of service does not confer any right to the post nor does it confer any right to seniority.
It was further held :  "the person continues to hold his substantive lower post and only discharges the duties of the higher post essentially as a stop-gap arrangement."
Naturally therefore, the stop-gap arrangement cannot confer any right on the petitioners.
12.
It is, however, clear that the respondents have abandoned the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioners under clause 16(2) of the Standing Orders.
The reversion of the petitioners cannot therefore be considered as punitive in character.
They were reverted as General Mazdoors only because they were not qualified in terms of the Industrial Settlement because they were not graduates from a recognised university.
13.
It is clear from the counter affidavit that the decision of the respondents was to put the petitioners back to their original position prior to their appointment as Clerks-Grade II.
It is only appropriate that if the petitioners were being considered for officiation as Clerk-Grade II in the absence of qualified candidates, such officiation may continue whenever such exigencies arise.
14.
The Writ Petition is dismissed with the above observation.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.