Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Nos. 2640 and 2668 of 1987.
The facts, as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 2640 of 1987 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner herein was appointed as a Sign Board Painter vide order dated August 16, 1979.
It is averred that the petitioner proceeded on leave from October 28, 1985 to November 10, 1985.
It is further stated that when the petitioner reported back for duty on November 11, 1985, he was not permitted to join.
He sent a notice to the Labour Inspector on the same day pointing out these facts with a copy to the Factory Manager as well.
When the Management did not appear in response to the repeated notices from the labour inspector, the petitioner served a notice of demand on February 3, 1986.
His prayer for reference of the dispute to the Labour Court having been declined by the Government vide order dated January 16, 1987, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is claimed that the petitioner had remained absent after November 11, 1985.
It has been further averred that his name is still borne on the rolls of the factory.
Since the petitioner had failed to join duty "in spite of the reminders" charge-sheet issued to the petitioner on account of continued absence is also pending enquiry.
The respondent claims that there is no dispute which may require to be settled by the Labour Court.
4.
I have heard Mr. U.S. Sahni for the petitioner and Mr. JK Sibal for the respondents.
Mr. Sahni contends that while examining the matter under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') the Government cannot examine the merits of the controversy.
In the present case, the State Government has refused to make a reference on the ground that the workman had "not attended duty."
Mr. Sahni submits that this is a controversy which has to be settled by the labour Court and not by the State Government.
On the other hand, Mr. Sibal, appearing for respondent No. 2, contends that the Management had not terminated the services of the petitioner and the Government has found prima facie that the workman was absent from duty.
He further points out that the workman was, in fact, employed elsewhere.
On this premises, the impugned order is sought to be supported.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have placed reliance on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Bombay Union of Journalists v. State of Bombay, AIR 1964 SC 1617, Western India Watch Co v. Its Workmen, AIR 1970 SC 1205 and AS Production Agencies v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana, AIR 1979 SC 170.
6.
A perusal of Section 10 of the Act shown that the appropriate Government has to form an opinion only with regard to the existence or otherwise of an industrial dispute.
It has to see if the parties are at variance.
It is not competent to adjudicate.
In the present case, the claim of the petitioner is that he had reported for duty on November 11, 1985 and that he was not permitted to join.
On the other hand, the Management claims that the workman has been absent since November 11, 1985.
In this situation, it was not open to the Government to determine and decide as to whether or not the workman was absent.
It had only to say whether or not there was a dispute between the parties.
The Government while passing the impugned order has not formed the opinion with regard to the existence of the dispute.
It has, in fact, adjudicated between the parties.
This was beyond the scope of Section 10 of the Act.
7.
So far as the cases cited by the learned counsel for the parties are concerned, I am of the view that no different view is discernible therefrom.
The languages of Section 10 is absolutely plain and clear.
It does not permit adjudication by the Government.
It only requires the formation of the opinion.
In view of the conclusion that the Government had adjudicated in the present case, I am unable to sustain the impugned order.
8.
Accordingly, the impugned orders in both the cases are quashed.
The Government is directed to make a reference of the dispute between the petitioner and respondent No. 2 to the Labour Court within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.