Bhaskar Rao, J - This is a writ petition filed seeking issuance of certiorari to quash the order dated 29121989 of the 1st respondent in and by which the petitioner was removed from service.
2.
The impugned order was sought to be assailed by Mr. PM Gopala Rao, the learned counsel on the ground that the 1st respondent has no jurisdiction to pass the order and also on merits, including the quantum of punishment.
However, in the view I am taking, I am not intending to delve on merits since a decision on the question of jurisdiction would suffice the disposal of the present writ petition.
3.
In June, 1985, while the petitioner was working as an Assistant Manager in the Syndicate Bank, the 1st respondent-Personnel Manager pursuant to certain allegations initiated disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner and after inquiry passed the impugned order removing the petitioner from service.
This action of the 1st respondent is challenged on the ground that the Personnel Manager is not the Disciplinary Authority concerned under the Syndicate Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979 and, therefore, the impugned order being one passed without jurisdiction is vitiated.
4.
In the year 1976, tracing the origin and source of power to section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Board of Directors of the Syndicate Bank in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government made the Regulations, called Syndicate Bank Officers/Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 and they came into force with effect from 1.1.1977.
It is under regulation 6 of the Syndicate Bank Officer/Employee (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter referred to, as the 'Discipline Regulations, 1976') that the charges were framed against the petitioner on the basis of the allegations.
Later the inquiry went on and on the basis of the enquiry report, the Personnel Manager removed through the impugned order the petitioner from service.
Apart from on merits, he prime attack against the impugned order is that the Discipline Regulations, 1976 have been superseded by the Syndicate Bank Officers' Service Regulations, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the Service Regulations, 1979) and therefore the charges framed and inquiry conducted as also the impugned order made by the Personnel Manager under the Discipline Regulations, 1976 are vitiated for want of jurisdiction in the Personnel Manager.
5.
It is, therefore, necessary to examine whether the Discipline Regulations, 1976 are superseded by the Service Regulations, 1979.
Adverting to the Discipline Regulations, 1976 the very name given to the Regulations is '(Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976'.
Regulation No. 1 gives the short title and commencement, Regulation 2 declares the application of the regulations, Regulation 3 furnishes the definitions, Regulation 4 describes the penalties categorising them as "Minor" and 'Major", Regulation 5 speaks of the authority competent to institute disciplinary proceedings and impose penalties, Regulation 6 lays down the procedure or imposing major penalties, Regulation 7 notes down the action that should follow the inquiry report, Regulation 8 lays down the procedure for imposing minor penalties, Regulation 9 postulates communication of the orders made under Regulation 7 or 8, Regulation 12 confers power on the competent authority to suspend an officer employee of the Bank, Regulation 14 contemplates procedure for fixing up pay, allowances and treatment of service on termination of suspension, Regulation 17 provides for appeals, Regulation 18 deals with review and Regulation 22 is the repeal and saving clause.
This in brief is the framework of the Discipline Regulations, 1976.
6.
Turning to the Service Regulations, 1979, they were made by the Board of Directors of the Syndicate Bank by virtue of the powers conferred under Section 19 and 12(2) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
The entire Service Regulations, 1979 are brought under ELEVEN Chapters.
Chapter-I relates to preliminary and definitions, Chapter-II does grading of officers and categorising of posts, Chapter-III provides for fitment of officers in the new grade and scales of pay, Chapter-IV takes in its fold appointment, probation, confirmation, promotion, seniority and termination.
It needs to be noticed here that the termination dealt with by regulation 20 is one free from the stigma of any kind of indiscipline and more in the course of normal employment.
It also provides for leaving or discontinuing the service by an Officer/employee, the prohibition postulated being pendency of any disciplinary proceedings against such Officer/employee.
Except this nothing more is stated about disciplinary proceedings and this too is contemplated since discontinuance or retirement has its relevancy to service, the Regulations being 'Service Regulations'.
The next Chapter, namely Chapter-V Contemplates payment of allowances, Chapter-VI speaks of perquisites to which the Officer/employee is entitled, Chapter-VII is in relation to leave and its kind, Chapter-VIII is as regards reimbursement of travel expenses, Chapter-IX is in regard to terminal benefits, Chapter-X takes in matters relating to transfers and Chapter-XI provides for miscellaneous things.
7.
The fields of operation of these two Regulations, as seen and as also pointed out by Shri Srinivasa Murthy are distinct and separate.
The Discipline Regulations, 1976 have their applicability exclusively to matters concerning misconduct and indiscipline while the Service Regulations, 1979 operate in matters like grading of officers, categorising of posts, fitment of the officers in the grades, appointment, probation, confirmation, promotion, seniority, termination, allowances, perquisites, medical reimbursement, leave travel concession, contributory provident fund, etc.
The Service Regulations, 1979 nowhere provide for any procedure for matters concerning misconduct or indiscipline of the Officer-employees of the Bank.
Thus, the Service Regulations, 1979 provide for matters other than those disciplinary in nature.
Regulation 53 of Service Regulations, 1979, to which my attention has been invited, runs :  "Revocation of earlier rules, etc.  Any rule, regulation, order, agreement, resolution or other instrument, or by usage, custom, convention or practice, governing any matter dealt with in any of these regulations including allowances, perquisite and facilities, shall, on the date when such regulation comes into force and unless the contrary is provided in these regulations, shall cease to have effect in regard to such matter."
8.
Placing reliance upon this Regulation 53 Sri PM Gopala Rao, contends that the Discipline Regulations, 1976 have been superseded by the Service Regulations, 1979 and, therefore, the impugned order made by the Personnel Manager- 1st respondent under the Discipline Regulations, 1976 is vitiated.
The language of Regulation 53 is beyond the realm of any ambiguity.
It declares that any rule, regulation, etc., dealt within the Service Regulations, 1979, shall, unless the contrary is provided in the 1979 Regulations, cease to have effect.
As was already noted the Service Regulations, 1979 have not provided for any matter dealt with by the Discipline Regulations, 1976 and, therefore, it cannot be said that the Discipline Regulations, 1976 halve been superseded by the Service Regulations, 1979.
9.
Now, addressing to the very Discipline Regulations, 1976, Mr. PM Gopala Rao, contended that the amendment brought into the "Schedule to the Discipline and Appeal Regulations" where under Personnel Manager is shown to be the Disciplinary Authority to the post of Middle Management Grade Scale II to admittedly the petitioner belongs, is not valid inasmuch as the amendment was neither brought in accordance with the procedure prescribed nor published in the Gazette.
Referring to the manner or procedure in which the amendment to the said Schedule was brought in, Mr. K Srinivasa Murthy drew my attention to a Circular, bearing No. 286/82/BCPER/100/IRS dated 10121982, of the Syndicate Bank by and in which the earlier Schedule was amended as noted supra.
He has also placed before me the extract from the Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 3121982 whereunder the proposed amendment was adopted.
The letter from the Reserve Bank of India, DBOD NO. Leg, 639/C.469(T.14)-82 dated September 1, 1982 addressed to the Syndicate Bank, discloses that there was consultation made by the Syndicate Bank in regard to the amendment before it was actually brought in as required under Section 19(1) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970.
So much so, the Government of India, through letter dated 11/16 November, 1982 of its Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) addressed to the Syndicate Bank has conveyed its sanction to the proposed amendment.
It is only after consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous sanction of the Government of India that the amendment in question was brought in through the circular noted supra.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that the amendment was brought in without following the procedure envisaged by Section 19 of the Banking Companies Act, 1970.
10.
The other ground of attack against the amending circular, as regards its validity, is that issuance of amendment to the regulation being one in the mature of delegated, legislative function, unless there is publication of the amendment in the Gazette the same is invalid and cannot be acted upon.
The learned counsel also invited my attention to the Delegated Legislation (Amendment) Act, IV of 1986 and contended that the provisions of the said Act also mandate publication of Rules or Regulations framed either originally or amended subsequently.
The learned counsel, Sri PM Gopala Rao, also sought to place reliance in support of his contention on some of the decisions of the Supreme Court, in Harla v. The State of Rajasthan, AIR 1951 SC 457, the Supreme Court referring to the importance or necessity of publication of Acts laid down :  "Natural justice requires that before a law can become operative it must be promulgated or published.
It must be broadcast in some recognisable way so that all men may know what it is; or., at the very least, there must be some customary channel by or through which such knowledge can be acquired with the exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
In the absence therefore of any law, rule, regulation or custom, a law cannot come into being by merely passing a resolution, without promulgation or publication in the Gazette or other means ....
The mode of publication can vary.
But reasonable publication of some sort there must be."
In State of Maharashtra v. MH George, AIR 1965 SC 722, the Supreme Court again held :  "Where there is a statutory requirement as to the mode or form of publication and they are such that, in the circumstances, the Court holds to be mandatory, a failure to comply with those requirements might result in .... but where there is no statutory requirement we conceive the rule to be that it is necessary that it should be published in the usual form i.e. by publication within the country in such media as generally adopted to notify to all the persons concerned the making of rules.
Publication in the Official Gazette viz. the Gazette of India is the notice of the persons concerned."
In DB Raju v. HJ Kantharaj, 1990(4) SCC 178, the Supreme Court reiterated that there must be reasonable publication of some sort, though it may vary, whenever there involved the subordinate or delegated legislation.
In R.B.
Sugar Co. v. Rampur Municipality, AIR 1965 SC 895 a resolution which is required to be published in Hindi in a local paper, was published in an Urdu paper but in Hindi language.
This was held to be a sufficient compliance.
In Naryana Reddy v. State of AP, 1969(1) An.
W.R. 77, this Court had the occasion to deal with the question of publication of the subordinate legislation.
It was held therein :  "Where the parent statute prescribed the mode of publication or promulgation that mode must be followed but where the statute is silent, the question arises what is the mode of publication or promulgation to be adopted.
The subordinate legislation itself may prescribe the manner of publication in which case such mode, if adopted may be sufficient, if reasonable.
If the subordinate legislation does not prescribe a mode of publication or if the subordinate legislation prescribes a plainly unreasonable mode of publication, it will take effect only when it is published through the channel, now customarily recognised in our country as the appropriate channel through which official orders are made known to the public, namely, file Official Gazette .....
There may however be subordinate legislation concerning individuals or confined to small local areas.
In such cases publication or promulgation by other means may be sufficient."
11.
In the instant case, Mr. PM Gopala Rao, the learned counsel could not show any mode of publication prescribed by either the parent legislation viz. the Banking Companies Act, 1970 or the subordinate legislation, viz. the Discipline Regulations, 1976 for being followed whenever any amendment is brought into the Regulations.
Further, the Supreme Court time and again held that there should be publication or promulgation but it should be reasonable one, though may vary.
The publication, therefore, need not necessarily or invariably be in the Gazette and Gazette only.
There must be some channel through which the concerned can acquire knowledge of the amended legislation with the exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
Publication in the Official Gazette, no doubt, is one of the modes of publication.
But that publication in the Gazette cannot be said to be the only exclusive mode of publication much less a mandatory one, in the absence of any specific requirement envisaged by either the parent or subordinate legislation.
What is very well necessary in the present case is that the publication of the amendment should be such that the concerned should be able to know of the amendment of the Schedule by exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
The amendment brought in through the circular in question affects the Officers/Employees of the Syndicate Bank alone and not the public at large, muchless it is an enactment as such.
No doubt the amendment is statutory in character and the Regulations are statutory in nature.
The intendment and object behind the rule of publication of the amended schedule is to see that the concerned employees would be able to amended knowledge of the same with the exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
In the instant case the Circular through which the amendment to the Schedule was brought in is given publication by endorsing a copy of it to all the Officers of the Bank with a request to note the change and incorporate the amendment in their Discipline Regulations, 1976.
The Circular invited the attention of all the Officers of the Bank to the Schedule that underwent the amendment.
In the circumstances the circular on the ground that it was not published in the Gazette cannot be sought to be assailed as having been invalid, particularly when it was given the necessary and due publication through a different mode, viz. by means of circulation to all the Officers.
The amendment brought in to the Schedule is to be accordingly held valid.
For the foregoing reasons when the Discipline Regulations, 1976 are not superseded and are in vogue and the amendment brought in to the Schedule thereto is valid, the contention of Mr. PM Gopala Rao that the Personnel Manager-Ist respondent's not the Disciplinary Authority and therefore the impugned order passed is without jurisdiction is not tenable.
The writ petition in so far it relates to the jurisdiction at question, therefore, fails.
12.
Adverting to the challenge of the impugned order on merits, it is to be noticed that as noted in the very impugned order, an appeal against the same lies under Regulation 17 of the Discipline Regulations, 1976 to the Assistant General Manager (Per).
The petitioner may therefore agitate the matter in appeal before the said authority.
The appellate authority may entertain the appeal, if filed, within six weeks from today and decide the matter as per law as expeditiously as possible.
With this observation the writ petition is disposed of.
No costs.
Orders accordingly.