Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who had been deputed for pre-commission training on July 18, 1964, was released from Army on September 1, 1970.
He was recalled on January 26, 1972 and served the Army till January 26, 1974.
In the meantime, he had appeared in the competitive selection for recruitment to the PCS (Executive Branch) and Allied Services in the year 1972.
On June 26, 1974 he was appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
Vide orders dated November 25, 1981, the respondents had given him the benefit of military service for a period of 3 years 5 months and 23 days.
The petitioner claims the benefit of the entire military service rendered by him in the Army.
The facts may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was selected for Emergency Commission.
He joined officers training at Madras on July 18, 1964.
He was commissioned on February 14, 1965.
He was released from the Army on September 1, 1970.
He was recalled on January 2, 1972 and was released on January 26, 1974.
Copy of the discharge certificate given to the petitioner on September 23, 1976 is at Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
3.
The petitioner appeared in PCS (Executive Branch) Examination in the year 1972.
He was selected for appointment as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
The petitioner joined his duties on June 26, 1974.
The petitioner avers that he was entitled to the counting of the military service rendered by him after doing pre-commission training for seniority and increment etc. on the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
He made representations in this regard as far back as August, 1974, but no action having been taken by the authorities, he filed CWP No. 8464 of 1976 claiming the requisite benefit.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on January 13, 1977 with the following order :-  "Return has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The primary claim in this writ petition is for the benefits of seniority and increments etc. on the basis of military service rendered by the petitioner.
In the return it has been stated that the matter is still under active consideration of the Government.
From the averments in the petition it appears that the writ petitioner has been pressing his claim since 4th August, 1974.
No adequate explanation has been given in the return for the considerable delay.
In view of this we direct the respondents to decide the case of the petitioner within 3 months from today.
With the above observations the writ petition is disposed of."
4.
The department considered the claim of the petitioner and rejected it.
This decision was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated April 15, 1977.
A copy of this letter has been placed on record as Annexure P-2.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed CWP No. 3569 of 1977.
This writ petition was decided by SS Sandhawalia, CJ vide orders dated July 27, 1979.
The order at Annexure P-2 was quashed and the respondent State was directed to fix the seniority of the petitioner by granting him the benefit of military service in the light of the observations made in Raj Kumar Verma's case.
It may be mentioned here that 51 officers, who were likely to be affected by the grant of benefit to the petitioner had been impleaded as respondent Nos. 3 to 53 in this Writ Petition.
Ultimately, by an order of November 25, 1981, the Government decided the case and declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer w.e.f.
January 3, 1971 instead of June 26, 1974, when he had actually joined as such.
He was accordingly ordered to be placed below one Sh. DP Kalia and above Shri Amarjit Singh in the cadre of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
It was further directed that his seniority as Excise and Taxation Officer will be determined accordingly.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner submitted a representation dated January 20, 1982 to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Punjab vide Annexure P-5.
This was followed by a reminder of April 20, 1982.
Having failed to get any order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
The State of Punjab and the Excise and Taxation Commissioner are the two respondents in this petition.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the two respondents by the Joint Secretary to Government Punjab.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was recruited as an Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer against the vacancy reserved for military personnel under the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1968 Rules).
Under these rules, 20 per cent of the non-technical.
posts to be filled up through direct recruitment shall be reserved for being filled up by the Indian Armed Commission on or after November 1, 1962 and are released at any time thereafter.
It is further averred that in accordance with the 1960 Rules, the seniority and pay of the released Armed Forces personnel is to be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be, under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the commission.
After July 18, 1964, when the petitioner joined the pre-commission training, he could take the first opportunity to join as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer only in the year 1972 when he had actually applied for Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer against one of the vacancies reserved for ex-servicemen.
Accordingly, under the 1968 Rules his date of appointment would have continued to be June 26, 1974.
It is further averred that in view of the directions given by this Court, his case was examined under the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 hereinafter referred to as 'the 1965 Rules').
Under these rules, the petitioner was actually not entitled to the grant of any benefit as he had crossed the maximum age on 111972.
The benefit of military service to the extent of 3 years 5 months and 23 days was given to him.
It is further averred that the petitioner is not entitled to any benefit beyond what has already been given to him.
6.
The arguments were initially addressed by Mr SS Nijjar on behalf of the petitioner and Mr. HS Riar for the respondents.
Later on, even the petitioner was heard by me.
7.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner is that the period of military service from July 18, 1964 to September 1, 1970 and from January 26, 1972 to January 26, 1974 had to be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining his seniority and pay etc. Mr. Riar, on the other hand, has contended that only the period of service rendered during the operation of emergency, viz. October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968 had to be taken into consideration.
He also relied on the judgment of this Court in LPA No. 319 of 1988 decided on December 8, 1989.
8.
The petitioner was admittedly recruited as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer on one of the vacancies reserved for Ex-servicemen under the 1968 Rules.
In terms of Rule 5(1) of these rules, the seniority and pay of the petitioner had to be determined on the assumption that he joined the post at the first opportunity that he had after joining the military service.
This opportunity had admittedly become available to the petitioner in the year 1972.
That being so, he is not entitled to any benefit under the 1968 Rules.
The department has still, in view of the directions given by this Court, examined his case under the 1965 Rules.
The petitioner has been given the benefit of military service rendered by him during the period of operation of emergency.
Is he entitled to anything beyond what has already been given to him ?
I am of the opinion that he is not entitled.
9.
The expression 'military service' has been defined in Rule 2 of the 1965 rules.
It reads as under :-  "For the purpose of these rules the expression 'Military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Force (including service as a Warrant Officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on 26th October, 1962 or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
10.
A perusal of the above rule would show that it is only the service rendered during the operation of the proclamation of emergency that qualifies for description as military service.
The emergency was admittedly in operation from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968.
The petitioner having joined pre-commissioin training on July 18, 1964, had rendered military service for a period of 3 years 5 months and 23 days.
Benefit of this service has admittedly been given to the petitioner.
Under the rules, no further benefit was admissible to him.
Accordingly, I do not find any merit in the claim of the petitioner that the entire period of service rendered by him in the Army should be counted for seniority and pay.
11.
Mr. Nijjar has also placed reliance on the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated February 24, 1972 to the various departmental heads etc. A copy of these instructions is at Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
These instructions related to the retention of lien in civil posts of such employees who joined Armed Forces during the emergency declared on account of Indo Pak War.
In paragraph 3 of these instructions it is provided as under :-  "The Punjab Government have decided that the civil Government employees who are/have been called for military service during the present Emergency shall be eligible to the concessions enjoined in the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, read with the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968."
12.
Mr. Nijjar claims that in view of these instructions, the period of military service from January 26, 1972 to January 26, 1974 should be taken into consideration while determining the petitioner's seniority etc.
These instructions, in my view, apply to such employees, who were in the Service of the State Government before the proclamation of emergency and had rendered military service during the operation of this proclamation.
The petitioner was not a civil Government employee, when he was called for military service.
Consequently, he is not entitled to any benefit under these instructions.
13.
In fact the present case is squarely covered by the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 319 of 1988 decided on December 8, 1989.
While dealing with the provisions of the 1965 Rules, their Lordships of the Division Bench were pleased to observe as under :-  "A glance through the said rule leaves no doubt that the period spent by a person on military service after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post to which he is appointed, shall count for increments are where no such minimum age is prescribed, the minimum age is laid down in Rules 3.9, 310, and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Volume-II shall prevail.
In the matter of seniority, clause (ii) also provides for taking into consideration the military service, mentioned in clause (i).
Similar is the position regarding pension.
Thus, there is no doubt that military service rendered during the period of Emergency shall count for increments etc. under these rules.
It is not disputed that the Emergency proclaimed by the President of India on 26101962 lasted until 1011968.
No doubt Emergency was also declared in the wake of second Indo-Pak conflict in the year 1971 but no such rules were framed or issued by the State Government for granting these benefits to the persons who served in the armed forces of India during that period.
Thus, under these circumstances, Sukhdev Singh having joined the armed forces on 1911963 could have been granted benefit in the matter of increments etc until the lasting of Emergency, i.e. 1011968 only and not for the subsequent period from 3.12.1971 till the lifting of emergency in the year 1972.
14.
In view of the above enunciation of law, the petitioner's claim deserves to be rejected.
15.
In a somewhat different context, the matter was also considered by the Apex Court in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) SCT 137 : 1991(1) SLR 200.
In this case, it was claimed that the persons who had joined Army prior to the proclamation of emergency had served even during the operation of emergency and were entitled to the benefits towards seniority etc. on joining civil posts.
The provisions of the rule inasmuch as the benefit was denied to such persons, were challenged on the anvil of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The claim was declined.
It was held that those who joined the military service during the national emergency and those who were already in service but were compelled to serve during the emergency formed two distinct classes.
The differentia in treatment was held to be intelligent which had a direct nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
Accordingly, the claim was declined.
The rule making authority in its wisdom has chosen to confine the benefit of military service to the period during which the proclamation of emergency was in operation.
It has further chosen not to confer any benefit for the period of emergency relating to the Indo-Pak War.
The rules conferred a limited benefit.
The citizen cannot claim anything beyond what has been granted under the rules.
16.
There is another impediment in the way of the petitioner.
He claims that he should be deemed to have been appointed as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer in the year 1966 instead of the year 1971 as followed by the Department.
If this claim is accepted, the rights of various persons are bound to be adversely affected.
None of these persons has been impleaded as a respondent.
All such persons, who are likely to be adversely affected, are necessary parties.
The petitioners cannot be granted any relief in their absence.
17.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
petition dismissed.