HS Bedi, J - By this judgment I propose to dispose of civil writ petition Nos. 2002 and 18 of 1981.
The facts have been taken from civil writ petition No. 2002 of 1981.
2.
The petitioners who were employed as drivers with respondent No. 1 - Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, were relieved from their duties on 881976 and 11.10.1978 respectively allegedly on attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years.
The petitioners aggrieved by the action of the respondent- Corporation moved the Labour Court for redressal of their grievance on the ground that the termination of their services was in the nature of retrenchment, as there was no provision either in the Model Standing Orders as framed by the State of Punjab under the Industrial Employment Standing Orders Act, 1946 as published in the Punjab Government Gazette on 3111967 and 2361978 or in the contract of service stipulating the age of superannuation of an employee.
The Labour Court found that in the absence of any contract between the contending parties or service rules, the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') would be applicable and section 2(r) which defined superannuation gave an indication as to how, in such circumstances the age of superannuation was to be determined, was specifically alluded to.
The said provision is reproduced below :-  "(i) The attainment of the employee of such age as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which the employee shall vacate the employment and,  (ii) in any other case, the attainment by the employee of age of 58 years.
3.
The Labour Court, therefore, found that as there was no contract of employment or conditions of service with regard to the age of superannuation only clause (ii) of Section 2(r) of the Act would apply and as such the age of superannuation of the petitioners was determined at 58 years.
For arriving at this conclusion, the Labour Court placed reliance on Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd Naini Allahabad v. Lalta Prasad and others, 1979 Lab.
IC NOC 109 (Allahabad) ignoring another Division Bench judgment reported as Kashinath Sahoo v. Orissa State, Electricity Board, 1977 Lab.IC 336 in which it had been held that the provisions of the Act could not be read into a case of superannuation and in that situation a person was entitled to continue in service till such time as he remained medically fit.
4.
It has been urged by Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners on the basis of Kashinath Sahoo's case (supra) that in the absence of a contract or conditions of service laying down the age of superannuation, the employee was entitled to continue in service till he remained medically fit.
In distinguishing the judgment reported as Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan's case (supra), he has stated that this judgment runs contrary to the spirit of labour legislation as the age of superannuation has to be clearly laid down in order to determine its applicability to the case of workman.
It is also urged that an indication to the above effect is to be found in M/s British Paints (India) Ltd v. Its Workmen, A.I.R. 1966 Supreme Court 732 in which it has been held that an employee is entitled to continue in service uptil the age he remains physically fit unless conditions of his service fix a certain age.
5.
After considering the matter, I find that the contention of Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner appears to be correct.
It is to be noted that gratuity is also to be paid on superannuation, but the Act itself deals only with the age where gratuity becomes payable and does not deal with a situation as to when exactly an employee is deemed to have superannuated, for purposes of pension or other retiral benefits.
6.
In view of what has been stated above, the petitioners were entitled to continue in service till they remained medically fit, but it has been conceded before me by Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners that subsequent to the date of superannuation of the petitioners, the respondent-Corporation has framed its own regulations called "Pepsu Road Transport Corporation (Conditions of Appointment & Service) Regulations, 1981 and Regulation 171 has fixed the age of superannuation of an employee as 58 years in normal circumstances.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioners would have been entitled to continue in service till the aforesaid regulations were enforced in the year 1981.
7.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed and impugned award of the Labour Court, annexure P-1 is quashed.
The petitioners are deemed to have been continued in service till the enforcement of regulation 171 ibid.
Arrears due to the petitioners will be cleared alongwith interest @ 12% per annum from the date if fell due to the date of its actual payment within a period of two months from the date a copy of this judgment is supplied to the respondent.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.