RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 5547, 6469, 6634, 7147, 8923, 9730, 8044 and 11373 of 1991, as the points raised in these writ petitions are almost identical.
2.
The petitioners in these writ petitions are staking their claim for admission to the Postgraduate Courses for the session 1990-91, in the Medical College, Rohtak in specialities of Orthopaedics and Surgery in degree Courses Group I, Group II and Diploma Courses Group I and Group II in accordance with their merits.
I may observe here that Group I Post-Graduate degree course is of two years' duration and is open to those candidates who have completed one year house-job; whereas Group II degree course is of three years' duration and is open to those candidates who have not done the house- job but have only done Internship.
However, it is open to the person who has done the house- job to apply for admission to Group II Course also.
Similarly, diploma course Group I is of one year duration and is open to the first category of candidates mentioned above; and Diploma Group II is of two years' duration and is open to the candidates of the second category mentioned above.
Needless to mention that a candidate eligible for Group I diploma also apply to Group II diploma.
For admission to the P.G.
Course/Diploma Course, a candidate could give three preferences.
Appendix 'A' to the prospectus issued by the Medical College, Rohtak, lays down the procedure for determination of merit, which is reproduced below :- (relevant extract)  "Appendix A  Procedure for determination of merit;  1.
Academic Marks :------------- 2 House Job : There will be five marks for each senior and julnior house- job and there will be a system of grading the performance during house-job.
"The marks allotted for different grades will be as follows : Grade - A (Excellent Outstanding 5 Marks Grade - B (Very Good) 3 Marks Grade - C (Good) 2 Marks Grade - D (Average, Satisfactory) 1 Marks 3.
A report on the candidate's performance during house job shall be obtained before the interview from the Head of the Department/Unit where he/she has worked.
For this purpose, the students shall be asked to indicate the name and latest address of the head of the unit with whom he/she has worked during house job.
In rare cases if such a report cannot be obtained due to the non-availability of the concerned consultant, the candidate shall be allotted marks according to his/her total average merit.
In pre-clinical subjects were house-job is not essential, the grade obtained in other equivalent jobs (Demonstrator, Research Officer etc.) may be treated at par.
Similarly, those candidates who have done rural/defence service etc. in lieu of house-job, the grade obtained there may be treated accordingly.
3.
Internship : For 3 years system performance during internship only shall be considered in place of house job and marks allotted accordingly.
The procedure for grding the performance will be the same as adopted for house job.
4.
--------- 5.
--------- 6.
Interview : 10 Marks.
This will take into account the professional performance and also contribution to sports, other extra-curricular activities, participation in other community welfare programmes etc.
The necessary documents should be submitted at the time of interview.
7.
---------" Clause 11 of the Prospectus regarding the procedure for selection gives the details as to how the candidates are admitted in Group I and Group II and how their interviews are to be held.
The same is reproduced below :  "After publication of merit list on the basis of Entrance examination candidates eligible for admission in Group-I will be called for interview.
Their overall merit will be prepared according to Appendix-A The remaining candidates who could not be admitted in Group-I will be kept in waiting list for admission in Group-II, if they have applied for that.
After that candidates eligible for admission in Group-II will be called for interview.
A combined merit list of those who applied only in Group-II and those who applied both in Group-I and II but could not be admitted in Group-I will be prepared.
Selected candidates as per this merit will be admitted to first year of three year degree course and first year of two year diploma course."
The eligibility of a candidate who is already admitted to a diploma course in a subject, and is seeking admission to a degree course, is given in Clause 5 of the Prospectus, which is as under :-  5.
A student who is already admitted to a diploma course 'in a subject shall be eligible to apply for admission to the degree course in the same subject provided the degree course is starting after the satisfactory completion of the duration of diploma course.
If selected he will be admitted to second year of the three year degree course if he has applied for admission in Group-I, or first year of three years degree course if he had applied for admission in Group-II."
4.
During the course of arguments, a serious dispute had arisen on facts as to whether at the time of interview, the marks were being awarded by members separately or only once by consensus of various members of the Selection Committee and whether the marks-sheet prepared at the time of the interview was signed by the Chairman only or by all the members of the Committee.
Further, the factual dispute was whether there had been one interview for candidates who had applied both for diploma and degree courses or there were two separate interviews for such candidates.
Another bone of contention was whether a candidate appearing for interview was being marked present and any signatures in token of his presence were being taken at the time of interview.
Initially, by my order dated 9th September, 1991, I had directed the Chairman of the Committee, i.e. Dr. JP Singh, Director of Medical College, Rohtak, to file an affidavit on the above points.
In the affidavit of Dr. JP Singh, it has been stated that two interviews of the same candidate who might have applied for degree and diploma Courses both, were held, i.e. one interview for considering the candidate for selection for diploma and the other interview of the same candidate for selecting him for the admission in the degree course.
In regard to other aspects, it has been stated that the marks were being recorded by him after consensus of the members of the Interview Committee and he was the one who had signed the mark-sheets.
Further it has been mentioned that no separate attendance sheets/register was maintained to show the attendance of a particular candidate.
The marks-sheet itself was the proof that a particular candidate had appeared for interview or not.
I may observe here that earlier on, a civil suit was filed by one Dr. Rakesh Kumar, wherein after recording evidence it was found that there was one interview for the candidates who might have applied for degree and diploma courses both.
The judgment of the Civil Court has been appended as Annexure P.11 with CWP.
No. 5547 of 1991.
5.
There were different nominees of the MD University on the Interview Committee for selecting candidates in different Specialities.
I thought it proper to get the affidavits of the University nominees, who were there for selecting candidates in the Specialities of Orthopaedics and Surgery.
No affidavits were filed by them by the date fixed by me and this necessitated me to summon the Court and record their statements.
Dr. Sharbjit and Dr. PP Singh appeared in this Court on 30th September, 1991 and their statements were recorded.
They were duly cross-examined, by the counsel for the respective parties.
6.
The following points have been urged by the learned counsel for the writ petitioners, which call for my determination :-  i) That in fact there was only one interview for the candidates who had applied both for degree and diploma courses and respondents in some cases had wrongly shown as if some candidates, including the petitioners, had appeared twice over and were given different marks for interview for selection in degree and diploma courses.
The plea is that the candidates who had applied for admission both the diploma as well as to degree courses had in fact appeared only once in the interview.
However, the respondents had shown them to have appeared twice in the interview and given different marks or some had been shown absent in one of the interviews.
In such case the maximum marks shown to have been awarded in either of the interviews should be taken to be marks for admission both to Diploma and Degree Courses.
ii) Dr. Subodh Jain and Dr. Indermohan Singhal (Respondents 4 and 5 in CWP No. 8044 of 1991 and also in some other writ petitions) could not have been admitted to MS Orthopaedics Group I, inasmuch as they were ineligible as per Clause 5 of the Prospectus, quoted above.
iii) The marks of house-job/Internship should have been awarded on the basis of the assessment report and not on the basis of house-job/Internship completion certificates.
iv) According to Clause 2 of Appendix 'A' to the Prospectus, the maximum marks for house-job are 10.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP Nos. 7147 and 8923 of 1991, since the petitioners had in addition to the house-job, done Rural Service also, they should be given marks to their best advantage.
If they are getting more marks for Rural Service, they should be given these marks instead of the marks for the house-job.
7.
Before coming to the points raised above, I may observe that the two nominees of the University who had appeared before me and given their statements, had categorically stated that there was only one interview of the candidates who had applied both for degree and diploma courses and another separate interview of those candidates who had only applied for diploma courses, was held.
Further the nominees of the University had stated that the marks were being awarded by consensus of all the members and the Chairman of the Interview Committee, i.e. Dr. JP Singh was recording the marks and the award list was not got signed from the members of the Interview Committee.
Dr. Sarabjit Singh had kept his own notes regarding the marks and he found that the marks in his notes tallied the marks in the award list, which was prepared by the Chairman, i.e. Dr. JP Singh.
It was further stated that no attendance sheet or any register was maintained in which the signatures of the candidates might have been taken to show their presence for the interview.
8.
Now coming to point No. (i) mentioned above.
Reading of Clause 11-A of the Prospectus would show that a candidate who had applied for Group I and Group II was to be interviewed once and if a candidate could not make grade in Group I, he was to be placed in the waiting list of Group I and considered for admission in Group II on the basis of the same interview.
Similarly, there was to be one interview of those candidates who might have applied only for Group II.
The merit list of Group II was to be prepared of those candidates who might applied for Group I and Group II and could not make grade in Group I and of those candidates who might have applied for Group II only.
There seems to be no rationale in holding a separate interview for those candidates who had applied for admission in the same Speciality for degree as well as diploma Courses.
The Interview Committee was the same and the qualifications of the candidates of Group I diploma and Group I degree and Group II diploma and Group II degree were the same.
Factually also, from the statements of the two University nominees, I find that there had been only one interview of the candidates who had applied both for diploma and degree courses.
In this view of the matter, I hold that as far as the petitioners are concerned, whoever amongst them had applied both for degree and diploma courses, and have been shown to have appeared twice for interview, the higher marks of interview awarded to them in degree or diploma will be taken into consideration both for admission to degree or diploma, as the case may be.
In case the marks have been awarded only for degree or for diploma, but the candidate had applied both for degree and diploma Courses, then the marks awarded for the interview will be considered for the other category as well and the merit list of the petitioners will be prepared accordingly.
These observations of mine would apply only to the candidates who had applied for admission in degree/diploma courses in the same speciality.
If a candidate had applied in either of the Groups in diploma or degree in one speciality and had also applied in either of the Groups in the other specialities, then the candidate had to be interviewed separately for different specialities and the marks awarded in the interview will be considered accordingly for preparing the merit list in different specialities.
9.
Now coming to the second point regarding the admission of Dr. Subodh Jain and Dr. Indermohan Singhal to MS Orthopaedics Group I, the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that these two candidates were under going diploma course when they had submitted the application for being admitted to MS Group I Orthopaedics.
The last date for the submission of the applications was 6th February, 1990.
The argument is that when they had submitted the applications, they were ineligible in accordance with Clause 5 concerning eligibility, which had already been quoted above.
According to this clause, a student who was already admitted to a diploma course in a subject was eligible to apply for the degree course in the same subject provided the degree course was starting after the satisfactory completion of the duration of the diploma course.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, diploma course would not have come to an end before the start of the degree course in normal circumstances.
It was just a fortuitous circumstance that this Court had stayed the admissions and that is why the degree course could not start.
The factual position is that these two respondents had applied for the admission before the last date of the submission of the applications while they were doing diploma course, which they completed on 15th July, 1990.
They were granted admission to MS Group I on 4th February, 1991 and 2nd February, 1991 respectively.
The MS Group I course started in February, 1991.
So factually these two respondents were granted admission after the completion of their diploma course on 15th July, 1991, which was before the start of the MS degree course Group I I do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
There is nothing in the prospectus or in the University Calendar that the degree course must start on a particular date.
Had it been so, then the prospectus would not have mentioned that the candidates already admitted to diploma course would be eligible for the degree course in the same subject, provided the degree course is starting after the satisfactory completion of the duration of the diploma course.
In that case a particular date would have been mentioned.
Of course, normally the session starts in a particular month, but there is no specific date or month that it must start.
There can be various circumstances due to which a particular course may not start at a time, it is expected normally to start.
The question to be seen is whether factually the completion of the diploma Course, is prior to the start of the degree courses.
Reading of Clause 5, quoted above shows that the eligibility is not to be seen on the last date of the submission of the applications, but the eligibility has to be seen on the factual basis, i.e. whether the diploma course is being completed before the start of the degree course.
Otherwise also, I see that this condition is not mandatory and under the circumstances as in the present case it cannot be held that the admission of Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 namely Dr. Subodh Jain and Dr. Indermohan Singhal in CWP.
No. 8044 of 1991, is against the eligibility clause mentioned in the prospectus.
10.
With regard to point No. (iii), it has been submitted that Appendix 'A', which has been quoted above, regarding the procedure for determination of merit, it has been made clear that as to how mathematically the marks for the two housejobs and for Internship have to be awarded.
The procedure as laid down in Clause 2, which is again applicable to Clause 3 of Appendix 'A' as well, it has specifically been mentioned that a report of the candidate's performance during his housejobs would be obtained in the form of a performance certificate and according to the Grade therein, i.e. Grade-A (Excellent, outstanding), Grade-B (Very Good) Grade-C (Good) and Grade D (Average, satisfactory), the marks will be awarded as 5, 3, 2 and 1 respectively.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the marks which have been awarded for house-job/Internship have not been awarded on the basis of the performance certificate, which were obtained regarding their performance as per requirement of Clause 2 and Clause 3 of Appendix 'A' but have been awarded on the basis of the house-job/Internship completion certificates, which in the ultimate analysis had categorised the performance as satisfactory/good/very good/not satisfactory.
In the housejob/Internship completion certificate, there is no categorisation as 'excellent' or 'outstanding'.
The argument is that according to the procedure mentioned in Appendix 'A', performance certificate of the candidates had to be obtained regarding their house-job/Internship which according to the petitioners had factually been obtained.
In spite of that, marks were not awarded on that basis, but on the basis of house-job/Internship completion certificates.
To illustrate their point, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in the house-job/Internship completion certificates even if the person was to get 'very good', he would get three marks, though otherwise the may be excellent and since there was no categorisation as excellent in the house- job/Internship completion certificate, the candidate would never get five marks.
Some of the candidates are alleged to have got the assessment certificates as excellent/outstanding, yet they have not been given marks accordingly, i.e. 5 marks.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that as far as those candidates who had completed their house-job/Internship prior to 1989, their marks have been awarded on the basis of the assessment certificates.
I find no rationale to differentiate between those candidates who had completed their house-job/Internship prior to 1989 or after 1989.
All such candidates who had completed house-job/Interniship prior to 1989 and after 1989, were eligible for admission to degree and diploma Courses.
Apart from that, the procedure as prescribed in the Prospectus in Appendix 'A', does not make any distinction between a candidate who had completed house- job/Internship prior to 1989 or after 1989.
In all cases, a report on the candidate's performance during the period of housejob/Internship had to be called, which, I am told had factually been called.
That being so, I am of the view that the marks for the house-job/Internship had to be awarded on the basis of the performance assessment certificates and not on the basis of the house-job/Internship completion certificates.
12.
Now coming to point No. (iv) raised by Mr. SS Nijjar and Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the writ petitioners in CWP Nos. 7147 and 8923 of 1991, that since the petitioners had done Rural Service after completion of house-job, their assessment under the category of house-job should have been done on the basis of their having done Rural Service and if they were getting more marks on the consideration that they had done Rural Service, then instead of giving marks for the house-job, they should have been awarded marks for the Rural Service.
It may be observed that this point has not been raised in the writ petitions.
Apart from that, I do not find any merit in this point.
It is clearly mentioned in Clause 2 of Appendix 'A' that if in lieu of the house-job, a candidate does Rural Service, only then the marks for Rural Service would be taken into consideration.
Admittedly, the petitioners had not done Rural Service in lieu of the house-job but they were asked to do Rural Service after they had completed the house-job.
In this view of the matter, this submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is rejected.
13.
Before concluding, I may also notice one point, which was raised by some of the writ petitioners that, in the Speciality of Orthopaedics in the current session, the number of seats had been reduced than it was in the previous session and in the ensuing session the same had been increased.
According to the learned counsel, the seats had been reduced when the petitioners had sought admission.
This point has no force.
It is for the Authorities to see and not for this Court, as to how many seats in a particular speciality have to be there.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, these writ petitioners are allowed in the terms indicated above, i.e. :-  i) That the marks of interview of the petitioners will be considered both for degree and diploma, if they had applied for both in the same speciality.
If marks have been awarded twice over, once for degree course and once for diploma course, then the higher marks will be taken into consideration for both the courses.
If a candidate has not been considered, even though applied for degree or diploma course, but has been interviewed either for diploma or for degree, the same marks shall be considered for the other course i.e. for degree or diploma as the case may be.
The writ petitioners in CWP.
No. 5547 of 1991 will be considered for admission both for degree as well as diploma in Orthopaedics according to their preferences.
ii) That the marks in a house-job/Internship shall be on the basis of the assessment/performance certificate obtained as per Clause 2 of Appendix 'A'.
In case such certificates have not been obtained so far, the same may be obtained immediately, and if the same cannot be made available, the recourse be had as provided under Clause 2 in Appendix 'A'.
15.
The College Authorities are directed to reexamine the cases of the petitioners for admission in the respective Specialities as applied by them and give them admissions accordingly against the seats in the general category, which were there originally or may have become available by virtue of transfer of seats from the other categories.
It will be open to the University/College Authorities to accommodate the petitioners on the transferred seats from one speciality to another, if they so choose.
16.
By virtue of interim orders of this Court, petitioners were admitted in various diploma/degree courses in different specialities.
The University/College Authorities will make all endeavour to see if the petitioners can still be accommodated in the same specialities/courses, where they had been admitted by virtue of the interim orders of this Court, provided they are found entitled to admission on merits in accordance with my judgment.
Let these directions be carried out within one month.
Status quo shall continue till then.
A photocopy of this judgment, attested by my Reader, be given to the counsel for the College.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.