GC Garg, J - The petitioner who possesses MBBS degree applied for admission to the Post Graduate Degree Course Group-II (Three-Year Course) in MD Medicine, MS Surgery and MD Ophthalmology in order of his preference.
There were in all 14 seats for the MD Medicine Group II.
The petitioner could not be admitted to the MD Medicine Group-II on the basis of his merit against the seats available.
He was, however, admitted to MS Surgery Group-II, his second preference, on 221991 vide Annexure P-3.
Subsequently, four seats in MD Medicine Group-II which became available were not offered to the candidates already on the waiting list but were offered to open merit candidates for whom a separate waiting list was drawn on 1051991.
Dr. Mitra Basu who was lower in merit than the petitioner was allowed to join the MD Medicine Group-II on 1351991.
The petitioner, therefore, has filed the present writ petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give admission to him in Post Graduate Degree Course Group-II in the Department of MD Medicine by way of transfer from the Department of MS Surgery on the basis of his merit and challenged the action of the respondents in granting admission to candidates lower in merit than him.
According to the petitioner he was entitled to be admitted to the MD Medicine Group-II, his first preference, on the basis of his merit in the waiting list as the candidates mentioned at Sr. Nos. 1 to 4 and 6 on the waiting list had already been admitted to the courses of their first preference and in consequence thereof he was the second candidate in the waiting list against the four seats becoming available and notified in May, 1991.
2.
Respondent No. 2-Medical College chose not to contest the writ petition in spite of service.
The writ petition has been resisted only by respondent No. 1-the Maharshi Dayanand University which has filed a written statement.
The contention raised on behalf of the University is two-fold.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the University submitted that a student who has already joined a course could not be allowed to shift to another Course after 30 days of joining the earlier Course.
It was further urged that the petitioner should be denied the relief of change from one Course to another on ground of delay.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and for the reasons recorded hereinafter, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The facts as enumerated in the writ petition were not at all disputed by the University.
The petitioner after getting admission in MS Surgery Group-II had been representing throughout that he was entitled to be admitted to MD Medicine Group-II on the basis of his merit.
The admissions were still going on as Dr. Mitra Basu was admitted to MD Medicine Group-II on 1351991 and Sandeep Miglani was provisionally admitted on 861991.
The petitioner having failed to get admission in the MD Medicine Group-II, his first preference, approached this Court on 951991 and on 1051991 this Court ordered that a seat in MD Medicine be kept reserved for the petitioner.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that there was any delay on the part of the petitioner either in approaching the respondent authorities or this Court for redressal of his grievance.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Parmod Kumar Joshi v. The Medical Council of India 1991(2) S.L.R.
58 relied upon by the counsel for the University has no application to the facts of the present case.
In the reported case the duration of the course was only of one year and a substantial part thereof had already expired.
It was in these circumstances that the relief was declined to Dr. Parmod Joshi - the petitioner in the said case.
But in the present case, as already noticed, the duration of the course is three years and the admissions to the courses continued till May and June, 1991.
A seat in the MD Medicine was specifically reserved for the petitioner by this court.
He cannot thus be denied the relief of change of course from MS Surgery Group-II to MD Medicine Group-II only on the ground of delay.
4.
As regards the contention on merits of the counsel for the University, suffice it to say that the seats when became available were not offered to the candidates on the waiting list as per their order of preference.
These seats were rather offered to the candidates who were lower in merit than the petitioner only on the ground that the petitioner and the other candidates like him had already got admission to the courses of their second preference and that a period of more than 30 days had elapsed since then.
This, in my view, is no ground to decline admission to the petitioner and other similarly situated candidates and offer admission to the candidates far lower in merit than them.
This Court had an occasion to consider this point in Civil Writ Petition No. 7317 of 1991 (Dr. Parvendra Suhag v. Maharishi Dayanand University D) decided on 1291991 wherein also the matter related to admission to the Post Graduate Degree Courses of this very University.
It was held therein as under :  "As far as the first point of learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned, it may be observed that no doubt it is provided in the prospectus that the candidate shall not be allowed to shift from one course to another after 30 days of joining the Course, however, according to me this would be in the normal circumstances, when initially the admission takes place.
If for any reason subsequently, the seats fall vacant and a supplementary waiting list is drawn up then in all fairness to the candidates on the supplementary waiting list, they should be asked if they would like to shift the course according to their priorities or options.
Maybe for this purpose, a short duration of time can be given to the candidates, and not necessarily 30 days as given in the prospectus; but certainly they have a right to be asked if they would like to change the Course.
If within the reasonable time which is given to a candidate, he or she refuses or does not give any reply it may be taken that he or she does not want to change the Course.
In view of the peculiar circumstances of the present case, I hold that the University would offer the vacant seat of MD Gynae Group-II strictly in accordance with the merit in the supplementary waiting list and asking them to reply within a reasonable time, say week or 10 days, whether they would like to change the Course and the candidates be admitted accordingly."
The reliance placed by the counsel for the University on Gulshan Kumar v. Maharishi Dayanand University 1990(4) S.L.R.
398 in no way helps the respondents as therein the petitioner had not completed the course in the MD Ophthalmology when he applied for admission in MS Orthopaedics.
The rules relating to admission required that a student who was admitted to a degree course in a subject shall not be eligible to apply for diploma or degree course in another subject or diploma course in the same subject.
In these circumstances it was held that the petitioners who were already pursuing their previous courses were not eligible to apply for the other courses.
But such is not the situation here.
5.
In view of that has been observed above, the writ petition succeeds and is hereby allowed.
Accordingly the respondents are directed to offer a seat to the petitioner in MD Medicine Group-II Course, his first preference, immediately and if he opts for the same, he will be admitted to the said Course forthwith.
The petitioner will have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Civil Misc.
Application No. 5517 of 1991 has become infructuous and is disposed of as such.
order accordingly.