AL Bahri, J - The Haryana State Federation of Consumer's Cooperative Wholesale Stores Limited management challenges award of the Labour Court dated April 1, 1991 holding that Ram Chander-respondent No. 2, who was employed with the management, was removed from service after he had put in more than 240 days in 12 months without following the procedure of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and he was ordered to be reinstated with benefit of continuity of service and 50% of the back wages.
The stand of the petitioner is that Ram Chander was initially appointed on April 30, 1984, for a fixed period and subsequently, there were five extensions in his service.
Last when extension was not allowed his services automatically stood terminated on November 30, 1986.
The provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, thus, will not be attracted.
2.
On the other hand, the stand taken by the workman is that before the Labour Court, no such stand was taken by the management and no evidence was produced.
Otherwise also, it is asserted that after the workman had put in 240 days during the period of 12 months prior to termination of the services, he had a right to continue in service till it was terminated legally at least by following the procedure under section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
3.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that it is not a case of retrenchment as services automatically stood terminated on expiry of the period of contract.
Reliance has been placed on Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In support of this contention, reliance as been placed on the decision of P Rajeev and others v. The Karnataka State Construction Corporation Limited, Bangalore, 1991 Labour & Industrial Cases (N.O.C.)
22 (KAR) and the decision of this Court in Raj Bahadur v. General Manager, Food Specialities Limited, Moga, District Faridkot and others, 1991(1) P.L.R.
631.
This contention in the peculiar circumstances of the present case cannot be accepted.
The provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) are to be read alongwith Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
When the management allows the workman to continue in service with notional breaks after the workman had put in 240 days in service in 12 months, it amounts to unfair labour practice if his services are terminated.
In that case, Section 25-F(ii) of the Act, would cover the case and the workman would be entitled to retrenchment compensation if service were to be terminated.
If the services had been terminated within a period of 240 days, obviously, the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner could be accepted that it was a case of contract and service stood terminated on the expiry of the period of contract.
After the workman was allowed to continue for 240 days and the management wanted to get rid of him and started employing other persons, obviously, it amounted to unfair labour practice.
It was so held on similar facts in Kapurthala Central Cooperative Bank Ltd v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, 1984 LIC 974.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in this petition, the same, is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.