GR Majithia, J - The defendant has come up in regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court which reversed on appeal those of the trial Judge granting a declaration to the respondent/plaintiff that his correct date of birth is August 4, 1926 and not July 1, 1924 as entered in the service record.
2.
The facts :-  The respondent/plaintiff was appointed as a Gate Keeper in Civil Secretariat by the appellant/defendant on July 22, 1955.
In due course, he was promoted as Head Gate Keeper.
At the time of entry into Government Service he had given his date of birth as July 1, 1924, though he was not in possession of any birth certificate or any other record regarding the date of birth.
He was due to retire on attaining the age of superannuation with effect from June 30, 1984 (Afternoon).
In December, 1983, he went to his village and talked to his brothers, namely, Joginder Singh (P.W. 1) and Kanshi Singh (P.W. 2) about his retirement from service on attaining the age of 60 years.
He was told by his brothers that he was not that much old.
Then he examined birth registration record maintained in the office of Civil Surgeon, Ropar and managed to get birth certificate, Ex.P1 and according to which he was born on February 4, 1926.
The birth certificate indicated that his birth was registered in his village birth register on August 6, 1926.
The respondent/plaintiff then represented to the defendant-appellant for correction of date of birth in his service record on May 17, 1984.
He supported his averment in the application with a copy of the birth certificate.
The prayer for correction of his date of birth was rejected by the defendant.
The defendant justified its order vide which his application for correction of date of birth was rejected.
It was also pleaded that the suit was barred by time and that the plaintiff had already retired from service on June 30, 1984 and was not entitled to the declaration prayed for.
The plea of estoppel was also raised.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Judge :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is within limitation ?
OPD  3.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his own act and conduct to file the present suit ?
5.
Relief.
4.
The trial Judge answered issue Nos. 1 and 2 against the plaintiff and issue Nos. 3 and 4 against the defendant on the ground that those were not pressed.
In view of the findings under issue Nos. 1 and 2, the suit was dismissed.
5.
The judgment and decree of the trial Judge was challenged in first appeal.
The First Appellate Judge after appraising the evidence came to the conclusion that the correct date of birth of the plaintiff is August 4, 1926 and that he was entitled to the declaration prayed for.
He further found that the principle of estoppel cannot be successfully invoked by the defendant against the plaintiff merely because the plaintiff had got recorded his date of birth as July 1, 1924 at the time of entry into Government service.
He further found that the defendant had not changed the decision detrimental to it on the basis of the representation by the plaintiff that his date of birth was July 1, 1924.
6.
This is essentially a finding of fact based upon evidence and not open to exception in second appeal.
Even otherwise, I do not find any error in the appreciation of evidence by the first appellate Court and none was pointed out.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the prayer for correction of the date of birth should have been made within two years from the date of entry into Government service as laid down in rule 25 of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I Part I, read with notings 1 to 3 in Annexure A to the said Rules.
This Court in R.S.A.
No. 908 of 1983 (State of Punjab v. Kishan Chand), decided on April 25, 1984, held that the provisions of Rule 25 ibid do not stand in the way of Civil Court to correct the date of birth of a Government employee, who approaches the court for such relief, In Manak Chand Vaidya v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1976(1) S.L.R.
402 (D.B.
), it was held that the executive instructions laying down a particular period from the date of entry into Government service for applying for correction of date of birth, do not curtail the right of the Government employee for getting the erroneous entry regarding the date of birth corrected through the Court.
8.
For the reasons aforesaid, the appeal is devoid of merit.
The same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.