RS Mongia, J - Shri HK Juneja, writ petitioner (now respondent in the present appeal) was appointed as District Manager in the Haryana Harijan Kalyan Nigam Ltd (hereinafter called the 'Nigam') vide order dated 24th January, 1985.
As per the terms of appointment, Shri Juneja was to be on probation for two years from the date of taking charge of his duties.
There is a further condition that his services could be terminated without notice and without assigning any reason during the period of probation.
A memorandum dated 13th December, 1985 (Annexure P.3) along with a charge-sheet was issued to Shri Juneja.
He replied to the charge-sheet.
The Managing Director of the Nigam vide his order dated 6th March, 1987 (Annexure P4) in terms of provisions contained in Bye-law 3.1(h)(a) of the Haryana Harijan Kalyan Nigam Employees Service Bye-laws (hereinafter referred to as the Bye-laws), read with terms of appointment, removed the petitioner from service.
An application was filed by the writ petitioner for reviewing that order, to the Nigam Authorities.
The Managing Director of Nigam, according to the petitioner, called him for personal hearing vide letter dated 22nd May, 1987, but after that the writ petitioner had not received any communication regarding the fate of his review application.
Since vide communication dated 18th June, 1987, a requisition had been sent to the Employment Exchange, Panchkula for one post of District Manager in the Nigam, the petitioner did not wait for the decision on his review application, but filed a writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India in this Court.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and quashed the order of termination of the services of the petitioner.
The Nigam has come up in appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
2.
The learned Single Judge found as a fact that the dominating factor which was in the mind of the Managing Director of the Nigam for terminating the service of the writ petitioner was the allegation that the writ petitioner had involved himself in dishonest transaction for which the authorities had elected to institute an enquiry and in fact had issued a charge-sheet in the first instance, but had subsequently without conducting a full-fledged enquiry thought to get rid of the petitioner by removing him from service by passing an innocuous order.
This, accordingly, to the learned Single Judge, was an order by way of punishment.
Since a procedure had been prescribed of holding an enquiry etc. in the Bye-laws and no enquiry having been held against the writ petitioner against the alleged charge of dishonesty, the order was in the violation of the Service Bye-laws.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant, submitted that the services of a probation could always be terminated if during the period of probation the work and conduct was not found upto the mark.
According to the learned counsel, this was so specially provided in Bye-law 3.1(h)(a) of the Bye-laws and also in terms of the appointment of the writ petitioner that his services could be terminated at any time during the period of probation without assigning any reasons.
Bye-law 31(h)8(a) may be noticed :-  "3.1(h) The period of probation shall be two years subject to extension for another year at the discretion of the appointing authority in case the work of the probation is not found to be satisfactory during the first one year.
If the work or conduct of any person appointed to the service during the period of probation is, in the opinion of the appointing authority, not satisfactory it may, "(a) dispense with the services, recruited by direct appointment; or ........." 4.
The question that arises for determination is as to whether the order of termination is founded on the allegations of misconduct or dishonesty or it was merely because of unsatisfactory work and conduct.
If the finding to be recorded is that the dominating factor or the foundation of the impugned order is the misconduct, then the impugned order would be by way of punishment.
Reference may be made to Supreme Court judgment in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, AIR 1984 SC 636, wherein it was held as under :-  "Where the form of the order is merely a camouflage for an order of dismissal for misconduct it is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak for an order of punishment the Court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee".
5.
The learned Judge, according to us, rightly came to the conclusion, on the basis of the material before him, that the termination order was founded on the allegations of dishonesty against the writ petitioner.
Further fact which the learned Single Judge rightly noticed was that the authorities did institute an enquiry against the writ petitioner to find out whether the allegations of dishonest transactions against him were correct or not.
For reasons best known to the Nigam that enquiry was dropped.
This would further lead to the conclusion that the impugned order was based on the allegations of dishonesty against the writ petitioner.
A three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Nepal Singh v. State of UP and others, A.I.R. 1985 Supreme Court 84, in similar circumstances held that though a full-fledged enquiry in that case had been instituted in the matter, but before any finding could be recorded, the enquiry was dropped for want of jurisdiction and no attempt having been made thereafter to institute a proper enquiry by the appropriate authority, the order terminating the services was liable to be quashed as violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
According to us, the case of the writ petitioner is fully covered by the dictum of Nepal Singh's case (supra).
6.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissal.