AL Bahri, J (Oral) - On the termination of Ajmer Singh, who was driver with the Notified Area Committee, Mohali, a dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act was raised before the Labour Court, Patiala.
After both the parties had concluded their evidence, on behalf of the Notified Area Committee, an application was filed for amendment of the written statement taking up two points, firstly that the Notified Area Committee should have been impleaded through its President and not through the Executive Officer.
Secondly, that Ajmer Singh, driver, after his removal from service started selling milk and was thus gainfully employed.
This application was contested.
Ultimately, the Labour Court passed the order on May 29, 1990 dismissing the same.
2.
As far as the first objection is concerned the same cannot be accepted.
As defined under Rules 3 of the Punjab Municipal Executive Officer Rules, 1976, the Executive Officer would be Principal Executive Officer of the Committee.
The Notified Area Committee has been properly impleaded through its Executive Officer who is the appointing authority of the petitioner and no amendment in this respect is called for and in this respect counsel for the respondent-workman states that no objection would be taken subsequently.
3.
The second point for consideration is as to whether the Committee would be allowed amendment of the written statement with respect to the pleadings with a new fact that the workman was gainfully employed after he was removed from service.
As to whether by selling milk Ajmer Singh was gainfully employed or not is left to be decided by the Labour Court.
Counsel for the respondent apprehends that after amendment, the proceedings before the Labour Court would unnecessarily be delayed, otherwise he has no objection if the Management is allowed to lead evidence on this point within a period of one month from today.
It is so ordered.
While dismissing the Revision Petition it is directed that the Labour Court will allow one month's time to Management to produce evidence on the question of gainful employment of Ajmer Singh by selling milk and after evidence and opportunity to Ajmer Singh to rebutt the evidence the reference be promptly disposed of.
Let this process be completed within two months from today.
Parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the Labour Court on February 18, 1991.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.