MR Agnihotri, J - Prem Singh, Conductor, Haryana Roadways, has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for the modification of the award dated 24th November, 1988, delivered by Mr. SD Anand, Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Ambala, by which award the petitioner was held entitled to reinstatement and continuity of service, but back wages for the period of unemployment were denied to him.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Conductor in 1976 and while working in Karnal Depot of the Haryana Roadways, a departmental inquiry was initiated against him.
As a result of the inquiry, services of the petitioner were terminated by order dated 12th January, 1982.
Feeling aggrieved against his termination, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute and reference was made to the industrial Tribunal for adjudication under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The learned Tribunal after detailed trial, found that termination of services of the petitioner as illegal, as the departmental inquiry proceedings stood vitiated.
Having held that same, the leaned Tribunal ordered that the petitioner was entitled to reinstatement and continuity of service.
However, it was further held that the petitioner shall not be entitled to back wages as he did not state on oath that he had been unemployed during the period in issue.
3.
In the written statement filed by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Karnal, also, the only plea taken by the respondents against the claim of the petitioner for grant of back wages is that as the petitioner has not stated on oath that he remained unemployed during the period in dispute, he was not entitled to back wages.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel and have gone through the award.
It has been settled by the Supreme Court in M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employer of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, AIR 1979 Supreme Court 75, that since reinstatement has been ordered by the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court and termination of services is set aside, relief of grant of back wages to the workman shall follow automatically.
The same view was taken by the Full Bench of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak and another, 1980 Lab.
I.C.
123.
Apart from this, in the present case, the respondent-Managment has not taken any plea nor have they led any evidence on the point as to whether the petitioner was gainfully employed during the period of enforced idleness.
The burden of pleading and establishing the aforesaid fact was on the Management and in the absence of any such plea or evidence, the petitioner could not be deprived of the back wages.
5.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition, modify the award of the learned Industrial Tribunal, Ambala, and direct that the petitioner shall be entitled to back wages for the period in question, that is, from the date his services were terminated till his reinstatement, according to the pay scales prevailing from time to time, alongwith the benefit of revised pay grades to which the petitioner would have been entitled had his services not been terminated.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified as Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.