JV Gupta, CJ - Petitioner, KC Verma, after graduating in BTech.
(Hon's) Degree in Civil Engineering in First Class from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, joined the Punjab State Electricity Board (in short the Board) as Assistant Engineer (Civil), on Ist August, 1959.
According to him, he was given higher start with two advance increments in recognition of his qualifications and merit secured by him in the interview conducted by the Board.
The petitioner was promoted as Assistant Executive Engineer on 11th September, 1962, and was further promoted as Executive Engineer on 9th December, 1965.
On 30th March, 1976, he attained the rank of Superintending Engineer and on 12th January, 1989 vide Annexure P.9 to the writ petition, he was promoted as Chief Engineer (Civil) by the Broad in the Hydel Designs, Chandigarh.
The Board passed orders on 30th May, 1990 (Annexure P.1) prematurely retiring the petitioner under the Punjab State Electricity Board Service (Premature Retirement Regulations) 1982, after the petitioner had attained the age of 55 years.
The petitioner was given three months pay in lieu of the notice, so that the premature retirement came into effect immediately on the passing of the order.
The petitioner impugned the premature retirement order by may of the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner in his writ petition has mentioned about his achievements while working in the Board.
It is no necessary to quote the same.
In para 20 of the writ petition, the petitioner has averred that a criterion has been laid down by the Board that for a selection post an officer shall be considered fit only if he has five year's good/excellent record of service prior to the date of consideration.
The petitioner further mention in the same para that his record was good/very good/outstanding and it was after consideration of his past record and merit, as well as his achievements that he was selected as a Chief Engineer on 12th January, 1989.
According to him, he was considered the best for this post out of the penal of three officers.
The petitioner has further levelled mala-fides against Mr. NS Vasant, Chairman of the Board, but for the view we are taking in the matter it is not necessary to advert to those allegations at all.
We have heard the learned counsel for the Board.
In reply filed on behalf of the Board, it has been averred in para 16 that the petitioner was allowed promotions/increments/Efficiency Bar on the dates when these fell due to the petitioner and the record of the petitioner had been varying from 'average' to 'very good' during the last 10 years.
It has further been averred that the Annual Confidential Reports for certain period contained adverse remarks also.
The written statement goes on to say that the A.C.Rs.
for the years 1979-80 and 1981-82 contained entries regarding the petitioner's integrity and reputation, but these entries have been quashed by the Civil Court in a Civil Suit filed by the petitioner.
However, the appeals preferred by the Board were pending before the District Judge, Patiala.
The petitioner was issued a letter of advice on 21st January, 1981, as also on 25th May, 1988 for delaying some cases concerning the nomination of officers for International Technical Workshop.
3.
It has also been mentioned in the written statement that the case of the petitioner with regard to his retention/retirement from service beyond the age of 55 years was reviewed by the Board well before he had attained the age of 55 years.
Because of the pendency of two disciplinary cases against the petitioner, the Board deferred its decision and decided to consider the same on the finalisation of the disciplinary cases.
Out of the two cases, once case was dropped and the other disciplinary case was placed before the Board vide Memo, dated 23rd April, 1990, which was included in the Agenda of the Board's meeting which was to be held on 29th May, 1990.
4.
We have carefully gone through the averments made in the writ petition as well as in the written statement, the respondent-Board has also placed on record the minutes of the meeting held on 29th May, 1990.
Before we deal with the minutes of the meeting of the Board, dated 29th May, 1990, it may be observed that adverse record of the petitioner, if any, prior to his promotion as Chief Engineer on 12th January, 1989, (the post from which the petitioner is sought to be prematurely retired), cannot be taken into consideration at all as the promotion washes off all the adverse record prior to the promotion.
The Apex Court in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 948, observed as under in para 7 of the report :-  "........It is now settled that adverse entries, if any, awarded to an employee lose their significance on or after his promotion to a higher post......".
Similar view was expressed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Baidyanath Mahapatra v. State of Orissa and another, 1989(4) S.L.R.
220, wherein it was observed that :-  "when a Government servant is promoted to a higher post on the basis of merit and selection, adverse entries, if any, contained in service record, lose their significance and those remain on record as a part of past history."
5.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement of the highest Court of the land, we hold that any adverse record prior to 12th January, 1990, when the petitioner was promoted as Chief Engineer by way of selection cannot be taken into consideration at all for the purpose of premature retirement.
6.
Now coming to the minutes of the meeting held on 29th May, 1990, wherein while considering the continuance of the petitioner in service beyond the age of 55 years, it has been recorded as under :-  "The Chairman brought to the notice of the Board that an audio cassette tape containing telephonic conversation between Er.
KC Verma and Sh. Ashok Jain of M/s GS Jain & Associates, New Delhi, which firm is carrying on Granular piles work at SYL Rajpura, has been handed over to him by Col. BP Bajpayee, GM of the firm a few days back.
He explained the contents of the tape to the Members.
The tape was then heard by the Board.
The Board, thereupon, observed that this tape contained highly incriminating proof about the acceptance of illegal gratification by Er.
KC Verma from M/s GS Jain & Associates.
The Board noted that Er.
KC Verma was promoted as Chief Engineer on 12th January, 1989.
The Board also noted that out of the two enquiries which were pending against Er.
Verma when the case of his continuance in service beyond the age of 55 years come up last before the Board on 28111989, one case has been dropped and in the second, decision is yet to be taken.
The Board further noted that his ACRs for the years 1979-80 and 1981-82 contained adverse entries regarding his integrity/reputation.
Though these entries have been quashed by a Civil Court at Patiala in civil suits filed by Er.
KC Verma, but the appeals preferred by the P.S.E.B.
in the Court of District Judge, Patiala are still pending.
The Board, however, felt that in view of the direct proof about the acceptance of illegal gratification by Er.
KC Verma in the form of taped telephone conversation, he is unfit to be retained in service of the Board and it is in the public interest to retire him under PSEB Services (Premature Retirement) Regulations, 1982.
The Board also felt that in view of the circumstances of this case it will not be feasible in the public interest to give three months notice to Dr. KC Verma and therefore, decided that he should be retired with immediate effect by paying him three months pay and allowances in advance in lieu of the notice period.
This will be without prejudice to any other criminal or disciplinary action/s against Er.
KC Verma" It will be evident from the minutes of the meeting quoted above, that apart from some other matter, it was an audio cassette tape allegedly containing telephonic conversation between the petitioner and one Sh. GS Jain and Associates, New Delhi, which way placed before the Board which was (sic) the basis of the impugned order.
According to the Board, the tape contained highly incriminating proof about the acceptance of illegal gratification by Mr. KC Verma from M/s. GS Jain & Associates.
As already observed, the other material could not have been taken into consideration at all, the very foundation of the premature retirement order is the audio cassette tape containing incriminating material which is being considered as proof against the petitioner.
Admittedly, no departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner in which the audio tape was put as a proof against the petitioner.
Without holding departmental enquiry and giving opportunity to the petitioner, the Board could not have relied on the audio tape.
The order of premature retirement is not a simpliciter order of retirement, but is in fact by way of punishment.
Another Officer, namely Engineer LB Gupta, Director, Civil Designs, Directorate, was also prematurely retired by the Board on the basis of the same audio tape, in which there were similar allegations against him.
He had also filed a writ petition challenging his premature retirement (CWP No. 8469 of 1990).
Vide judgment of even date we have quashed the order of premature retirement of Engineer LB Gupta, by holding that the order of premature retirement was not in public interest and was violative of Premature Retirement Regulations of the Board as well as Regulation regarding disciplinary action to be taken against the Board's employees.
For the same reasons we hold that the order of premature retirement of the petitioner (Annexure P.1) is by way of punishment and is violative of the Premature Retirement Regulations as well as the Regulations regarding disciplinary action applicable to the Board's employees.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and quash the order of premature retirement of the petitioner, dated 30th May, 1990 (Annexure P.1).
Resultantly the petitioner would be deemed to be containing in service since the date of his premature retirement i.e. 30th May, 1990, with all consequential benefits.
The amounts already received by the petitioner, if any, would be adjusted in his pay.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.