KP Bhandari, J - Petitioner Ramesh Chand Verma is admittedly a member of backwards class.
He appeared in the competitive examination for the H.C.S.
(Executive) and allied services.
He was selected and was offered the post of 'A' Class Tehsildar.
The petitioner in the writ petition claims that the seat reserved for the backward classes under Section 16(4) of the Constitution was offered to Narinder Kumar Wadhwan, a member of the backward class who competed in the examination.
Surjit Singh, another member of the backward class also competed and he was appointed to H.C.S.
(Executive) under the general category, according to the merit obtained by him in the competitive examination against the post reserved for backward class.
The petitioner submitted representation dated 541986 Annexure P.2 to the Chief Secretary.
In his representation he submitted that Narinder Kumar Wadhwan was a member of backward class and was appointed to the H.C.S.
executive branch against the post reserved for the backward classes.
However, Narinder Kumar Wadhwan declined to accept the appointment.
Narinder Kumar Wadhwan did not join as he was selected to PCS executive branch in Punjab and he opted to join the service under the Punjab Government.
The petitioner submitted that he was next in the merit list out of the backward class and he was entitled to be appointed in the H.C.S.
(Executive) Cadre.
The petitioner's brother Shri GC Verma, Advocate submitted representation (Annexure P.4) to the Chief Secretary on similar lines.
As the petitioner did not get any reply from the Government, he has filed the present writ petition praying that the petitioner should be appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive) post meant for reserve category.
2.
The State has filed written statement through Shri Chhatar Singh IAS, Joint Secretary to Government, Haryana Political and Services Departments, Chandigarh.
The State has refuted the stand taken by the petitioner in the writ petition.
The main stand of the State is that when Narinder Kumar Wadhwan did not join, Surjit Singh another member of Backward class who was appointed against the general category should be deemed to have been appointed against the post meant for backward class.
Subh Ram Vashista Tehsildar made an application for allowing him to become a party.
The said application was made at such a stage when the case was fixed for arguments, so vide my order dated 17111989, after hearing Mr. PK Palli, Sr. Advocate, I, however, declined the application.
However, Subh Ram Vashista was allowed to intervene and assist the Court.
3.
I have heard the arguments of Shri PK Palli, Senior Advocate, at considerable length.
I have also heard Mr. LP Sood, DA for the State and Mr. VK Bali, Sr. Advocate for the intervener.
4.
The facts in this case are not in dispute.
Admittedly, as a result of the competitive examination, one member of backward class was to be appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive) branch on the basis of their merit amongst the members of the backward class.
Narinder Kumar Wadhwan was highest in the merit list amongst the backward class candidates and, therefore, the was offered the post H.C.S.
(Executive).
He, however, declined to join PCS (Executive) branch under the Punjab Government.
Surjit Singh was another backward class candidate who was appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive) as a result of competitive examination on his own merit in the general category.
On the occurrence of the vacancy due to the non-joining of Narinder Kumar Wadhwan, admittedly post reserved for backward class has fallen vacant.
Mr. Sood submitted on the basis of the Government instructions that Surjit Singh another candidate who was appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive) in the general category should be deemed to have been appointed against the vacancy reserved for the backward class.
On the other hand, Mr. VK Bali, Sr. Advocate for the intervener supported the arguments of Mr. Sood in this behalf.
On the other hand, Mr. PK Palli, very ably argued that if we look to the scheme of the Constitution, under Article 16(4) posts are reserved in the State for the socially and educationally backward classes.
Once the post is reserved for the backward class, it should be filled on the basis of competitive examination by a member of the backward class.
The post was offered to Narinder Kumar Wadhwan on the basis of his merit amongst the backward class candidates and he did not join.
On the occurrence of the vacancy the petitioner should be appointed who is the next candidate amongst the backward class candidates.
He further submitted that a post which has been reserved for a member of the backward class cannot be deemed to be filled by candidate who has been appointed on the basis of the merit in the general category.
Mr. PK Palli placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1978 SC 988.
Jaswant Singh, J speaking for the Bench observed as follows :-  "The Instructions contained in the above circular of the State Government not only deprecate the then existing practice according to which in case of termination of the services of a Government Servant belonging to Scheduled Castes/Tribes and backward classes, the resultant vacancy was included in the normal pool of vacancies to be filled up in accordance with the block system and characterise it as repugnant to the dominant idea of giving due representation to the members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes and backward classes but go on to lay down in unmistakable terms that if the services of a Government Servant belonging to Scheduled Castes/Tribes or backward classes are terminated, the resultant vacancy should not be included in the normal pool of vacancy to be filled up in accordance with the block system but should be filled up on ad hoc basis from the candidate belonging to these castes and classes.
The instructions put the matter beyond the pale of controversy by emphatically declaring that the intention of the Government was that the posts vacated by members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes and backward classes should remain earmarked and be filled up by the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and backward classes.
Decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 2504 of 1975 Dated 391976 (Punjab and Haryana) reversed."
Relying upon the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, Mr. PK Palli argued that the petitioner was entitled to be appointed against the post reserved for the backward class which has fallen vacant due to the non-joining of Narinder Kumar Wadhwan, as the petitioner was next in the merit list.
5.
I have given considerable thought to the arguments addressed in this case.
The reservation made under Article 16(4) is a beneficial provision meant for socially and educationally backward classes.
The provision of beneficial legislation should be interpreted by the Court in a manner which fulfils the policy of the Act and is more beneficial to the person in whose interest the provision has been made vide Lalappa Lingappa v. Laxmi Vishnu Textile Mills, AIR 1981 SC 852.
If two constructions are possible of a beneficial piece of legislation, the Court should interpret it in a manner which helps to carry out the beneficial provision and does not unduly extend the scope of exception (See Shiekh Gulfan v. Sanat Kumar, AIR 1965 SC 1839).
In interpreting such a piece of legislation which was clearly in furtherance of the Directive Principles of State Policy in Article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution, the Courts cannot adopt a doctrinaire or pedantic approach.
It is well known rule of construction that in dealing with such a beneficent piece of legislation, the Courts ought to adopt a construction which should subserve and carry out the purpose and object of the Act rather than defeat it (See National Textile Corpn.
Ltd. v. Sitaram Mills Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 1234).
6.
Keeping in view the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in interpreting the beneficial provision of law, I am of the opinion that the object of making reservation under Article 16(4) is to make provisions for the entry of the socially and educationally backward classes in the service.
Once a post is reserved for a member of the backward class in pursuance of a notification issued by the State under Article 16(4), the post reserved should be offered to the member of the backward class.
In the present case, when the post offered to Narinder Kumar Wadhwan fell vacant, it was obligatory on the part of the State to offer the post to the next man.
Admittedly, the petitioner is the next candidate in the merit list amongst the backward class candidates.
I am unable to find anything in the instructions which may show that Surjit Singh a member of the backward class who was appointed in the general category should be deemed to have been appointed against the post reserved for the backward classes.
Such an interpretation should not take away the right of the petitioner who is a member of the backward class to be appointed against the post reserved for the member of the backward class.
In this connection it may be mentioned that I examined Raj Kumar, Assistant, Office of Chief Secretary, Services Branch II who made entries in the roster register.
He produced a copy of the relevant entry from the register Annexure C.1.
He has admitted that Surjit Singh belongs to backward class and was selected as a general candidate.
The words "treated as backward class candidate" do not specifically find place in the order of Chief Secretary Annexure C.2.
This according to him is his interpretation to Annexure C.2 because on the non-joining of Narinder Kumar Wadhwan, the vacancy was carried forward.
The vacancy can be carried forward if the backward class candidate was not available.
Admittedly, the petitioner is a member of the backward class and is next in the merit list amongst the backward class.
As the petitioner is available who can be appointed against the post reserved for the backward class on the basis of his merit, this post could not be carried forward.
In this view of the matter, I allow the writ petition and I am of the opinion that in the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh's case (supra), the petitioner is entitled to be appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive branch) against the post meant for the backward class with retrospective effect from the date the other candidates of the H.C.S.
(Executive branch) of his batch were appointed as a result of the competitive examination.
The entire period from the deemed date of appointment shall count towards seniority.
However, the petitioner will no be entitled to any arrears of pay and allowances.
The respondent-State of Haryana is directed to appoint the petitioner in the H.C.S.
(Executive branch) cadre with retrospective effect from the date the other candidates were appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive) branch within a period of one month and he should be assigned proper seniority as a result of this retrospective appointment.
In view of the peculiar facts of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.