RL Anand, J - Head Constable Raghunath Tyagi, has filed the present writ petition against the respondents under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and the petitioner has prayed for the quashment of the order dated 23.3.1995 vide which the representation of the petitioner was rejected and also the order dated 20111996 vide which his appeal was also rejected by respondent No. 2.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the was appointed as a constable on 2811978.
He passed his basic training course in 2nd position on 31.3.1979 and he was posted in the Executive Clerical Cadre with a special pay of Rs. 20/- per month on 31.10.1979.
The petitioner was promoted to the post of Head Constable in that very cadre i.e. Executive Clerical Cadre on 1981981.
Respondent No. 4 asked the consent of all the constables as to whether they would like to remain in the Executive Clerical Cadre or they would like to be reverted to General District Cadre.
The petitioner gave the consent on 18111981 that he may reverted to the General District Cadre.
According to the petitioner, Shri Baljit Singh and Prem Singh constables were transferred to District Police Cadre at Jind and Ambala.
They were juniors to the petitioners.
In these circumstances, the petitioner could also have been reverted to the General Police Cadre in the year 1982 itself and then as per his seniority he should be promoted to the various posts such as ASI, SI and Inspector as per his turn and service record.
The petitioner made a representation dated 3031983 before respondent No. 4 highlighting that he should also have been reverted to the General Police Cadre.
In the year 1984, the petitioner was sent on deputation to the Chandigarh Police.
The grievance of the petitioner further is that his juniors were promoted as ASI in the year 1994.
When he came to know about this fact he made further representation to the department.
Ultimately, he filed a Civil Writ Petition in the High Court in the year 1995 which was disposed of by giving the directions to the respondents to decide the same within a specified time and finally the representation of the petitioner was rejected vide impugned order annexure P- 1.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that since he gave the consent and forgo his promotion in the year 1981, by making a request to the department to revert him to the post of constable in General Police Cadre, the same has not been done.
Resultantly a disadvantage has occurred to him on account of various persons who according to the petitioner are juniors to him.
Hence the present writ petition in the year 1997.
3.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
The position has been explained by the department and it has been inter alia averred in the written statement that there are two different cadres in the Haryana Armed Police; one is Executive Police Clerical Cadre and the other is General Police Cadre.
Seniority of each cadre is maintained separately.
The petitioner left the Executive Clerical Cadre willingly and of his own free will and joined the General Police Cadre in the Haryana Armed Police.
The petitioner now cannot claim the promotion to the post of Sub Inspector from the date on which the respondent No. 7 was promoted in his previous Executive Clerical Cadre as he had already lost his lien in the said cadre because of the reason that his name was removed from the Executive Clerical Cadre on his own written request.
It was also averred by the respondent that petitioner is taking contradictory pleas as on one hand he is claiming seniority in the Executive Clerical Cadre above respondent No. 7 and on the other hand he is submitting that he may be transferred to the District police.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the name of the petitioner was removed from Executive Clerical Cadre and he was reverted to his original rank as constable and placed at his original seniority in the General Duty Cadre and was posted in 3rd Battalion Haryana Armed Police.
He was transferred to District Police according to new seniority but his turn did not come and matured for his transfer to District Police at the time of his removal from Executive Clerical Cadre to General Duty Cadre.
The petitioner has himself stated in his application on 14101981 that he may be sent to District Police permanently as constable on his turn as per seniority.
With this broad defence, the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
The petitioner filed replication in which he reiterated the allegations made in the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
The respondents also filed the reply to the replication and they reiterated the stand taken up in the written statement.
5.
I have heard Shri Jagdish Manchanda, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties let me first clarify that there are two cadres in the Haryana Armed Police.
Haryana Armed Police has a different cadre from the General Police Cadre which is ordinarily understood by a common man as District Police.
Earlier, the cadre of the petitioner was Executive Police Clerical Cadre.
A person, who joins Executive Police Clerical Cadre gets extra money by way of special pay because of the nature of the duties.
The petitioner was promoted in Executive Police Clerical Cadre as Head Constable in the year 1981 but for the reasons best known to the petitioner he made a request that he may be transferred to General Police Cadre i.e. the District Police as per his own seniority.
In order to go to General Police Cadre, it is obligatory that firstly the person will go in General Police Cadre in Haryana Armed Police.
It happened with the petitioner.
In order to come to District Police from General Police Cadre of the Haryana Armed Police the person can only come as per his own seniority.
Once the petitioner became the constable in General Police Cadre of Haryana Armed Police, he can switch over to District Police only as per his own seniority.
In this regard I would like to refer to the order annexure P-1 in which the entire case of the petitioner has been considered in the light of the background of the service record of the petitioner.
It is clear from this order that the petitioner was selected for the Executive Clerical Cadre.
He was promoted as Head Constable in this very Executive Clerical Cadre.
He was sent to General Police Cadre in Haryana Armed Police on request made in writing on 14101981.
In the year 1981, when the petitioner made a request that he should be sent to District Police, he was not senior enough.
His turn had not come in the cadre of the constable of Haryana Armed Police for sending him to District Police.
Moment his turn came he was sent to District Police.
The instances given by the petitioner are not applicable as is evident from the said order.
S/Shri Baljit Singh and Prem Singh were reserves and they were not members of the cadre of Haryana Armed Police.
The learned counsel for the respondents have invited my attention to Annexure R-1 the consent dated 14101981 which was given by the petitioner and it runs as follows :-  "It is requested that I am willing at my own will for my permanent transfer as constable to District Police.
Please I may be transferred to District Police at my turn.
I shall be very grateful."
7.
Thus, the reading of the above consent indicates two things; firstly the petitioner has wilfully given up his lien for all times to come from Head constable to constable and secondly he wanted that he should be transferred to District Police at his own turn.
In the year 1981, his turn was not ripe.
Therefore, he had to wait in the category of HAP as constable till his turn comes for his transfer to District Police.
In short, the grievance of the petitioner is that he should have been transferred to the District Police in the year 1981 itself.
This was not possible because the seniority of the petitioner was not so high so that he could be adjusted in the District Police in the year 1981 itself.
This was the reason that the petitioner himself has written in the request R-1 that he may be absorbed in the District Police as per is own turn.
8.
Resultantly, this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.