GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has made the following substantive prayer :  "(i) issue an appropriate writ, direction or order quashing the appointment of Respondent No. 4 as Laboratory Assistant as he is not qualified to hold the post of Laboratory Assistant and was not entitled to be absorbed in Government service; (ii) by issuing a writ of Mandamus the Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 be directed to take over the services of the petitioner and absorb the petitioner as a Laboratory Assistant in Government High School, Sariana, District Hoshiarpur as the petitioner is fully eligible and qualified for the post of Laboratory Assistant and she was duly appointed and working as Laboratory Assistant in Public High School, Sariana, District Hoshiarpur before it was taken over by the State; (iii) the respondents be further directed to give all other consequential benefits to the petitioner such as arrears of salary etc. for which the petitioner is legally entitled."
2.
Respondent No. 4-Dinesh Kumar and petitioner-Manjit Kaur were appointed as Laboratory Assistants in Public High School, Sariana, District Hoshiarpur (for short, `the School') on 1491985 and 12.1.1996 respectively.
At that time, the School was managed by a society.
In February, 1987, the School was taken over by the State Government along with the staff.
The name of respondent No. 4 was included in the first list of the staff forwarded by the management of the School for absorption in the government service and on that basis, he was absorbed in government service.
The name of the petitioner was included in the second list sent by the management of the School, but she was not absorbed in the government service and this is the reason why she has filed the present petition and made the prayers aforementioned.
3.
The petitioner has averred that even though respondent No. 4 was not qualified to be appointed as Laboratory Assistant because he was not having the qualification of matriculation with science, his father - Shri Parma Nand, who was working as Dealing Assistant in the office of District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur, pressurized the management of the School to appointment him and later on, manipulated his absorption in the government service at her expense.
She has referred to the provisions contained in the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (for short, `the Act') and the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (for short, `the Rules') and averred that the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Laboratory Assistant with effect from 1491985 and his absorption in government service are liable to be treated as nullity because he was not qualified for that post.
She has further averred that the official respondents are duty-bound to absorb her against the post occupied by respondent No. 4 because she fulfilled the criteria of eligibility and was regularly appointed in the service of the School.
Still further, she has averred that respondent No. 4 had cleared science paper after absorption in the government service and, therefore, he must be treated junior to her for the purpose of absorption in the government service.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it has been averred that the petitioner's name was not included in the staff statement furnished by the management of the School to Deputy District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur on 30101985, whereas the name of respondent No. 4 was included at S.No.
33.
In the second list furnished by the management of the school on 2951986, the petitioner's name was shown at S.No.
39.
However, she was not absorbed in the government service because the department had considered the names of only those employees, who were included in the list supplied on 30101985.
They have further averred that the petitioner was not appointed against the aided post and, therefore, she cannot claim absorption in the government service as of right.
On the issue of inter-se seniority of the petitioner and respondent No. 4, it has been averred that the latter was treated senior because he was appointed as Laboratory Assistant on 1491985 and the petitioner was appointed as such on 12.1.1986.
5.
In his separate written statement, respondent No. 4 has averred that the petitioner cannot claim absorption in the government service as of right because she was appointed against an unaided post.
6.
The petitioner has filed replication reiterating her stand that she is senior to respondent No. 4 and had prior right to be absorbed in the government service.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8.
In the light of the averments contained in the pleadings of the parties and the documents produced by them, I would have dealt with the issue of eligibility of respondent No. 4 to be appointed as Laboratory Assistant on 1491985 and the legality of his absorption in the government service, but necessity of doing so has been obviated because in the course of hearing, Shri Amit Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner stated that his client will not press the claim for seniority over respondent No. 4 and Shri Salil Sagar, learned Additional Advocate General gave out that the petitioner has continued in service in pursuance of interim order dated 2741988 read with order dated 8.8.1988 passed in CM No. 4184 of 1988 and that she has been adjusted against the post of Laboratory Assistant created during the pendency of the writ petition.
In view of their statements, determination of the issues raised in the writ petition has become academic, more-so because, I feel that ends of justice would be met by directing the official respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner in view of the fact that she has continuously worked on the post of Laboratory Assistant for almost 17 years.
Even if the period of her employment prior to the take-over of the School is ignored, she is entitled to be absorbed on the basis of 15 years continuous service rendered in pursuance of interim order dated 2741988 passed by this Court.
9.
Shri Salil Sagar, learned Additional Advocate General fairly stated that the official respondents will have no objection if a direction is issued for absorption of the petitioner on the post of Laboratory Assistant.
10.
Hence, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The official respondents are directed to absorb the petitioner against the vacant post of Laboratory Assistant created during the pendency of the writ petition and give her consequential benefits.
The needful be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy this order.
However, her plea for fixation of seniority over respondent No. 4 is rejected.
Petition partly allowed.