RL Anand, J - Petitioner Harjap Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court against the respondents to grant him disability pension along with interest @ 18% per annum.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Army on 28.4.1979 and at that time he was found medically fit and was placed in category `A'.
In the year 1986 medical problem started with him when he was posted at Kapoopah (near Sikkim) in the high altitude area which is around 28000 to 30000 feet above the sea level.
The oxygen in that area is very less.
He started getting fits and his medical category was reduced in February 1988 to `C'.
Then his unit moved to peace area at Meerut, where his medical category was reduced to permanent `B'.
The Medical Board held its proceedings on 2981988 and he was found suffering from fits which was his principal disability.
The other disability declared was Neurosis Hysterical Reaction.
He was discharged from the service on 111996 under Army Rule 13(3) read with Army Rule 13(A) before the completion of terms of engagement being placed in medical category `B'.
He was medically boarded out on the ground of 20% disability/mental disorder i.e. Neurosis Hysterical Reaction.
He further alleged that his total service to the Army was 16 years out of which he served 9 years and 8 months at high altitude.
In the year 1990 he was admitted to Psychiatry Ward of Base Hospital and was diagnosed as a case of Neurosis Hysterical Reaction.
He was declared unfit to handle arms and ammunition.
In the year 1992 he was also admitted to Psychiatry Ward of Command Hospital, Lucknow.
He was finally invalidated from service on medical ground on 111996.
He applied for disability pension and his case was sent to CCDA(P), Allahabad, but the same was rejected on 331996.
He filed an appeal which also met the same fate.
Hence this writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to them, the disability suffered by the petitioner was constitutional one and is not attributable or aggravated to Army service.
4.
I have heard Mr. YS Bajwa, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate on behalf of the Union of India and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is proved on the record that when the petitioner joined the Army he was placed in medical category `A'.
No deformity was noticed at the time of his entry into service nor it is so proved from any medical record.
It is also proved on the record that the petitioner served the Army and most of the period his duty was at such places which are on high altitude.
He was discharged from the Army on account of medical ground and his disability was assessed at 20% due to Neurosis Hysterical Reaction.
The sole point for determination is whether his disease was congenital, constitutional or has been suffered by him when he was serving the Army.
After applying my mind to the facts and circumstances of this case I am of the considered opinion that the disease suffered by the petitioner was not constitutional, rather it is attributable to Army Service.
The petitioner was found fit at the time of his admission in the army.
On account of arduous duties which are supposed to be performed by the Jawans while in the Army service, whether in the plains or on the mountains, these types of diseases invariably occur.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
Resultantly, I allow this writ petition and give the directions to the respondents to release the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner according to rules w.e.f.
111996 within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
The petitioner shall also appear before the Medical Re-survey Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.