Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - This is an application for restoration of the writ petition that was dismissed on second call by my order dated August 14, 2002.
The application has five paragraphs, and they are :  "(1)That the aforesaid writ petition has been filed before the Hon'ble High Court challenging for not absorbing the petitioner in the post of Peon at Pulinbehari Lahiri Charitable Dispensary at Majdia.
(2) That the aforesaid writ petition came up for hearing before His Lordship the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jayanta Kumar Biswas, and when the said matter was called on the Learned Advocate of your petitioner could not attend the Court as a result His Lordship was pleased to dismiss the said writ petition for non-appearance of the Learned Advocate of the petitioner.
(3) That on 14/8/2002 the Learned Advocate of your petitioner was sick as such he could not come to Court, as such could not appeared before His Lordship when the said matter was called on for hearing.
(4) That due to the aforesaid reason the Learned Advocate of your petitioner could not appeared before His Lordship the Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jayanta Biswas, when the said matter was called on.
Unless the said order dated 14/8/2002 is recalled and restored the said writ petition to its original file for hearing on merit then the petitioner will suffer irreparable loss and injury.
(5) That this application is made bona fide and for the end of justice."
2.
It is therefore apparent that not a single word has been said in the application, taken out only on March 9, 2005, why no step for restoration of the writ petition was taken for around three years.
The delay in taking our the restoration application has remained absolutely unexplained.
From para 3 it is apparent that advocate for the petitioner was aware of the fact that the matter had appeared on the list of August 14, 2002 when it had been dismissed for default.
3.
When advocate for the petitioner was aware of the fact that the writ petition had been dismissed for default, if an application for restoration was to be made, in my view, it was to be made immediately after August 14, 2002 or at least within a reasonable period from that date.
No steps were taken and no explanations have been given why no steps were taken.
I do not think such a restoration application as this should be allowed.
4.
For these reasons, I dismiss the restoration application.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.