Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner, by this writ petition, seeks quashing of impugned order dated 1-6-2004, transferring him from Khandwa in MP Circle, to Gujarat Circle.
Pursuant to the transfer order, he has been posted at Junagarh in Gujarat.
Petitioner is a Telecom District Manager with Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd (in BSNL) which is a Government of India Enterprise falling within Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Before noticing the rival contentions and submissions made on behalf of the petitioner and the respondent, it would be appropriate for facility of reference to reproduce here the various postings of the petitioner at different stations and the period thereof :  Sr. No.
Designation Name of Circle Name of station Period from... to.. 1.
SDOT Ahmedabad Gujarat Circle Ahmedabad 5-11-90 to 16-6-91 2.
ADET(P) ALTTC Specialization Training Gzd.
Ghaziabad 17-6-91 to 8-11-91 3.
ADET (P) Field Attachment MTNL Delhi Delhi 9-11-91 to 12-3-92 4.
ADET (IT-C)  MTNL Delhi Shakti Ngr.
Delhi 12-3-92 to 11-1-93 5.
ADG TEC N Delhi New Delhi 12-1-93 to 15-4-94 6.
DE (Trans-Inst)  MP Circle  Indore 16-4-94 to 7-6-94 7.
DE (TRKS & Rural) -do- -do- 8-6-94 to 31-3-97 8.
DE (Transmission) -do- -do- 1-4-97 to 4-3-99 9.
Area Manager Porbandar Gujarat Circle Porbandar 5-3-99 to 1-9-99 10.
TDM Khargone MP Circle Khargone 2-9-99 to 14-1-04 11.
TDM Khandwa -do- Khandwa 15-1-04 to till date 3.
The main plank of petitioner's submission is that from 2-9-1999 to 14-1- 2004, he had been posted at a "tough station" as known in the respondent's terminology at Khargone.
Under the transfer policy and guidelines, any officer, who has done a tenure posting at a tough station, is entitled to out of turn priority or choice in the matter of the next posting.
Reference in this connection is invited to letter dated 8-10-2002, by which the respondents had invited options from willing officers to be posted a tough stations including "Khargone" offering them out of turn priority in further posting.
4.
It is the petitioner's case that no officer was forthcoming to avail the above option.
Petitioner also did not opt for it but the respondents taking advantage of an earlier request to be posted in the MP circle, posted the petitioner at Khargone being a tough station.
It is not in dispute that Khargone was declared a tough station on 8-10-2002.
Petitioner's contention is that even though it got subsequently declared as tough station, it was a tough station all through and petitioner has spent four and a half years approximately at Khargone from 2-9-1999 to 14-1-2004.
Even if the period after its declaration as a tough station on 8-10-2002 is to be taken, petitioner has spent more than one year and four months.
It is submitted that Khargone does not have even a railway station.
There is hardly any infrastructure of roads.
The condition prior to 8-10-2002 was even worse.
5.
Learned counsel submits that in October, 2003, one Pradeep Singh was posted as Telecom District Manager at Khargone but he declined to join and the said posting was cancelled.
Learned counsel states that petitioner was not being relieved from Khargone as another officer was not willing to come to join.
It was ultimately on 15-1-2004 the petitioner was relieved from Khargone and was posted at Khandwa (MP).
While petitioner had only spent about five months at new posting at Khandwa, the impugned order was passed transferring him from MP circle to Gujarat circle.
It is this order which the petitioner assails.
6.
Learned counsel states that petitioner is a divorcee having a son, who is doing his 10th class and aged parents, who are settled at Khandwa.
He states that there was no justification whatsoever for this unwarranted transfer from Khandwa to Gujarat circle, within four and a half months of petitioner having completed nearly four and a half year of tenure at the tough station-Khargone.
Regarding the allegation of petitioner having spent most of his career while being posted in MP circle, learned counsel submits that petitioner was sent in March, 1999 in compelling circumstances to Porbandar, where he did join but had to remain on leave on account of litigation, which he was facing at Indore (MP).
Be that as it may, respondents themselves had transferred the petitioner from September, 1999 to the tough station at Khargone (MP).
Petitioner, therefore, assails the present transfer as being contrary to the respondents' own policy, as being arbitrary and vindictive as far as petitioner is concerned, since it ignores the ground reality of petitioner being a divorcee and having a son, studying in 10th class in a school in Khandwa with his aged parents.
7.
Mr. Sukumar Pattjoshi, learned counsel for the respondents, cited authorities to the effect that Courts can interfere with a transfer only if the same was a mala fide one or was in violation of statutory provisions.
He submits that it was not open for an officer to seek a tenure posting in the circle of his liking and then claim out of turn priority.
Giving the example of say an officer belonging to North-East seeking a transfer in that region and then complaining about being posted to a tough region.
This exactly was the position in the present case, counsel urged.
He further submitted that it cannot be overlooked that the petitioner somehow managed from 1994 to remain posted in MP circle for a period of nearly 10 years.
He was posted in Gujarat only for a short duration from 5-3-1999 to 1-9-1999 i.e., for a period of six months.
In these six months also, petitioner remained on leave for about 129 days.
He further submits that the benefit of tough station cannot be made available to him because Khargone was declared a tough station only on 8-10- 2002.
Petitioner has since then completed only about one and a half year of tenure posting at Khargone.
Benefit of out of turn priority or a choice posting is available only on completion of two years at a tough station.
Counsel also urged that the petitioner belongs to All India Telecom Service and strictly the benefits of tough station were only available locally to circle employees.
Mr. Sukumar Pattjoshi further explains that the posting of the petitioner from Khargone to Khandwa should not be regarded as transfer as if it was a posting within the MP circle.
This is done locally by the Incharge of MP circle.
The transfer to Gujarat circle is the real transfer, which has been ordered of 15-6-2004.
Mr. Pattjoshi next submitted that this is not an individual posting order.
It has dealt with transfer of 58 employees and was bona fide made.
He referred to pages 30 to 33 of the counter affidavit, wherein it would be seen that other officers also having been posted in MP circle or other circles for long, have been transferred.
8.
To sum up, Mr. Pattjoshi submitted that the petitioner has failed to make out any case of mala fides or arbitrariness.
This is a case of a common posting order, where 58 officers other than petitioners were also involved.
Petitioner has no right to seek a posting or transfer to a place of his liking and remain there.
He, therefore, prays for dismissal of the writ petition.
9.
The legal position regarding judicial review of order of transfer is well settled.
Transfer is an incidence of service and the Courts do not normally interfere in transfers for administrative reason and exigency or in public interest.
The Court interferes when there are strong and pressing grounds rendering transfer as illegal either on ground of violation of statutory rules or on account of mala fides or being vitiated by arbitrariness.
Reference may be made to Union of India v. HN Kirtama, (1989)3 SCC 445.
Again in Gujarat Electricity Board v. Atmaram Sungomal Poshani, (1989)2 SCC 602, the Court held that no Government servant or employee of public undertaking has legal right for being posted at any particular place.
Transfer from one place to the other is generally a condition of service and an employee has no choice in the matter.
10.
There is no quarrel with the legal principles as enunciated in the judgments referred to.
In the present case, it is to be seen whether petitioner is entitled to seek (stake ?)
a claim for an out of turn priority or choice posting, having served at Khargone, a tough station and secondly whether the petitioner makes out a case which makes his present posting an arbitrary one due to compelling circumstances requiring the transfer to be kept in abeyance.
11.
As noted, petitioner stayed from 2-9-1999 to 14-1-2004 i.e. four years and four and half months at Khargone in MP circle.
The benefits flowing from posting at Khargone, a tough station, are sought to be denied to the petitioner on the ground, that it did not apply to Indian Telecom Service Officers and were confined to employees of MP circle.
Secondly it was declared a tough station only on 8-10-2002.
Hence, petitioner did not complete two years at Khargone.
Reference is invited to Annexure P-2, issued by the Chief General Manager of BSNL The said order does not exclude its application to officers of All India Telecom Service.
The relevant, part is as follows :  "Based on various parameters some stations are being declared as tough stations.
The officer who opt for posting at one of these stations for two years will be given out of turn priority in his/her further posting."
12.
There is no stipulation confining application of Annexure P-2 to MP Circle Officers or excluding Indian Telecom Service Officers from its application.
Regarding non-completion of two years at Khargone, it has to be appreciated that petitioner was already posted since 1999, while declaration as tough station was made on 8-10-2002.
It goes without saying that Khargone was declared as a tough station on 8-10-2002 on account of absence of Railway line, proper roads and infrastructure.
The condition prior to the order would only have been worse.
13.
I am of the view that a pragmatic approach, recognizing ground realities has to be adopted in a matter like this.
Even though being an Indian Telecom Service Officer, the factual position remains that petitioner was posted in Khargone from September, 1999 to 14-1-2004 i.e. for a period of four years and more.
Khargone was declared as a tough station on 8-10-2002.
It continues to be one and is not any body's case that prior to 8-10-2002, conditions were better.
After four and half years approximately at Khargone, petitioner is transferred to Khandwa, MP on 15-1-2004.
This respondents contend that this is hardly a transfer and is mere posting within circle.
Any transfer results in dislocation.
It is not disputed before me that distance between Khargone and Khandwa is about 200 KM When the petitioner has hardly been at Khandwa for five months, he is sought to be transferred to Junagarh in Gujarat.
14.
The case of the petitioner is that he is a single parent having a son who is studying in 10th class.
He is at a crucial and formative stage of his educational career.
Petitioner's aged parents are also at Khandwa.
Counsel for the petitioner on instructions from the petitioner, submits that petitioners's son is in middle of academic year and any disturbance would adversely affect child's education and also render the petitioner unable to take care of his aged parents.
While, it is true that, personal inconvenience cannot be entertained as a ground for seeking stay of a transfer, since in every transfer dislocation and inconvenience is inherent.
However, what can be done is that rigours of it can be mitigated in genuine and deserving cases.
This experience has shown results in increased efficiency and builds up high morale in the staff.
15.
Reference in this regard is invited to the observations of the Supreme Court in Director of School Education, Madras v. O Karuppa Thevan, 1996(2) S.C.T.
402 : 1994 Supp (2) SCC 666.
It reads as under :  "The tribunal has erred in law in holding that the respondent employee ought to have been heard before transfer.
No law requires an employee to be heard before his transfer when the authorities make the transfer for the exigencies of administration.
However, the learned counsel for the respondent, contended that in view of the fact that respondent's children are studying in school, the transfer should not have been effected during mid-academic term.
Although there is no such rule, we are of the view that in effecting transfer the fact that the children of an employee are studying should be given due weight, if the exigencies of the service are not urgent.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant was unable to point out that there was no such urgency in the present case that the employee could not have been accommodated till the end of the current academic year.
We, therefore, while setting aside the impugned order of the tribunal, direct that the appellant should not effect the transfer till the end of the current academic year.
The appeal is allowed accordingly with no order as to costs."
16.
Impugned transfer order is said to be a part of routine transfers and made with a view to ensure that an officer does not spend most of his career in a particular circle.
Besides, he must do a posting outside the circle.
The factum of petitioner being a single parent, having a son, who is in middle of his academic year of 10th class coupled with grounds realities that petitioner completed four and half years in a tough station, which normally gives benefit of an out of turn priority and choice of posting, has led me to conclude that the transfer order deserves to be deferred till the end of academic year, applying the ratio of Director of School Education, Madras v. O Karuppa Thevan (supra).
17.
Counsel for the petitioner, on instructions from the petitioner, states that petitioner be permitted to stay at the current station upto 31st March, 2005 and thereafter the petitioner would not even claim out of turn priority or choice of posting and the respondents would be at liberty to post or transfer him in their discretion.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned order of transfer, as far as the petitioner is concerned, is directed to be kept in abeyance with directions to the respondents not to effect the transfer till the end of academic year ie till 31st March, 2005.
Writ petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.