Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J - By this writ application, the petitioner has prayed for direction upon the respondents to appoint/recruit him in the post of Postman/Mail guard after setting aside the order dated 12th September, 2003 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Kolkata Bench, in OA No. 104/AN/2003.
2.
The facts giving rise to filing to the preset application may be summarized thus :  The petitioner has been serving as Extra-Departmental Mail Carrier in the Head Office at A and N Island, Port Blair.
Pursuant to an advertisement for filling up the post of Postman/Mail Gourd under the quota of Extra-Departmental Candidates, the petitioner filed an application to the authorities for being considered for the said post in the year 1997.
He appeared in the written test for the said post with other candidates and ultimately, on 18th November, 1997, the result of such test was published wherefrom it appears that none of the candidates was qualified.
After the lapse of more than 5 years, he made representations to different authorities including the Prime Minister for considering his case of appointment on the ground that on 19th December, 2002, he came to learn from a reliable source that he became successful in the examination of 1997.
He got no reply from those Authorities on the aforesaid representations and eventually, he filed an application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, thereby praying for setting aside the result dated 18th November, 1997, of the examination held in the year 1997.
The Tribunal, by the order impugned herein, summarily rejected such application holding that the petitioner not having been qualified in the written test as well as in the interview did not acquire any legal or enforceable right to seek employment for the post.
3.
Being dissatisfied, the petitioner has come up with the present writ application.
4.
Mr. BK Das, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, has taken a preliminary objection as regards maintainability of the present writ application.
5.
By referring to Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, Mr. Das contends that the petitioner having challenged the decision of the authority dated 18th November, 1997 by filing an application under Section 19 of the aforesaid Act in the year 2003, the same was patently barred by limitation and as such there was no scope of getting any relief from the Tribunal.
According to Mr. Das, the Tribunal, instead of entering into the merit, ought to have summarily dismissed the application simply on the ground of limitation and consequently, this Court cannot grant any relief to the petitioner.
6.
Mr. AS Roy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has opposed the aforesaid preliminary objection raised by Mr. Das and has contended that the Tribunal itself having entered into the merit of the matter, at this stage, there is no scope of considering whether the application before the Tribunal was barred by limitation.
He further submits that this Court now should examine the propriety of the order of the Tribunal and consider whether in the facts of the present case the Tribunal was justified in summarily dismissing the application on merit without calling for any affidavit from the respondent.
7.
In order to appreciate the aforesaid preliminary objection raised by Mr. Das, it will be profitable to refer to the provisions contained in Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and those are quoted below :  Limitation - (1) A Tribunal shall not admit an application.
(a) in a case where a final order such as is mentioned in C1.
(a) of the sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from the date on which such final order has been made;  (b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in C1.
(b) of sub-section (2) of Section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expiry of the said period of six months.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where (a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order made at any time during the period of three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the matter to which such order relates; and  (b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced before the said date before any High Court, the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to period of six months from the said date, whichever period expires later.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), an application may be admitted after the period of one year specified in Cl. (a) or Cl. (b) of sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, the period referred of six months specified in sub-section (2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he has sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.
8.
A bare perusal of the aforesaid provisions makes it abundantly clear that an applicant under Section 19 of the said Act cannot impugn the accuracy of a result declared on 18th November, 1997 in the year 2003 before the Tribunal.
Simply because after the lapse of 5 years, the petitioner made representations to the Prime Minister and some other higher Authorities which were not even answered by those Authorities, such fact cannot revive a remedy which had since become barred by limitation.
In the application before the Tribunal the petitioner's grievance was not that those Authorities did not consider his representations, but he prayed for setting aside the result dated 19th November, 1997 which was clearly barred by limitation.
9.
In our view, if a person, 5 years after publication of result of an examination, makes representations before Prime Minister or other Authorities for reconsideration of the result on the ground that he had from a reliable source come to know that he really passed in the said examination, those Authorities have no duty to answer the said belated representation made by the petitioner.
The petitioner having no legal or fundamental right to make such representation after long lapse of 5 years complaining aberrations in the declared result, we cannot pass any direction upon those Authorities to dispose of the representation at this stage.
10.
We are, however, of the view that in the facts of the present case, the Tribunal, instead of holding that the petitioner did not qualify in the written test as well as in the interview, ought to have dismissed the application simply on the ground of limitation.
It is now settled position of law that if an application is barred by limitation, the concerned Tribunal does not get any jurisdiction to enquire into the merit of the case and such application should be held to be non est in the eye of law.
11.
Therefore, although, we do not approve the reason assigned by the Tribunal, we are not inclined to entertain this application as the ultimate conclusion of the Tribunal that the petitioner was not entitled to get any relief was correct.
As indicated above, the Tribunal ought to have rejected the application only on the ground of limitation.
12.
We, accordingly, find substance in the preliminary objection raised by Mr. Das and hold that the application filed by the petitioner before the Tribunal being barred by limitation, the Tribunal rightly refused to grant any relief to the petitioner and accordingly there is no scope of interfering with the final order passed by the Tribunal.
13.
Thus, the writ application is dismissed on the aforesaid ground alone.
14.
We, however, make it clear that we have restricted our scrutiny only to the order of the Tribunal impugned in this application and rejection of this application will not stand in the way of the petitioner in challenging any subsequent order passed by the respondents in accordance with law.
15.
In the facts and circumstances, there will be, however, no order as to costs.
Indira Banerjee, J - I agree.
Application dismissed.