Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner was working as a Beldar with the respondent-Corporation.
In the month of December 1984, a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner.
The petitioner duly replied to the aforesaid charge-sheet and denied the allegations levelled against him.
Thereafter vide order dated July 17, 1986, the Punishing Authority ordered the removal of the petitioner from service.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P-5 with the present petition.
2.
The petitioner felt aggrieved against the aforesaid order and filed a statutory appeal before the Vice Chancellor of the respondent University.
A copy of the grounds of the appeal has been appended as Annexure P-6 with the present petition.
The appeal of the petitioner was disposed of by the Vice Chancellor and the following order was communicated to the petitioner on April 2, 1986 :  "Please refer to your application dated 12.3.1986 on the subject cited above, it is to inform you that your appeal has been considered and rejected by the Vice Chancellor."
3.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid order by filing a Civil Writ Petition No. 4210 of 1986.
A Division Bench of this Court vide order dated January 13, 1987 disposed of the aforesaid writ petition on a statement made by the learned counsel for the respondent University whereby the aforesaid order passed in appeal was withdrawn with a liberty to re-hear the appeal and decide the same in accordance with law.
A copy of the order passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 4210 of 1986 has been appended as Annexure P-9 with the present petition.
4.
Thereafter a fresh order was passed by the Vice Chancellor on June 12, 1987.
The order of removal of the petitioner was set aside and he was ordered to be reinstated.
However, the appellate authority disposed of the appeal in the following terms :  "(i) He should join as Beldar in the scheme C(a) PB-29NP(A) at Kaul under the Rice Breeder, Rice Research Station, Kaul.
(ii) His four increments are hereby stopped with cumulative effect for his misconduct.
(iii) The intervening period from the date of removal from service till date of joining may be treated as leave of the kind due or BOL as the case may be.
(iv) He will not posted at Buria for at least next 10 years."
5.
The petitioner has again felt aggrieved and has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
6.
I have heard Shri RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Girish Agnihotri, the learned counsel for the respondent.
7.
The primary grievance of Shri RK Malik is that although the earlier order dated April 2, 1986 passed in the appeal filed by the petitioner was withdrawn by the respondent University with a liberty to pass a fresh speaking order in accordance with law, but still while passing the fresh order Annexure P-10, no reasoning have been given, nor various points taken by the petitioner before the Vice Chancellor have been taken into consideration.
8.
From the perusal of the order Annexure P-10, the grievance of the petitioner appears to be justified.
A perusal of the aforesaid grounds of appeal shows that various objections have been raised to the punishment order passed against the petitioner.
None of the aforesaid objections has been taken into consideration by the appellate authority, nor any reason has been given while disposing of the appeal.
9.
In these circumstance, it is apparent that the Order Annexure P-10 is totally devoid of any reason and is a non-speaking order and as such violative of principles of natural justice.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed and the order Annexure P-10 is set aside.
The matter is remitted back to the Vice Chancellor of the respondent University who shall now decide the appeal filed by the petitioner by passing a well-reasoned speaking order by giving a personal hearing to the petitioner in the matter.
Since the matter has remained pending for a sufficiently long time, therefore, the necessary fresh order shall be passed by the Vice Chancellor of the respondent- University within four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
In case the petitioner is found entitled to any relief, such necessary relief shall be released to the petitioner within a further period of one month.
Before parting with this order, it is made clear that setting aside the order Annexure P-10 shall not be construed to mean that the order of punishment dated February 17, 1986 stands revived in any manner.
A copy of this order be given dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.