RK Merathia, J - The Insurance Company disputed the claim mainly on the ground that it has no knowledge about the relationship of master and servant between the owner of the vehicle and the deceased and there is no proof of the same.
Further there is no proof regarding the alleged wages and the age of the deceased.
However, the Insurance Company could not deny its liability on the basis of the Insurance Policy.
2.
On the basis of the evidence including the payment register it was found that the deceased was getting Rs. 3,000/- per month as salary and as per the post-mortem report his age was found as 19 years.
On these basis the amount of compensation was calculated and the petitioner was directed to pay the same as the vehicle was insured at the time of the accident.
3.
Mr. Sahni submitted that the Petitioner-Insurance Company will be liable only when the employer has become insolvent.
He further submitted that when he contested the claim, the Workmen Compensation Commissioner had no jurisdiction to pass the impugned award.
4.
The case of M/s. Raj Kishan and Company v. State of Bihar, (1999)1 Pat LJR 803, relied on by Mr. Sahni is not applicable in the present case.
In that case the employer contested that the concerned employee was not employed under their establishment rather he was employed by some other establishment.
In that situation, it was held that when there was such contest, it was the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court who shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate such matters.
The judgment of Patna High Court in case of Oriental Insurance Company v. Shanti Devi, (2001)4 Pat LJR 690 relied on by Mr. Sahni is also of no help to him.
The learned Single Judge found that the case of the claimant in that case was not that the Khalasi was engaged in driving the vehicle and that there was no evidence on the above line, therefore, he was unable to accept that even Khalasi is covered by the first proviso to Section 147.
In the case on hand the owner of the vehicle has produced payment register to prove that the deceased was his employee.
The other points raised by Mr. Sahni including the aforesaid point of scope of Section 14 of the Workmen's Compensation Act are equally not tenable in view of the following judgments.
The Oriental Fire and General Insurance Company v. The Presiding Officer etc., 1988 Pat LJR 987, Ved Prakash Garg v. Premi Devi, 1997(4) SCT 541 (SC) : (1997)8 SCC 1 : AIR 1997 SC 3854, United India Insurance Co v. Manjit Kaur, AIR 1989 Kerala 140 (FB), United India Insurance Company v. Vasudevan, AIR 1998 Kerala 226 (FB), National Insurance Company v. Philomina, (1997)2 Pat LJR 180.
5.
I also do not find any illegality in the order granting interest @ 7% per annum if the amount is not paid within 60 days from the order.
The petitioner Insurance Company has chosen to file this writ petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India on 19-12-2003 i.e. after about an year of passing of the impugned award dated 5-12-2002, instead of filing an appeal, within 60 days, as provided under Section 30 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 after depositing the amount payable under the order under appeal, in order to circumvent the provision the appeal.
9.
This court is satisfied that the impugned order has been passed on the basis of the evidences on record and as per the law.
There is no reason to interfere with the same.
Accordingly this writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.