Ashutosh Mohunta, J - This petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has been filed with a prayer for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent-Board to grant the time bound benefit of next higher pay scale to the petitioners at par with the direct recruits.
2.
The petitioners joined service in the decade of fifties on different posts.
After the constitution of the Punjab State Electricity Board (for short `the Board') the services of the petitioners were transferred to it and were absorbed in the Board subsequently.
The petitioners got promotions from time to time and they rose upto the level of Executive Engineer with the passage of time.
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 5 had already retired at the time of filing of the writ petition in the year 1994 and by now petitioner No. 6 might also have been retired.
The service conditions of the petitioners were governed by the Punjab Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (for short `the 1965 Regulations').
Regulation 7 thereof deals with recruitment to the posts of Assistant Engineers, Assistant Executive Engineers and Executive Engineers.
Regulation 10(a) and 10(b) lays down qualification for appointment by promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer out of the Junior Engineers.
The petitioners were appointed as Assistant Engineers by fulfilling the qualification laid down in Regulation 10(a).
The Board issued circular No. 52/89 dated 1971989 by which it allowed time bound higher pay scales to the employees on the completion of 9 years and 16 years of service.
Initially this benefit was limited to the employees drawing maximum pay scale of Rs. 3500/-.
Subsequently, this benefit was extended to all the employees vide Officer Order No. 194/PRC-Fin-1988 dated 30.3.1990 modifying earlier circular dated 1971989.
Consequent upon the issuance of the letter dated 30.3.1990 the Assistant Engineers and Assistant Executive Engineers were placed in the next higher grade of Rs. 3000-5600 after completion of 9 years and Rs. 4500-6300 on completion of 16 years of service.
However, this benefit was limited only to the persons who joined as Assistant Engineer by direct recruitment.
Meaning thereby that the promotees like the petitioners were not allowed the benefit of next higher pay scale on completion of 9 and 16 years of service.
A copy of this Circular No. 14/90 issued vide No. 195/PRC/Fin-88 dated 31.3.1990 is annexed with this petition as Annexure P-15.
With the grant of this benefit to the direct recruits only, the Assistant Engineers/Assistant Executive Engineers, who joined the Service by direct recruitment and were junior to the petitioners, started getting higher pay scale than the petitioners, who were senior to them.
The representations made by the petitioners were rejected by the authorities concerned.
Now the petitioners have filed the present writ petition for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution.
3.
The respondent filed a written statement wherein factual position depicted in the writ petition has not been denied.
However, the prayer made by the petitioners for their equation with the direct recruits has vehemently been opposed in the writ petition as well as by the counsel appearing on behalf of the Board.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the case file carefully.
5.
The primary grievance of the petitioners is that once they were appointed as Assistant Engineer on promotion, they formed one cadre with the direct recruits, and any discrimination made between the direct recruits and the promotee officers was not justified and it was illegal and unconstitutional.
6.
Regulation 7(a) of the 1965 Regulations deals with recruitment to the posts of Assistant Engineers from the following three sources :-  (a) By appointment from Trainee Engineers as provided in Regulation 9.
(b) By promotion as provided in Regulation 10.
(c) By transfer of an officer already in the service of a Government or any other State Electricity Board or an Undertaking of Government.
7.
Clauses (a) and (b) of Regulation 10 depict the qualification for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers out of the Junior Engineers.
In the present case the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Engineers on their fulfilling the qualification laid down in clause (a) of Regulation 10.
Once the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Engineers from the posts of Junior Engineers on their having been found eligible therefor, they got equation with the persons who joined as Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment.
Any discrimination made between Assistant Engineers, appointed from different sources would be arbitrary and illegal.
The object of granting the benefit of next higher time scale to the employee was only to remove stagnation in their service career.
The yardstick for granting higher time scale in the same class of employee ought to have been applied uniformly without any discrimination on the basis of source of entry to the cadre.
Different yardsticks cannot be applied to the employees forming one class.
By their joining the posts of the Assistant Engineers/Assistant Executive Engineers both the direct recruits and the promotees, they formed one class.
Any discrimination on the basis of source of recruitment in the same class of employees would be illegal, arbitrary and unconstitutional.
Vide decision dated 13121994 rendered in Writ Petition No. 1847 of 1993, HP Diploma Engineers Association and others v. H.P.S.E.B.
it has been held by a Division Bench of the Himachal Pradesh High Court, Shimla, that once the persons recruited from different sources are integrated the cadre of Assistant Engineers, they perform same functions, shoulder similar responsibilities and are put in the same pay scale.
The stagnation is equally shared by the Assistant Engineers recruited from both the sources.
Similarly, after joining the posts of Assistant Engineers, the petitioners in the present case shouldered the same responsibilities and shared the stagnation equally with the direct recruits.
Any discrimination on the basis of source of recruitment would be arbitrary and illegal.
In this view of mine, I am also fortified by the decision of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 40 of 1982 (D.R.
Saini and others v.
P.S.E.B.)
and Civil Appeal No. 41 of 1982 (P.S.E.B.
v. Vinod Kumar Virmani and others) upholding the judgment of his Court to the effect that no distinction can be made between the Engineers holding Diploma or Degree, if borne on one and the same cadre, having joint seniority.
8.
Consequently, I allow the writ petition.
It is held that the petitioners are entitled to the grant of next higher grade in accordance with their eligibility for the same.
They shall be granted the next higher time scale with effect from the date of their completion of 9 and 16 years of service.
The petitioners shall be released all the consequential fiscal benefits, according to their eligibility, within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment, failing which the officers/officials found responsible for causing the delay, would be penalised with the grant of interest to the petitioners at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Petition allowed.