Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ of certiorari to seek quashing of the orders dated 411985 and 1891984 whereby the petitioners were not permitted to cross efficiency bar.
2.
The petitioners were appointed against the posts of Sectional Officers (Civil) on different dates since the year 1968 till the year 1974.
The conditions of service of the petitioners are governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Sectional Officers Service (Class III) Rules, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as `1964 Rules').
As per 1964 Rules, persons appointed to the service and members of the service are required to pass such Departmental examination as may be prescribed by the Chief Engineer within three years of appointment to the service.
Rules also contemplate that the Chief Engineer may for sufficient cause extend from time to time, the period for passing of the said examination so that the total period for which extension is given does not exceed three years.
3.
The Chief Engineer Punjab (Buildings and Roads Branch) had issued instructions dated 2491973, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P2 stating that the examination will be held twice a year during the months of May and November in accordance with the syllabus approved by the Government in November, 1964.
The examinations are required to be conducted by Board of Examiners consisting of one Superintending Engineer as Chairman and two Executive Engineers as members.
The said instructions also contemplate the qualifying marks in each subject.
4.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the respondents have not conducted the Departmental examination since January, 1978 and even the earlier examinations have been held only occasionally.
In the year 1978, the departmental examinations were discontinued as a statement was made by the then Minister of the Department on the floor of the Legislative Assembly that the Departmental examination prescribed under Rule 14 of 1964 Rules would be abolished.
The petitioners continued to be granted all the grade increments till the year 1982.
However, the petitioners were not allowed their annual grade increment while crossing their efficiency bar.
5.
Petitioners have also mentioned that there was an exchange of correspondence regarding amendment of the Rules for abolishing the Departmental examination in terms of Rule 14 of 1964 Rules.
Thus, on account of failure of the respondents in not conducting the Departmental examination in terms of the instructions, the petitioners cannot be deprived of crossing of efficiency bar.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the Departmental Professional Examination for the Junior Engineers, (redesignated from earlier Sectional Officers) was held in May, 1972, July, 1973, December, 1973, December, 1974, November, 1975 and last examination was held in February, 1982.
It has been further pointed out that none of the Junior Engineers including the petitioners appeared in the examination held in February, 1982.
7.
Reliance was also placed upon the communication Annexure R.2 dated 1841984 wherein the Government has communicated to the Chief Engineer that until the proposed amendment in the Rules are notified, the annual grade increments cannot be released to those Junior Engineers who could not pass the Departmental Professional Examination.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has vehemently argued that the State Government has issued instructions for conduct of Departmental Examination twice a year.
Such instructions were issued to enable the members of the service to appear in the Departmental examination so as to comply with the provisions of Rule 14 of 1964 Rules.
The examinations are required to be conducted by the respondents.
The Departmental Examinations have not been held regularly is apparent from the averments made in the written statement itself.
In fact, there is a long gap in the conduct of the examinations.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot be made to suffer with the consequences of not qualifying the Departmental examination.
Reliance was also placed upon Rule 19 of Rules 1964 to contend that the State Government would be deemed to have relaxed the applicability of Rule 14 of 1964 Rules in respect of the petitioners.
Rules 14 and 19 of 1964 Rules reads as under :-  "14.
Departmental Examination.
- (1) Persons appointed to the Service and members of the Service, unless they have already done, shall within three years of their appointment to the Service, pass such departmental examination as may be prescribed by the Chief Engineer : Provided that the Chief Engineer may, for any sufficient cause extend, from time to time, the period for passing the said examination so that the total period for which extension is given does not exceed three years : Provided further extension shall not be given save with the approval of Government given in consultation with Finance Department.
(2) If a Sectional Officer fails to pass the departmental examination within the prescribed period or within the extended period, if any, he shall not earn his future grade increments till such time as he passes it when the increment shall be released retrospectively : Provided that he shall not be entitled to get any arrears of the released grade increments for the period during which he could not pass the examination.
XX XX XX XX XX  19.
Power to relax :- Where the Government is satisfied that the operation of any of these rules causes undue hardship in any particular case, it may after consultation with Finance Department where financial implications are involved, by order, dispensed with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent, and subject to such conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner."
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, I find that withholding of efficiency bar is not justified.
The regular conduct of departmental examination is a sine qua non for the applicability of Rule 14 of 1964 Rules.
In fact, such was the instructions issued by the Department as well.
However, the examinations were held twice in the year 1973 and once in the years 1974 and 1975.
The last examination was held only in February, 1982.
Petitioners cannot be made to suffer on account of the failure of the respondents to hold the Departmental examination regularly.
In State of Maharashtra v. Jagannath Achyut Karandikar, AIR 1989 SC 1133, in somewhat identical situation, the Supreme Court was seized of a matter where the rules contemplate qualifying of Departmental examination as a condition precedent of promotion to the cadre of Superintendent.
The examinations were required to be conducted every year and the officials have to pass the same within the stipulated period.
Those who could not pass within time frame would lose seniority but they would be promoted as and when they qualify the examination.
It was held that since the Department has not conducted the Departmental examination regularly, the promotion cannot be withheld.
Relevant portion of paras 9 and 10 of the judgment reads as under :-  "9 Rule 2 of the 1962 Rules no doubt states that a candidate who does not pass the examination at the end of nine years' service will lose his seniority.
But this rule cannot be read in insolation as the High Court did.
It has to be read alongwith the other rules since it is a part of the scheme provided for promotion.
Rule 5 requires the Government to hold the examination every year.
This rule is the basis of the entire scheme and the effect of the other rules depends upon holding the examination.
If examination is not held in any year, the rule 2 cannot operate to the prejudice of a person who has not exhausted all his chances.
The person who has not exhausted the available chances to appear in the examination cannot be denied his seniority.
It would be unjust, unreasonable and arbitrary to penalise a person for the default of the Government to hold the examination every year.
That does not also appear to be the intent or purpose of the 1962 Rules.
10.
If the examination is not held in any year the person who has not exhausted all the permissible chances has a right to have his case considered for promotion even if he has completed 9 years' service.
The Government instead of promoting such person in their turn made them to wait till they passed the examination....." 10.
In view of the judgment referred to above, communications Annexures P.3 and P.4 are not legally sustainable, therefore, the same are quashed by allowing the writ petition.
11.
The petitioners shall be entitled to their annual grade increments and to cross efficiency bar irrespective of their qualifying departmental examination with all consequential benefits.
12.
No costs.
Petition allowed.