Swatanter Kumar, J - Haryana Public Service Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, issued an advertisement No. 6 dated 2011995 inviting applications for filling up of 200 temporary posts of Lecturers (College Cadre) in various subjects, in the Haryana Education Services (Group-B).
Corrigendum to this advertisement was issued, partially modifying the original notification.
The petitioner passed his MA in English in the year 1988 and M Phil.
in English in the year 1991 from Kurukshetra University.
The petitioner belongs to backward class of Haryana, thus, being eligible and qualified, submitted his application through proper channel.
This application of the petitioner was accepted and he was called for interview by the Commission.
The result of the selection in regard to Lecturer (College Cadre) in English was published on 2811998.
Under BC Category only three candidates were selected, whereas in furtherance to the orders passed by the High Court in CWP No. 4235 of 1998, the respondents were directed to compile the result for that category and publish the same.
On 381998 the respondents issued a fresh selection list of the BC category.
As per that list the petitioner figured at Serial No. 8 and another candidate, namely, Somvir figured at Serial No. 9.
Somvir was appointed but the petitioner was not given any appointment.
The petitioner has been completely ignored for appointment.
This action of the respondents was challenged by the petitioner by filing CWP No. 3232 of 1999.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents had not disputed that petitioner was qualified and eligible for the post.
However, immediately thereafter, on 2552000 the respondents issued a show cause notice to the petitioner.
The petitioner was working as Lecturer in English in Government College, Karnal when show cause notice was served upon the petitioner requiring him to reply as to why his services be not terminated as he had obtained 545% marks in MA English as against 55% marks required for that purpose.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply and stated therein that he had made no misrepresentation and had clearly stated in his form that he had obtained 872 marks out of 1600 marks.
The petitioner also stated that he was qualified in terms of the prescribed qualifications and as such no action need to taken against him.
The recommendation of the Commission, in respect of the petitioner sent to the Government, was withdrawn vide letter dated 2252000.
2.
After receipt of notice, written statement was filed by the respondent- Commission, which was adopted by the State of Haryana.
It is stated therein that the petitioner has no right to invoke the writ jurisdiction as he had misrepresented in his form the marks percentage to be 55% though he had stated total marks obtained as 872 marks out of 1600.
As the form had indicated 55% marks, his application was considered and, therefore, the petitioner was called for interview, but lateron while checking the records of the petitioner upon the result received from the College, it was found that the petitioner was not eligible and could not have been interviewed by the respondents.
Thus, the show cause notice was issued accordingly.
3.
In the light of the above facts now we shall refer to the regulations/clauses in the advertisement describing essential qualifications for appointment to such post.
There is no dispute to the fact that the posts in question are governed by the Haryana Education Service Group-B Rules.
The relevant clause of the advertisement reads as under :-  "(I) For College Lecturers (All subjects) except the Lecturer in Computer Sciences, Lecturers in Electronics & Lecturers in Fine Arts :- (a) Good academic record with atleast 55% marks or an equivalent grade at Master's Degree level in the relevant subject from an Indian University or an equivalent degree from a Foreign University.
(b) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard."
Certain clarifications were also published in the advertisement and they read as under :-  "1.
The applications of the candidates possessing less than good academic record with atleast 55% marks or an equivalent grade will be straightaway rejected.
2. xx xx xx 3. xx xx xx 4. xx xx xx 5.
Fraction of percentage less than 55% marks or 50% marks wherever it is required, will be ignored."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner placed heavy reliance on the judgment of Division Bench in the case of Kuldeep Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(4) SCT 234 (P&H) : 1997(5) Services Law Reporter 133.
It is contended that clause 5 of the clarification has to be construed so as to mean that fraction of percentage below 55 will be ignored for the purposes of making a candidate eligible.
In other words, this exception is to be read in favour of the petitioner and rounding of fraction of marks has to be construed in his favour.
The petitioner has obtained 545% marks and, thus, the same should be read as 55% marks.
In fact the Full Bench of this Court in Kuldeep Singh's case (supra) had rejected the contention of rounding of the marks to the benefit of the candidates unless there was a rule to the contrary.
We cannot ignore the fact that petitioner had written his marks as 872 out of 1600 and had written percentage of 55% in his form, which he did not possess.
As and when the error came to the notice of the concerned authorities, they have issued show cause notice to the petitioner.
The petitioner instead of replying to the said show cause notice has approached this Court for quashing of the show cause notice.
In our view it was obligatory upon the applicant to give his correct and precise percentage in the form.
When the form requires a candidate to fill up his total marks and also indicate the percentage so acquired, this obligation, thus, must be discharged by the applicant perfectly and precisely.
5.
The cumulative reading of Rule 5 of the above Rules read in conjunction with the cautions published in the paper, we are unable to accept the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the marks have to be rounded of to the advantage of the candidate and even if he has fraction percentage less than 55%, he would be eligible.
In fact the caution No. 1 clearly indicates that possessing less than good academic record with at least 55% marks will be straight-away rejected.
The main rule also postulates atleast 55% marks at Master's degree level.
Once the substantive provisions of the rule make it mandatory, then it is not for the authorities to relax such contention unless the rules were amended to provide for such relaxation specifically.
Clause 5 of the clarification in the advertisement indicates that fraction of percentage less than 55% will be ignored.
This clause if construed in the manner suggested by the petitioner, it will be in plain and simple contradiction to the substantive rule as well as clarification No. 1.
6.
Another plea taken by the petitioner is that of discrimination.
The averments have been made in paragraph (g) of the grounds taken in the writ petition and certain other names have been mentioned of the applicants who have been appointed lecturers in different places and they had less marks than 55%.
Such persons are stated to be working in different colleges and are still continuing and no show cause notice has been served upon them.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State the allegations have not been denied.
All it is stated is that the petitioner may be put to strict proof regarding the averments made in that paragraph.
It is strange that the Commission or the Government both have adopted an attitude of vague denial.
In fact in the replication, the petitioner has even made a mention of the date of the letter and its number by which such relaxation was granted to Shri Ramesh Babu lecturer and it was proved by the Commission itself.
If that be so, the respondents are obliged to consider the case of the petitioner at parity with others.
The learned counsel for the State argued that 1986 rules had provided such relaxation, however, the 1994 rules do not admit such relaxation.
7.
We are not proposing to discuss merit or demerit of this contention at this stage.
The petitioner has been served with a show cause notice to which he has already submitted his reply.
The respondents are, thus, directed to consider the representation of the petitioner in accordance with law and in particular with reference to the plea of discrimination as afore-noticed.
The appropriate orders on the representation of the petitioner will be passed by the concerned authorities within a period of four months from the date of pronouncement of this judgment.
The interim order dated 2452001 shall remain operative till that date.
The petition is disposed of with the above directions, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.