VK Bali, J - Shri Ranvir Kumar and three others through present writ petition, filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 being ineligible.
In consequence of setting aside promotions of respondents Nos. 4 and 5, the petitioners further pray for issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents 1 to 3 to consider them for promotion to the post of Draftsman in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 and to further direct release of pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 to them with effect from 111996 with all other consequential reliefs.
2.
The brief facts on which the relief sought are stated to be based, reveal that the petitioners were appointed as Tracers in the month of January, 1984 and were posted on various posts in the Department of Irrigation (Punjab Public Works Department).
The services of the petitioners are governed by Rules known as `The Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch).
Draftsmen & Tracer State Services, Class-III Rules, 1960' (hereinafter to be referred as "1960 Rules").
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that the relevant rules for promotion to the post of Draftsman stipulate passing of prescribed examination as mandatory and in May, 1987, they had passed the said examination.
On 1921990, amendment was made in the rules and the pay scales were revised.
The Tracers were re-designated as Junior Draftsmen and qualifications were raised to matriculation with two years diploma in Draftsman.
As per 1960 Rules, promotion to the post of Draftsman can only be made if a person is eligible as per Rule 10 of 1960 Rules and passing of prescribing examination is mandatory.
A person, who qualifies test has to be considered keeping in view his seniority.
It is further the case of the petitioners that respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in violation of 1960 Rules and in arbitrary manner promoted respondents 4 and 5, who had not even passed the said examination, which was condition precedent for promotion as per Rule 10 of 1960 Rules.
4.
In response to notice issued by this Court, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have entered defence and contested the cause of the petitioners by filing written statement.
It is, inter-alia, pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 that the petitioners were appointed as Tracer, which post was re-designated as Junior Draftsman.
Prior to 1988, the promotions were made to the post of Draftsman from the cadre of Tracers later on re-designated as Junior Draftsman after having qualified the Departmental Examination Paper `A' and `B' as specified in the Rules governing the services of Tracers/Junior Draftsman.
These promotions were made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit amongst the Tracers against the available vacancies in the department, after adjudging their eligibility.
On 1921990, the Punjab Government had revised the pay scale of Drawing Establishment and also amended the relevant rules for the basic qualification for the appointment/promotion of Junior Draftsman/Draftsman as matriculation with two years Industrial Training Institute Certificate of Draftsman.
A Junior Draftsman shall be eligible for promotion as Draftsman in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 after a minimum period of 12 years of service as per notification issued by the Government on 1921990 (Annexure P-12).
5.
It is then pleaded that main plea of the petitioners is that they had passed departmental examination earlier and acquired eligibility for promotion over and above respondents 4 to 8, which is not justified and contrary to the rules.
Promotions have been made in accordance with seniority in the cadre amongst the eligible Junior Draftsmen, as is evident from Annexure R-1.
Names of the petitioners figure at Sr. Nos. 215, 221, 329 and 333 whereas, names of respondents 4 to 8 are at Sr. Nos. 127, 137, 83-A, 331 and 143, respectively.
It is then pleaded that promotions have been made strictly in accordance with seniority-cum-merit amongst the Junior Draftsmen, eligible for promotion and that the contention of the petitioners that they had passed departmental examination earlier than respondents 4 to 8 and that they should be promoted earlier to them irrespective of seniority is not tenable.
It is then pleaded that departmental examination prescribed is merely eligibility examination for promotion from the post of Junior Draftsmen to the post of Draftsmen, who have not passed two years diploma of Industrial Training Institute.
6.
Inasmuch as, there is only one point which has been pressed into service, mention whereof shall be made at the relevant time, there is no need to give further details of the pleadings made by the parties in their respective pleadings.
Suffice it, however, to say at this stage that notices were issued to respondents 4 to 8 and the office report shows that they had been served.
None of the respondents, as mentioned above, have appeared nor chosen to cause appearance on their behalf nor any written statement has been filed by them.
7.
The short submission that has been made in the present case is that vacancies that arose before the amendment in Rule 10 of the 1960 Rules should be filled by virtue of the said rule and not as per unamended Rule 10 of 1960 Rules.
It may be recalled at this stage that Rule 10 of 1960 Rules was amended by virtue of notification dated 1921990.
It is not in dispute that in the unamended Rule 10 of the 1960 Rules passing of departmental examination was necessary and passing of the same was done away with by virtue of amendment of Rule 10 of 1960 Rules brought about on 1921990.
8.
It is the positive case of the petitioners that number of vacancies of Draftsman in 9 circles in Irrigation Department for the period from 1987 to November 1992 were available.
Vacant posts of the Draftsmen have been shown in Annexure P-28.
It is further the case of the petitioners that in addition to the vacancies mentioned in Annexure P-28, more vacancies of Draftsmen were available in other circles as well.
It is further the case of the petitioners that actual number of vacancies of Draftsmen in the Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, in the offices of the Chief Engineers and various circles was quite high at all times, During the course of arguments, it was not disputed that there were, indeed, vacancies available prior to amendment in Rule 10 of 1960 Rules.
9.
On the admitted facts, as stated above, the Court is of firm view that the vacancies that became available prior to amendment in Rule 10 of 1960 Rules had to be filled as per the procedure in the unamended Rule 10 of 1960 Rules.
Unamended rules, concededly, laid condition precedent of passing of prescribed examination and further that there as no condition of remaining on a post of Tracer for 12 years for promotion on the post of Draftsmen.
Despite that, amended Rule 10 of 1960 Rules was invoked and the petitioners, who had qualified for the promotional post as per condition precedent mentioned in unamended Rule 10 of the 1960 Rules were ignored and those, who did not answer the pre-requisites as mentioned in unamended Rule 10 of 1960 Rules were preferred.
This is certainly against the law and cannot be permitted.
It is well settled by now that change in qualification brought about by amendment of rules would not affect the vacancy that may become available prior to such amendment and such vacancies had to be filled as per the conditions, as mentioned in unamended rules.
In this context, reference may be made to a Division Bench judgement of this Court in OP Taneja and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(4) Recent Services Judgement 367.
The Hon'ble Division Bench observed that "it is beyond the pale of controversy that in so far as vacancies existing prior to the date of the impugned amendment are concerned, they would undoubtedly have to be filled in accordance with the unamended Rules."
10.
The proposition of law, as mentioned above, could not be disputed by learned counsel representing respondents 1 to 3 during the course of arguments.
11.
In view of the above discussion, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to re-consider promotions of the petitioners and others with regard to the posts of Draftsman which became available before 1921990 and if in the said process, the petitioners deserve to be promoted, pass an order of their promotion and further if in the said process some order adverse against respondents 4 to 8 is passed, they shall be given an opportunity of hearing.
Let this exercise be completed within a period of three months.
In case, the petitioners in the exercise aforesaid, are promoted, naturally, they shall be given all consequential benefits as per rules.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment.
Petition allowed.