VK Bali, J - The appellant (plaintiff in the original lis) challenged the order dated 1231985 passed by the disciplinary authority as also the order dated 5121985 passed by the Appellate Authority stopping one increment with cumulative effect.
The suit was dismissed.
So was the fate of the appeal.
2.
In this Regular Second Appeal, all that has been urged in support thereof is that inasmuch as, the relevant rule 196 of the Union Bank of India Conduct Rules dealing with the punishments talks of stoppage of increment only, the concerned authority had no jurisdiction whatsoever to pass an order stopping the increment with cumulative effect.
In support of his contention, the learned Counsel relies upon a judgment of the learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court in Food Corporation of India v. West Bengal and others, 1981(2) S.L.R.
807.
The judgment indeed supports the contention noted above.
But with respect, I am unable to subscribe to the view taken in the said case.
3.
The fact that jurisdiction of the authorities to pass an order of stoppage of increment with cumulative effect having not been raised either in the plaint, or before atleast the trial Court, apart, para-85 of the By Inpatrate Settlement clearly prescribes that the order in writing withholding the increment should also mention whether it will have the effect of postponing future increments, in other words, as to whether the same would be with cumulative effect or not.
There is no prohibition in rule 196 ibid that no order stopping increment with cumulative effect can be passed.
If that be so, the rules can always be supplemented by instructions, settlement and the like.
4.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 : 1991(1) R.S.J.
413 while dealing with rule 5(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules which is para materia to rule 196 ibid, held that rule 5(iv) does not empower the disciplinary authority of withholding increments of pay with cumulative effect except after holding an enquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
5.
In the present case, concededly, a proper enquiry was made before the impugned order was passed stopping one increment with cumulative effect.
Finding no merit in the appeal, I dismiss the same heaving however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.