RL Anand, J - Through this judgment we dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 10746 of 2000, titled Inderjit Singh and other v. The Food Corporation of Indian and others, 13186 of 2000, titled Harchet Singh and others v. The Food Corporation of Indian and others, 11787 of 2000, titled BS Dhillon v. The Food Corporation of India and others, and 10754 of 2000, titled Malkiat Singh and others v. The Food Corporation of India and others, as, in our opinion, all the four writ petitions can be disposed of by a common judgment.
For the sake of facts, we are taking the same from Civil Writ Petition No. 10746 of 2000, titled Inderjit Singh and others v. The Food Corporation of India and others.
2.
The challenge in these writ petitions has been given to the various charge-sheets.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 10746 of 2000, the petitioner have given challenge to the charge-sheet dated 2172000 (Annexure P-1) vide which the petitioners were charge-sheeted after a gap of more than 20 years and it has been prayed by the petitioners that the charge-sheet be quashed and further disciplinary proceedings may be stayed as it would amount to denial of reasonable opportunity to the petitioners to defend themselves.
Moreover, the charge-sheet has been issued with a motive of pick and choose and has not been issued to others who were also posted along with the petitioners.
3.
The case set up by the petitioners is that initially they joined the respondent-Corporation as Assistant Grade-III (Depot) in the Punjab region of the Corporation.
On the basis of their seniority and merit they were promoted to the posts of Assistant Grade-II (Depot) and thereafter to the posts of Assistant Grade-I (Depot).
During the years 1979-80 and 1981-82, the petitioners were posted at Food Storage Depot, Raikot, district Ludhiana and at that stage they were holding the following posts:-  Sr. No. Name of the petitioner Name of the post 1.
Inderjit Singh Assistant Grade-II 2.
H.S.
Grewal Assistant Grade-II 3.
Nanak Singh Assistant Grade-II 4.
BS Dhillon Assistant Grade-I 5.
Jagjit Singh Madan Assistant Grade-I 4.
Thereafter, the petitioners were transferred and posted at different places.
During the period of service they have worked with the Corporation in a most efficient and meritorious manner.
They have good record to their credit and there is no complaint against them from any quarter whatsoever.
After a gap of more than 20 years, the respondent No. 3 issued charge-sheets dated 2172000 to them under Regulation 60 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 (hereinafter called `the Regulations') alleging therein that shortage to the extent of 1172% has been found in the paddy the storage of which was done during 1979-80 and 1981-82.
The memorandum issued by respondent No. 3 was sent to the petitioner by the District Manager, Ludhiana vide letter dated 2772000.
Identical charge-sheets have been served to all the petitioners.
The perusal of the charge-sheets would show that the charges against the petitioners pertain to the storage of paddy during the years 1979-80 and 1981-82 alleging that shortages have been found in the paddy the storage of which was done during the said period.
The charge-sheets were issued to the petitioners after a gap of more than 20 years and thus there is inordinate delay in issuing the charge-sheets to the petitioners.
The charges levelled against the petitioners were well within the knowledge of the respondents from the very beginning and if the charge-sheets would have been served upon the petitioners at the relevant point of time, then they would have been in a position to rebut the allegations levelled against them.
It is mentioned in the charge-sheets that some shortage was noticed in the paddy which was stored as far back as in the years 1979-80 and 1980-81.
It would be impossible for the petitioner to recall incident after a gap of 20 years.
If the inquiry is allowed after a lapse of more than 20 years, it will amount to denial of reasonable opportunity to the petitioners to defend themselves as one cannot reasonably expect an employee to have a computer like memory or to maintain a day-to-day diary in which every small matter is meticulously recorded in anticipation of further eventualities of which he cannot have a prevision.
Moreover, an employee cannot be expected to adduce evidence to establish his innocence after such an inordinate delay.
So much so, the petitioners would not be in position to identify the witnesses and would also be handicapped with regard to the documents.
Some persons in the similar circumstances filed different writ petitions which were allowed.
The allegations of the present charge-sheet also pertain to the years 1979-80 and 1981-82.
Nothing has been stated in the charge-sheet as to what type of investigation was carried out by the corporation during the period of 20 years nor there is any detail of the same in the charge-sheet.
In these circumstances, the issuance of charge-sheet after a gap of 20 years is violative of the principle of natural justice.
There was a motive in the issuance of charge-sheet as the petitioners were due for promotion.
The charge-sheets have been issued at the behest of some of the employees who have vested interest in depriving the promotions to the petitioners.
It was further alleged by the petitioners that no charge-sheet has been served upon the other officials who were also posted along with the petitioners at Raikot, district Ludhiana at the relevant time.
Still further, neither any technical staff, who purchased the paddy, nor the staff from the quality control who was required to look after the paddy, has been charge-sheeted.
Only the petitioners have been charge-sheeted by way of pick and choose policy.
Whole of the paddy as alleged in the charge-sheet was stored in the open in katcha plinth for more than two and half years.
Respondent No. 3 issued a DO letter dated 2/461998 to the respondent No. 1 stating therein that during 1979-80, the maximum moisture limit was 20% for the purchase of paddy in accordance with the Government of India specifications.
It was stated in the said letter that there was insufficient covered storage capacity in the corporation and the paddy was forced to be stored mostly in open in katcha plinths and many times without any dunnage and covering material.
It was further stated that if the paddy remained unmilled for a period of more than one year and if it was stored in the scientific covered godowns 2% further driage ought to be allowed for the second year, an additional 2% loss sought to be allowed for paddy stored in unscientific conditions.
The Zonal Manager recommended to the Managing Director that the losses in the paddy stored at F.S.D.
Raikot, district Ludhiana during the years 1979-80 and 1981-82 be written off on the basis of the report submitted by a Committee constituted for the said purpose.
The petitioners further alleged that they are being victimised with ulterior motive because at Raikot the losses were 1172% only whereas the losses upto 1749% reported at F.S.D.
Macchiwara, district Ludhiana were written off.
It was also alleged by the petitioners that a perusal of the charge sheet would show that there is a loss of about Rs. 34 lakhs.
The charge sheets have been served upon the petitioners under Regulation 60 which provide for minor punishment.
When such a heavy financial loss is involved, the recovery cannot be ordered without adopting a proper procedure as laid own in the Regulations and holding a regular inquiry against all the officials posted at Raikot at the relevant period.
Moreover, the recovery of Rs. 34 lakhs cannot be treated to be a minor punishment.
The charge sheets have been issued in order to avoid the holding of disciplinary proceedings because the department is not in a position to establish the alleged charges against the petitioners at such a belated stage and no punishment can be awarded on the basis of simple charge sheet without holding a proper inquiry.
With these broad allegations the petitioners of all the four writ petitions have made a prayer for the quashment of the charge sheets.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents let the petitioners may file the reply to the charge-sheet and they can raise all the matters before the disciplinary authority.
The entire charges against the petitioners relate to the shortage of food stock which is a matter of documentary evidence.
Mere lapse of time or pendency of enquiry does not inevitably result in lapse of proceedings.
The charge sheets cannot be quashed solely on the ground of time lapse between the incident and the initiation of the proceedings.
Since the case against the petitioners is based upon documentary evidence relating to the shortage of food stocks, therefore, no prejudice is likely to be caused to the petitioners.
The petitioners cannot be allowed to raise this point before this court as to what kind of investigations were carried out by the answering respondents in detecting the shortages.
No discrimination was done with the petitioners and no pick and choose policy was adopted.
In short, the defence of the respondents is that mere delay in issuing the charge-sheets is not fatal until and unless it is shown that some prejudice has been caused to the petitioners.
Moreover, the case of the respondents is based on documentary evidence and, therefore, the writ petitions should be dismissed calling upon the petitioners to raise all the pleas before the punishing authority.
6.
I have heard Shri R.K. Chopra, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Shri Hemant Kumar, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of all the four cases.
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has invited our attention to the judgment dated 1522000 passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 18063 of 1999, titled Balbir Singh v. Food Corporation of Indian and others and submitted that the petitioners have only been charge sheeted under Regulation 60 which dealt with minor penalty.
The petitioners have already filed the reply to the charge sheets.
Merely that the charge-sheet was issued after a lapse of some time, is no ground to quash the same when the petitioners have the opportunity to explain everything before the punishing authority.
It was also argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that invariably the High Court does not exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the quashment of the charge sheet unless it is shown that it has been issued without jurisdiction.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the case of the department pertains to the shortage of paddy.
The incidents of charge sheet pertain to the years 1979-80 and 1981-82.
The charge sheet has been issued after a lapse of more than 20 years.
Such a delay of 20 years itself is suggestive of the fact that a serious prejudice has been caused to the petitioners who would be handicapped in remembering under what circumstances the alleged shortage took place.
They will not be in a position to give proper defence before the authorities who have intentionally adopted the procedure under Regulation 60 when the alleged shortage is of about Rs. 34 lakhs which cannot be termed as small one.
The department issued the charge sheet after a lapse of 20 years and if the procedure is resorted to for initiating the regular inquiry, the department will not be able to prove the charges.
Therefore, in order to kill the petitioners conveniently they have adopted this procedure.
The department cannot be allowed to which-hunt under the garb of departmental inquiry after a lapse of 20 years when ultimately the minor penalty is to be imposed upon the petitioners.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, we are of the opinion that there is merit in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Every case to be decided on its own facts.
It is the admitted case that the respondent-Corporation is allegedly raising the shortage of paddy of the years 1979-80 and 1981-82.
After a lapse of more than 20 years calling upon the so-called delinquent officials to explain the shortage when they are not posted at that station would be an extreme act of hardship which will tantamount to denial of right of reasonable defence which is even recognised by our Constitution.
It is the case of the petitioners that the charges levelled against them were well within the knowledge of the respondents.
Had the charge sheets been issued at the relevant time, the petitioners would have been in a position to rebut the allegations.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in the issuance of charge sheets forthcoming from the written statement of the respondents.
In such a situation, there is no difficulty on our part to old that the petitioners have been deprived of their right of reasonable defence and that they would be deprived of their right/chance to produce evidence after a lapse of more than 20 years to show that no shortage took place.
The issuance of the charge sheet in the present case after a lapse of 20 years itself caused serious prejudice to the petitioners.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that the department cannot be allowed to take the benefit of their own lapse by issuing charge sheets after a lapse of 20 years.
Reliance can be placed upon the judgment of this Court dated 651994 passed in C.W.P.
No. 13008 of 1993, titled Dalip Singh v. Food Corporation of India, 1995(4) SCT 309 (P&H).
Similar view was taken on the judicial side in C.W.P.
No. 10438 of 1992, Bhagwan Singh Dhillon v. Food Corporation of India.
It may be mentioned that C.W.P.
No. 10746 of 2000 was earlier filed by Shri Sant Singh and five others.
Shri Sant Singh was petitioner No. 1 in the said writ petition, but vide order dated 1532001 he withdrew his prayer and qua him the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
Resultantly, all the four writ petitions are hereby allowed.
The various charge sheets which were issued by the respondents stand quashed and the respondents are hereby directed not to proceed with the departmental proceedings against the petitioners on the basis of the charge sheets.
There shall be no order as to costs in any of the writ petitions.
Petitions allowed.