Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The solitary Letters Patent Appeal and 8 writ petitions raise an identical issue - Is the selection for admission to the Veterinary Pharmacists Training Course for the Session 2001-2003 illegal ?
While deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 2571 of 2001, the learned Single Judge has held that the mode of awarding marks in the interview had caused serious prejudice to the petitioner.
Thus, he has been held entitled to be admitted.
The State of Punjab challenges the decision through the appeal.
The petitioners in the remaining cases complain that the process of selection was arbitrary.
Thus, they pray that the selection be quashed and directions for their admission to the course be issued.
2.
Learned Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as appearing on the record of LPA These may be briefly noticed.
3.
The Director, Animal Husbandry, Punjab, issued an advertisement in August, 2000.
Applications for admission to the 200 seats in the "Veterinary Pharmacists Training Course" to be conducted at the College of Veterinary Science, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, were invited.
Respondent-Vikas Kumar submitted his application.
An entrance test was held.
The result was published in the press.
Thereafter, the candidates were interviewed during the period from November 21 to December 13, 2000.
The final merit list was prepared.
Selected candidates were admitted to the course.
The respondent-writ petitioner had failed to make the grade.
4.
Aggrieved by his exclusion, Vikas Kumar approached this Court with the prayer that the selection be quashed and the authority be directed to admit him.
5.
The claim was resisted by the respondents in the written statement.
6.
The learned Single Judge after consideration of the matter and perusal of the original record found that a definite criteria for selection had been laid-down.
According to this criterion, the suitability of the candidates had to be assessed on the basis of the performance in the entrance test; the marks secured in the qualifying examination (viz. Matric or Ten plus two) and the interview.
It was specifically observed that the "interview is an important factor and if some marks have been reserved for the purpose of interview, this criteria is not bad."
It was further held that the allotment of 50% marks for the entrance test, 35% for the matriculation examination and 15% marks for interview was valid.
While considering the factual position, his Lordship found that the present respondent had secured 6313 marks on the basis of the entrance test and the score in the qualifying examination.
However, only 3 marks out of 15 had been given to him in the interview.
As against this, certain other candidates had been given much higher marks.
One of the candidate had been awarded as many as 12 marks.
On this basis, it was concluded that the award of marks in the interview was arbitrary.
It had caused prejudice to the candidate.
Resultantly, he was held entitled to admission.
Since the selected candidates had not been impleaded as parties and they had already studied for more than a year, their selection was not quashed.
The State was directed to create an extra seat so as to accommodate the present respondent.
7.
The appellants challenge the correctness of the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned Counsel for the appellants in the appeal and respondents in the bunch of writ petitions, submits that the view taken by the learned Single Judge cannot be sustained.
On the other hand, learned Counsel for the respondent in the appeal and the petitioners in the bunch of writ petitions, have contended that the selection was arbitrary.
The result was not published in the newspapers.
The marks have been arbitrarily awarded during the course of interview.
Thus, the entire selection is vitiated.
8.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the selection as made by the authority arbitrary and, thus, invalid ?
9.
It is the admitted position that an admission notice has been issued by the Director, Animal Husbandry, Punjab.
It was duly published in the press.
The criteria for selection was notified.
It was provided as under:-  "The selection of the candidates will be made on the basis of the performance in the Entrance Test (50%), eligibility conditions (35%) and Interview (15%)."
10.
Apparently, the candidates were made aware of the procedure and criterion for selection.
They had due notice.
None of them had challenged it at any stage prior to the selection.
Even at the hearing today, nothing has been pointed out to suggest that the candidate were not aware of the procedure that the authority was going to follow for the purpose of determining the inter se merit of the candidates.
Thus, it is evident that all the candidates had accepted the correctness of the criteria as laid-down by the authority.
In this situation, we are not surprised that even the learned Single Judge has found no fault with the method adapted by the authority.
11.
The contention raised on behalf of the unsuccessful candidates is that the marks were arbitrarily allotted at the time of interview.
Thus, the entire selection should be held to be vitiated.
Is it so ?
12.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned Counsel for the respondents, has pointed out that a five member committee had been constituted for the purpose of conducting the interviews.
The constitution of the Committee was as under :  (1).
Mr. Ashok Kumar Goel, IAS Special Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Dairy Development Chairman (2).
Dr. GS Chahal, Director, Animal Husbandry Department, Punjab  Member-Secretary (3).
Dr. RP Sehgal, Dean, College of Veterinary Science, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Member (4).
Dr. Sawinder Singh, Joint Director, Animal Husbandry, Animal Health Institute, Jalandhar Member (5).
Dr. (Maj.) Bhupinder Singh, Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry, Jalandhar Member.
13.
The factual position regarding the constitution of the Interview Committee has been given in the affidavit dated January 25, 2002 of Dr. GS Chahal, Director, Animal Husbandry.
This affidavit has been filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 2992 of 2001.
This factual position has not been contested by any of the candidates.
14.
The examination of the constitution of the Selection Committee shows that senior-most persons from the Government and the department were the Members.
Still further, a person holding the senior position of Dean in the Punjab Agricultural University and another one from Animal Health Institute were also the Members.
Both of them were not directly connected with the department or the Government.
The constitution of the Selection Committee consisting of such senior persons by itself inspires confidence in the process of selection.
15.
It is also the admitted position that 50% marks had been allotted for the entrance test.
35% marks were to be awarded on the basis of the performance in the qualifying examination.
To illustrate, a candidate who had secured 567 marks out of 650 in the matriculation examination was given a credit of 3053 marks for the qualifying examination.
In addition to these two, 15% marks were allotted for the interviews.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the Members of the Interview Committee were even aware of the marks secured by each candidate in the entrance test and the qualifying examination.
In the absence of any concrete material to show that they were aware of the score of each candidate, prior to or at the time of the interview, it looks very difficult to imagine that the marks shall be awarded in such a manner that the candidate was able to succeed only on the basis of his score in the interview.
16.
Despite this factual position, it has been contended on behalf of the writ petitioners that there was a wide disparity in the marks.
It ranges from 1 to 12.
Thus, an adverse inference should be drawn.
We are unable to accept the contention.
Nothing has been pointed out in the petition to show that any of the Members of the Interview Committee was even remotely interested in any individual candidate.
No specific allegation has been made against any member of the Committee in respect of any candidate.
It has only been suggested at the time of hearing that there is a general "suspicion" with regard to the fairness of the interview.
In the circumstances of the present case, we feel unable to persuade ourselves to uphold the contention on the basis of a totally baseless and unfounded suspicion.
17.
It is undoubtedly correct that the selection process is generally under a cloud during these days.
However, without any concrete evidence, it is not possible for us to hold that every selection or interview, irrespective of the constitution of the body conducting the selection, shall be deemed to be tainted.
The onus of proving that the selection was unfair rests on the person who makes such an allegation.
Normally it is very easy to make an allegation and very difficult to disprove it.
However, the Courts cannot act on vague averments and baseless suspicion.
In the present case, there is a total absence of evidence which may even remotely suggest that the selection was not fair.
In this situation, the contention cannot be accepted.
18.
It deserves mention that 50% marks had been allotted for the written test.
If any body had wanted to affect the selection, it would have been possible to manipulate the marks in the test.
Counsel for the writ petitioners have not even suggested that the marks allotted in the entrance test were not fair.
If the concerned authority had assessed the performance in the written test correctly and also constituted a high powered committee for the purpose of making the selection, we cannot hold that the process is vitiated merely because there is a disparity in the marks awarded to the candidates.
19.
The unsuccessful candidates can have a grievance as their hopes have been belied.
Having been unsuccessful in securing a seat for training, all sorts of thoughts are bound to cross their minds.
However, it is time that we learn to trust people in authority.
Otherwise, suspicion can only lead to frustration.
20.
On an examination of the matter, we are satisfied that there was nothing in the process of selection which may even cast a doubt about its fairness or objectivity.
21.
Counsel for the writ petitioners have contended that the process of selection is vitiated as the result was not published in the press.
In particular, it was emphasised that the Director had published a notice in the press for inviting applications.
The result of the written test was also published in a paper.
However, the final result of selection was not notified in the press.
On this basis, it was contended that the selection is vitiated.
22.
It is true that the admission notice was published.
It is also correct that the result of entrance test was notified.
The obvious purpose was to enable the candidates to submit their applications.
Still further, the candidates were called for interview on the basis of the result of the entrance test.
Thus, they were made aware of the factum of passing or failing in the written test.
So far as the final result of the selected candidates is concerned, it was put up on the notice board.
The successful candidates were also informed individually.
In our view nothing more was required.
Placing of the list of selected candidates on the notice board and issue of letters to the individual candidates who had been granted admission was, in the circumstances of these cases, adequate.
23.
On behalf of the writ petitioners, reference has been made to two decisions of this Court to contend that the publication of the final result is mandatory.
First of these decisions is in Pinki v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, 1995(1) SCT 313 (P&H) (DB) : 1995(2) RSJ 284.
This was a case relating to the admission to the Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery course.
The candidates who were successful in the entrance test had to apply for admission to the college.
The application had to be submitted by a specified date.
In this situation, it was observed that the result should be properly published so that postal delays do not result in denial of opportunity to the successful candidates.
In the present case, it has not been shown that any of the qualified candidates was unable to appear in the interview by the mere non-publication of the result in the paper.
All the candidates had due notice of the interview.
24.
The counsel have also referred to the decision in Kuldeep Singh Rawat v. Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana and others, 1997(1) All Instant Judgments 373.
Particular emphasis has been laid on the observations in paragraph 9.
We have perused the decision.
In the circumstances of the case, a direction was given by the Bench of the Board "to publish the list of candidates, selected as well as unselected, alongwith the marks secured by each one of them."
We cannot read the decision to mean that every authority has to notify the result of selection in the press.
So long as the candidates are made aware of the result, the Court shall not interfere unless prejudice is shown.
25.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioners that by an interim order passed on January 9, 2001 in C.W.P.
No. 2992 of 2001 the department was called upon to give the rationale for the interview.
26.
Dr. DV Sharma states that the rationale has been disclosed in the affidavit filed by the Director.
This affidavit is on the record in Civil Writ Petition No. 2992 of 2001.
In this affidavit, it has been inter alia averred that 15% marks were kept for personal interview to "determine the candidate's capacity to work in rural areas, the aptitude to deal with rural masses who are the main livestock owner, his alertness, intelligency."
This in our view is a good rationale.
In addition, it may be mentioned that if any of the candidates was aggrieved by the allotment of 15% marks for the interview, he had the opportunity to challenge it before the process of selection had commenced.
In these cases, we find that each of the candidates had participated in the process of selection without raising his little finger.
Having taken the chance and failed to secure a position in the merit list, the candidates are now trying to stretch things and find faults.
In our view they cannot be permitted to do so at this belated stage.
In fact, it appears that they were sitting on the fence.
They took their chance.
Having failed, they are now trying to find holes in the process of selection.
Their conduct estops them from doing so.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we are unable to persuade ourselves to uphold the view taken by the learned Single Judge or to agree with the contentions raised on behalf of the writ petitioners.
Resultantly, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
The writ petitions are dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of these cases, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.