Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - In this petition filed under article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has given a challenge to the order passed by the Appellate Authority-cum-Labour Commissioner, Punjab, dated October 17, 1983.
2.
Written statement was filed in the year 1983 and today, the case has been listed for final hearing.
3.
No body appears on behalf of the petitioner and from the order sheet of the file, it is clear that despite of number of dates, none appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
In these circumstances, I proceed to hear the case on merits as the learned counsel for the respondents is ready to argue the matter.
4.
By the impugned order, the Appellate Authority affirmed the order of the lower authority vide which the petitioner was directed to get it registered under the Factories Act, 1948 and deposit the required fee in the Government treasury.
The appeal against the said order was dismissed.
Relevant part of the order reads as under :-  "I have heard the appellant, his counsel Mr. M L Saini and Sh. Darshan Singh, Labour Inspector on behalf of the department.
The learned counsel for the appellant urged that the hand printing process is not carried on with the aid of power and that power is used to pump water which has nothing to do with the manufacturing process.
As such, it was argued that the appellant establishment having less than 20 workers is not liable to be registered under the Factories Act.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel drew my attention to the judgment of Madras High Court published in I-LLJ-686 in V Mohammed Haneef and Co v. Employees State Insurance Corporation Madras and others, wherein tanneries were held not to be factories since the manufacturing process was not carried on with the aid of power.
I am afraid this judgment is not of much help to the appellant.
The appellant is engaged in dyeing and printing of clothes.
Cloth is always washed before it is dyed and printed.
Water is used in washing process which is an integral part of dyeing and printing process.
It does not make any difference that the electric connection is not in the name of their sister concern which is jointly using water with the appellant.
The fact remains that 5 horse power motor was found functioning in the factory premises when it was inspected.
The number of workers exceeded 10.
The appellant establishment is thus covered by the definition of factory.
Notice for registration of factory and depositing the required fee has been rightly issued to the appellant establishment.
If they have in the meantime managed to get themselves registered under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, this does not entitle them to exemption from registration under the Factory Act.
I thus find that the present appeal is without any substance and the same is hereby dismissed".
5.
In the ground of the writ petition, the petitioner has mainly raised two issues; one that the petitioner is not an establishment covered by the definition of factory, nor is carrying on manufacturing process as defined under Section 2(k) of the Act; secondly, thee petitioner is a small establishment working in cottage industry and was not using any power for the purposes of hand printing.
As far as the second contention is concerned, it is based upon factual assessment of the averments made by the party.
It has specifically been noticed in the order of the impugned authority that 5 horse power motor was found functioning in the factory premises of the petitioner.
The number of workers exceeded 10.
These are matters of evidence which are well decided by the authorities after inspecting the premises in question.
This Court normally in exercise of its writ jurisdiction under Article 226, Constitution of India 1950 would not interfere in the findings arrived at by the competent authority.
Once it is found as a matter of fact that the factory having more than 10 workers and was using power of more than 5 horse power, it would be deemed to be a factory within the meaning as defined under Section 2 (a) of the Factories Act, 1948.
6.
For the reasons aforestated, I find no merit in this petition.
The same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.