KS Kumaran, J (Oral) - Reply of respondent No. 2 filed in court is taken on record.
Heard counsel.
2.
The petitioner-Management has approached this court for quashing the order, Annexure P-4 dated 20122000 directing respondent No. 3 to file the necessary affidavit to the management as contemplated under Rule 14 of The Punjab Privately-Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
It has also been directed in Annexure P-4 that the management should pay the subsistence allowance within one month from the date of the receipt of the affidavit.
Rule 14 of the above-said Rules reads as follows :-  "14.
Subsistence allowance.
- An employee under suspension shall be entitled to an amount of subsistence allowance equivalent to fifty per cent of his basic pay and the allowances admissible thereon from the Managing Committee : Provided that the employee under suspension shall not have his headquarters without the prior approval of his appointing authority and shall submit every month a certificate to the effect that :- (a) he is not employed anywhere gainfully in any capacity; (b) he is not carrying on any business; and (c) he has not left his headquarters without the prior approval of his appointing authority.
(2) If the employee is kept under suspension beyond the period of six months under Section 5 of the Act, the subsistence allowance shall be raised to seventy-five per cent of the basic pay and the allowance admissible thereon : Provided that the delay is not due to non-cooperation or negligence of the employee concerned."
So, it is evident from Rule 14, reproduced above that an employee under suspension shall be entitled to subsistence allowance provided he submits every month a certificate to the effect that he is not employed and he is not carrying on any business, and that he has not left the headquarters without prior approval of the opposite party.
The fact that respondent No. 3 has not been paid the subsistence allowance is not disputed before us.
The only point raised on behalf of the petitioner is that respondent No. 3 has not filed the affidavit as contemplated under Rule 14 of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1981 Rules') and respondent No. 3 has retired in the year 1996 and, therefore, he now cannot give such certificate as contemplated under Rule 14.
3.
The solitary question for consideration is whether the stipulation in the proviso to rule 14(1) of the 1981 Rules requiring an employee to submit a certificate "every month" is mandatory.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that a plain reading of the proviso to rule 14(1) of the 1981 Rules is sufficient to show that the aforesaid stipulation is mandatory, whereas respondent No. 3 contends that the same is merely directory.
4.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that subsistence allowance is payable at the end of every month.
Consequently, requiring an employee to furnish a certificate at the end of every month (expressing that he had not been gainfully employed, that he had not been carrying on any business activity and he had not left the headquarter) before he stakes his claim for subsistence allowance (at the end of the month) is most justified.
The intention of the rule making authority is only to ensure that the employee has not violated the terms of the order of suspension before releasing any payment to him.
Viewed in the aforesaid prospective, it is evident that the requirement to furnish the certificate envisaged in the proviso to rule 8(1) (14(i)) of the 1981 Rules is a condition which must be fulfilled as and when the employee claims his subsistence allowance.
If for some reason, justified or otherwise, an employee does not furnish the requirement certificate at the end of the first month but submits it at the end of the second month, should he be paid subsistence allowance for one month or for two months.
It would not have been the intention of the rule making authority that an employee under suspension should not be paid his subsistence allowance at all for the month at the end of which he did not furnish such a certificate.
Consequently, in our view, the words "every month" used in the proviso to rule 8(1) (?
14(i)) cannot be held to be mandatory.
The aforesaid words have been used in the proviso to rule 8(1) (?
14(i)) of the 1981 Rules only on account of the fact that the subsistence allowance becomes payable at the end of every month.
5.
In view of the conclusion drawn above, it is evident that respondent No. 3 must file an affidavit in terms of the proviso to Rule 8(1) (?14(i)) of 1981 Rules before he can claim subsistence allowance.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn our attention to the affidavit filed by respondent No. 3 dated 2332001 in compliance of the direction of this Court dated 832001.
A perusal of the affidavit dated 2332001 shows that the affidavit does not conform to the perception of the proviso to rule 8(1) (?14(i)) of the 1981 Rules.
6.
Finding himself in the aforesaid predicament, learned Counsel for respondent No. 3 prays that he be now permitted to file an affidavit in terms of the proviso to rule 14(1) of the 1981 Rules.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel that the said affidavit would be filed within 7 days.
In view of the conclusion drawn above, we find no infirmity in the request made by learned Counsel for respondent No. 3.
Accordingly, respondent No. 3, if he be so advised, may file an affidavit in terms of the proviso to rule 8(1) (?214(i)) of the 1981 Rules.
In case an affidavit conforming to the requirement of the rule is filed by respondent No. 3, the petitioner shall release the subsistence allowance to respondent No. 3 within a period of one month thereafter.
It is clarified that the subsistence allowance shall be payable from the date of suspension of respondent No. 3 till the date on which he attained the age of retirement.
7.
If any part of the affidavit filed by respondent No. 3 is found to be false or incorrect, it would be open to the petitioner to take action in accordance with law.
If any amount is recoverable by the petitioner under the grant-in- aid rules from the Government, it will be open to the petitioner to claim such amount from the Government after the same has been paid to respondent No. 3 by the petitioner.
Disposed of accordingly.
Ordered accordingly.