Amitava Lala, J - By making this writ petition, the writ petitioner wanted for cancellation of the order of the District Inspector of Schools (SE) Malda being Annexures `D' and `F' to the petition and further commending him to approve for the post of Assistant Teachers in Science and Mathematics in Akandaberia SC High School and other necessary orders from the Annexure `D' to the writ petition.
It appears that for the following grounds the panel was not approved :  "(1) It appears that the interview of candidates was scheduled to be held on 771999.
The sponsored candidates were intimated through registered post on 1821999.
Clear 20 days margin is not maintained in the present case.
This is a clear violation of P(q) of the recruitment rules 2066-GA dated 27101995.
(2) The panchayat nominee is seen absent on the date of interview.
The reason for absence is not stated.
No copy of the letter of the Sabhapati regarding placement of panchayat Nominee is not annexed with the panel.
(3) It appears that Employment Exchange sponsored 13 candidates for the post.
Only one candidate appeared before the Selection Committee for interview.
12 others candidates are seen absent.
The school authority has tactfully allowed their covetable person to appear before the Selection Committee with definite motive.
However, the xerox copy of the A.D. card is not annexed with the interview letter.
(4) The School Authority has not furnished the certificate of the President of the SC that the call letter of the candidate who appear at the oral interview and also in the class room demonstration are signed by him.
(5) The empanelled candidate passed MSc.
Examination 1992 appearing in 1994.
Copy of Certificate of MSc.
degree has not been furnished along with the panel.
(6) It appears that the 1st empanelled candidate appeared at the B.Ed.
Examination in 1992 from Calcutta University and in the same year 1991-92 ie 1992 he was regular student of BN Mandal University.
There is no clarification to this point."
2.
The petitioner is a successful candidate in the panel.
The learned Advocate appearing for the School Authority has filed an affidavit-in- opposition.
From the affidavit of School Authority, it appears that School Authority has clearly made 20 days gap which is provided as pointed out against point No. 1.
3.
So far as the point No. 2 is concerned the School Authority stated that in spite of the notice upon the panchayat samity, no nominee was placed in the interview.
As such, there is no fault in holding the interview.
The similar point has been decided by the judgment of the Division Bench reported in 1987(II) CLJ page 144, Samsul Huda v. State of West Bengal and others.
The Division Bench has held if the majority members of the Selection Committee attained the interview, the said interview is valid and legal.
4.
So far as the point No. 3 is concerned the School Authority contended before this Court that in spite of service of notice fixing the date of interview by registered post, nobody appeared except the petitioner.
5.
So far as the points Nos. 4 and 5 are concerned the requisite certificates in respect of the panel were submitted before the District Inspector of Schools.
Moreover, the candidate passing MSc.
from BN Mondal University cannot be regarded as disqualification.
Furthermore, the school contended that the writ petitioner appeared as non-collegiate standard in MSc.
in BN Mandal University.
It is further contended that observation of the District Inspector of Schools for having B.Ed.
Examination is incorrect since for the posts in question Science and Mathematics in School, the question of B.Ed.
certificate is not relevant to the selection process.
6.
So far as the point No. 4 is concerned in respect of the scheduled caste candidate cannot be applicable since it is a question of single post.
It was held by the Supreme Court, 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC) : 1998(4) Supreme 110, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association and others that in a single post cadre, reservation at any point of time on account of rotation of roster is bound to bring about a situation where such single post in the cadre will be kept reserved exclusively for the members of the backward classes and in total exclusion of the general members of the public and cent percent public reservation for the backward classes is not permissible within the constitutional framework until there is plurality of posts in a cadre, the question of reservation will not arise because any attempt of reservation whatever means and even with device of rotation of roster in a single post cadre is bound to create 100% reservation of such post whenever such reservation is to be implemented.
In such a situation the rejection or non-approval of the panel by the authority concerned is not acceptable by this Court.
No fruitful answer is given by the learned Advocate in respect so such submission as made by the writ petitioner as well as by the school authority.
7.
Under this circumstances, the impugned order under Annexures `D' and `F' stand set aside.
The authority concerned being the District Inspector of Schools (PE) Malda is directed to reassess the approval of the panel in the light of the judgment without a period of one month from the date of communication of the order without fail.
8.
Thus, the writ petition stands disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
9.
If the authority concerned found in the light of the judgment that there is no necessity of reconsideration at all or if considered, in the light of the judgment in favour of the petitioner then the approval will be communicated to the school authority immediately thereafter and school authority, in turn, will give an appointment to the petitioner one week thereafter.
Order accordingly.