Satya Brata Sinha, J - This writ petition is directed against a judgment and order dated 3061997 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal in case No. T.A.
No. 1672 of 1996, whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioner herein for grant of scale of pay admissible to the post of Field Investigator being Rs. 250-15-550/- in terms of the advertisement contained in Annexure `A' to the application has been rejected.
2.
The petitioner is a degree-holder in Economics.
An advertisement was issued in the year 1966 calling for applications for appointment in the post of Field Investigator, the qualifications wherefor were prescribed in the following terms :-  "A degree in Sociology or Anthropology or Economics or Statistics or Geography preferably with honours and/or having experience in Socio-economic Surveys."
Pursuant to the said advertisement the petitioner applied.
He appeared before the selection committee.
As it now transpires from the order passed by the learned Tribunal that he was not found fit for appointment in the post of the selection committee which recommended for his appointment at a lower scale of pay, namely, 200-10-400/- in place and stead of 250-15-550/-.
The order of appointment dated 7th December, 1966 reads thus :-  Shri Ranjit Kumar Ray son of Shri Kshitish Chandra Roy is hereby appointed to act temporarily until further order as Field Investigator under the Calcutta Metropolitan Planning Organisation on pay in the scale of Rs. 200-10-400/- (E.B.
after 10th Stage) plus usual allowances as admissible under the existing orders of the State Government with effect from the date on which he joins the post.
The appointment is made purely on temporary basis against a post retained in Government Order No T&CP/2084/IE-10 dated the 24th February, 1966 and is terminable with one month's notice on either side."
3.
The petitioner has made a representation for grant of the scale of pay as per advertisement, but the same had been rejected.
The petitioner prayed for supply of reasons in support of the said rejection in terms of his letter dated 21st August, 1991.
The petitioner also filed representations before the Chief Minister and other authorities.
As he did not get any reply to his representation, he filed a writ application before this Court.
By a judgment and order dated 28th July, 1992, Paritosh Kumar Mukherjee, J (as His Lordships then was) upon hearing the counsel for the parties directed :-  "Having considered the rival submissions made by both the parties it appears that the petitioner has genuine grievance for granting higher grade from Rs. 200/- Rs. 250/- Rs. 500/- and as no such fixation has been made, the petitioner is entitled to get the other scale of pay.
Since the representation has already been made before the Secretary, Development and Planning (T & CP) Department as appearing in Annexure G, I set aside the impugned communication dated November 20, 1991 issued by the Assistant Secretary and I direct the Secretary, Development and Planning (T & CP) Department to dispose of the representation of the writ petitioner as appearing in Annexure G at P. 37 by passing "a reasoned order."
The said Secretary is directed to see whether the petitioner was entitled to the initial grade Rs. 250/- to Rs. 550/- and no additional qualification or technical qualification has been prescribed for the post of Field Investigator and also consider the relevant fact that the petitioner having continued in service for 18 years is entitled to the benefit conferred by Rule 9 of the ROPA Rules as quoted aforesaid.
The Secretary is further directed to give higher scale of pay and also place the petitioner in the appropriate gradation list, in supersession of the provisional gradation list dated 30th November, 1981 appearing at page 35 of the writ petition.
Determination of grant of higher scale of pay should be considered and disposed of within three months from the date of communication of the xerox copy of the judgment on the usual undertaking.
The respondent-authority is directed to give reasons, if in case the said respondent is not inclined to place the representation of the writ petitioner."
4.
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said direction, the matter was considered afresh by the Secretary who passed a reasoned order rejecting the petitioner's claim.
Thereafter the aforementioned application was filed before the learned Tribunal.
5.
Before the learned Tribunal a contention was raised to the effect that the selection committee did not find the petitioner fit for appointment to the post of Field Investigator in the scale of pay as was advertised, but recommended his appointment to a lower scale of pay.
6.
Mr. Neogi, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has raised a short question in support of this application.
The learned Counsel states that keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had been granted a revised scale of pay with effect from 10th October, 1972, there is absolutely no reason as to why he would be deprived from the scale of pay as per advertisement.
The order dated 10th October, 1972 reads thus :-  "Shri Ranjit Kumar Roy, Field Investigator, Calcutta Metropolitan Planning Organisation, is hereby appointed temporarily until further orders as Field Investigator under the same Organisation, on pay in the sale of Rs. 400-15-490-20-750 (Efficiency Bar after 8th and 16th stages) plus dearness and other allowances as admissible under the existing orders of this Government with retrospective effect from the 3rd April, 1972."
7.
A bare perusal of the said order would show that thereby the petitioner was appointed afresh and had been granted revised scale of pay which was ordinarily admissible to the post of Field Investigator on the basis that in the meanwhile he had gained sufficient experience.
The learned Tribunal, in our opinion, has rightly analysed the cases of the parties and arrived at a finding that the petitioner had accepted the aforementioned scale of pay and thus cannot now be permitted to turn around and contend that he was entitled to higher scale of pay.
The learned Tribunal further arrived at a finding that so far as grant of scale of pay from 3rd April, 1972 is concerned the same was done by way of a promotion and thus benefit of Rule 5(2) and Rule 9 of the ROPA Rules was not applicable in this case.
Thus this is a case where the principle of estoppel shall apply as against the writ petitioner.
Mr. Neogi, learned Counsel, submitted that keeping in view the findings of this court in the earlier application as would appear from the judgment dated 28th July, 1992, the respondent cannot take any other stand.
We are afraid that keeping in view the ultimate direction issued by the learned Judge, it cannot be said that a final and binding direction had been issued and/or the grievance of the petitioner had been finally adjudicated upon so as to attract the principle of res judicata.
It is true that the learned Judge made certain observations and issued certain directions, but despite the same proceeded to hold that the determination of grant of higher scale of pay should be considered and disposed of within three months from the date of communication of the judgment and the respondents were further directed to give reasons if in case the said respondent is not inclined to place the representation of the petitioner (sic).
Such purported direction, in the peculiar facts situation must be considered to be an observation and not a direction which would be binding upon the respondent.
8.
If the principle of res judicata is not applicable in the instant case, there cannot be any doubt that the respondent-authority was free to pass a reasoned order.
Such an order having been passed and the same having been considered in great detail, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for interference with the order passed by the learned Tribunal.
The learned Tribunal, in our opinion, having regard to the materials brought on record, has rightly come to the conclusion that keeping in view the recommendation by the selection committee the petitioner having been offered the post of Field Investigator in lower scale of pay without any demur whatsoever, he could not be permitted to reagitate the said question at a much later stage only on the ground that he had given benefit of the revised scale of pay in terms of the ROPA Rules in the year 1972.
For the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this application, which is accordingly, dismissed without any order as to costs.
Application dismissed.