Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Mohinder Singh, the son of the petitioners was working as a chowkidar with the Punjab Mandi Board.
He unfortunately died on 3131995.
The petitioners claim various benefits as admissible under the Rules to the family members.
While the claim in respect of the gratuity, ex- gratia grant and General Provident Fund was accepted, the benefit of family pension was declined in view of the fact that parents of an unmarried person were not included in the definition of the family of a Civil servant.
The petitioners represented.
Having failed to persuade the authorities to grant them family pension, they have approached this Court through this writ petition.
They pray for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the family pension w.e.f 1.4.95.
They also claim interest.
2.
A written statement has been filed by respondent 3 only.
It has been pointed out that under rule 6.17(3) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II, the wife included "a judicially separated wife and husband".
The sons and unmarried daughters upto the age of 25 years are included in the definition of family.
The parents fall outside the provision, which provides for the grant of family pension.
It has been further averred that in view of the decision of the High Court in LPA 640/90, the Punjab Government had issued notification dated 16.7.1998, by which the parents were included in the definition of family.
The notification amending the definition was made effective from 1196 only.
Since the petitioners' son had died in March, 1995, they are not entitled to the benefit under the definition.
3.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
The question as to whether or not the parents of a deceased Government employee can be excluded from the definition of family was considered by a Bench of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Kharak Singh Kang, 1998(1) RSJ 412 : 1998(1) SCT 556 (P&H) (DB).
It was held that the rule which excluded the parents was unreasonable and, thus, unconstitutional.
The clear implication of this decision is that the parents cannot be denied the benefit of family pension on the death of the Government employee.
Since the Board is following these rules and the family pension is admissible to the members of the family of the deceased, the petitioners are entitled to the benefit.
The mere fact that the notification issued by the Government on 16.7.98 has been enforced w.e.f.
1196 cannot result in denial of benefit to the petitioners' claim which is due to them ignored.
5.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition and direct that the petitioners' claim for family pension shall be considered and decided within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Whatever is due shall be paid to the petitioners along with interest @ 12% pa w.e.f.
1.4.95 till the date of actual payment.
Under the circumstances, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.