RL Anand, J - Shri Nek Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the service element of the petitioner which is payable for life and continued to be paid if the disability subsequently falls below 20% as the service element is granted for life.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Army on 8.1.1947.
He became invalided due to paralysis on 2421949.
Disability pension was granted on 2521949 and it continued up on 3111962.
However, he was deprived of the service element illegally by the respondent authorities on the alleged plea that the petitioner has not completed the requisite service of 15 years.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who tried to justify their stand by stating that since the petitioner has not completed the service as per Regulation No. 183, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of service element.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The point for determination lies in short compass about the interpretation of Regulation No. 183 which lays down that the disability pension consists of two elements viz, service element and disability element which shall be assessed as under :-  (a) Whether the individual has rendered sufficient service to earn a service pension i.e. actual service is 15 years or more (20 years or more in the case of NCs (E).
(i) Equal to normal service pension relevant to the length of qualifying service actually rendered plus a weightage of 5 years as given in Regulation 136(a) or 146.
(b) Where the individual has not rendered sufficient service to qualify for a service pension.
(i) If the disability was sustained while on flying on parachute jumping duty in an aircraft or while being carried on duty in an aircraft under proper authority.
The minimum service pension appropriate to his rank (see regulation 180) and group if any.
(ii) In all other cases :- Equal to the service pension as determined per Regulation 136(a) or 146, but it shall in no case, be less than 2/3rd of the minimum service pension admissible to the rank pay Group.
It shall be further subject to a minimum of Rs. 375/- per month.
The reading of the above would show that the rule making authority in its wisdom has made a clear distinction between the service element and disability pension.
This depends upon the actual disability which is suffered by an army personnel.
Such disability can increase or decrease with the passage of time.
For the disability suffered by a soldier the rules have given him the concession to claim disability pension from the Department.
The rules making power has also recognised the service element depending upon the length of service of such individual person.
Again it has categorised where a soldier- army man has completed the requisite qualifying service in order to get service pension or where he has not put in requisite service.
Service element has been further categorised in the two parts as stated above.
Where an individual has rendered sufficient service to earn a service pension.
One such norm has been laid down in the rule.
Where this individual has not rendered the sufficient service to qualify for a service pension is the other yardstick.
Rule 183 sub-Rule (b)(ii) applies to all residue employees and norms have been laid down in this Rule, as mentioned above, for such personnel.
As per this rule, such personnel would be entitled to equal to the service pension as determined per Regulation 136(a) or 146, but it shall in no case, be less than 2/3rd of the minimum service pension admissible to the rank/pay group.
It shall be further subject to a minimum of Rs. 375/- per month.
Meaning thereby, if an army man has put in one day service and becomes disabled, he shall be entitled to service element apart from the disability pension and it is not open to the Government to say that such individual has not completed the requisite years of service.
This interpretation was recognised by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12311 of 1996, Amarjit Singh v. Union of India wherein, the Hon'ble Division Bench granted the benefit of service element to that petitioner irrespective of the fact that he had not completed 15 years of service.
The order dated 2721997, passed by the Division Bench was challenged by the Union of India before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 197-CC 7400 and the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to dismiss the SLP.
6.
No law to the contrary has been cited by the counsel for the respondents.
7.
In these circumstances, the present writ petition is hereby allowed and directions are given to the respondents to release the service element of the petitioner which shall be payable to him for life according to Rules and Regulations as revised from time to time.
If the benefit of service element is not released within six months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order, the petitioner shall be entitled to the interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
Petition allowed.