VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Harit Sharma has filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution seeking quashing of the grading given to the petitioner by respondent No. 2 (The Director, Directorate of Sports, Chandigarh Administration) in the Sports Gradation Certificate and also quashing the admission of respondent No. 5 Jaspreet Singh to B.Com.
Part I in respondent No. 4 (The Goswami Ganesh Dutta Sanatan Dharma (Coeducational College, Chandigarh).
He also seeks a direction to respondent No. 2 for grant of proper Gradation Certificate and that respondent No. 1 should admit the petitioner in B. Com.
Part I against Sports quota seat.
2.
It has been asserted that petitioner passed All India Secondary School Examination from the St. John High School, Chandigarh.
Thereafter he passed his 10+2 examination in 1999 and obtained 772% marks from the Central Board of Secondary Education as a student of the Pandit Mohan Lal S.D.
Public School, Chandigarh.
Petitioner contends that he was the Captain of the Cricket team of Pandit Mohal Lal SD Public School and played Inter School Tournaments.
He was selected in the District Cricket Team of Chandigarh and played Inter District Tournament.
The petitioner was selected in the Cricket Team of Union Territory of Chandigarh (Under 19) and represented the Union Territory of Chandigarh in All India (CK Nayudu) Schools Cricket Championship (Under 19).
The Union Territory, Chandigarh got second position though the Championship was won by Delhi.
As per the petitioner All India (CK Nayudu) Schools Cricket Championship is organised by the School Games Federation of India which is reorganised by the Ministry of Sports.
The Federation is also a member of International Schools Sports Federation.
The petitioner through his father submitted an affidavit to the Directorate of Sports for grant of Sports Gradation Certificate.
The petitioner was given B-10 grade.
According to the petitioner the gradation is wholly unjustified.
He is an outstanding sportsman and 5% marks have been deducted because he has taken Physical Education as one of the subjects in 10+2 examination.
The petitioner contends that 5% marks could not be deducted and gradation is incorrect.
Hence, the present petition.
3.
Respondents I and 2 filed their joint reply.
It was pointed that petitioner had not participated in State Level Tournaments during the year 1998-99.
As per the Sports Gradation Policy of Chandigarh Administration, the Sports Gradation Certificate was awarded.
The petitioner had correctly been awarded the certificate because he had participated in the National School Games without participation in the State Level Tournament.
Thus, Grade D-3 had been awarded to him.
4.
Respondent No. 4 filed a separate reply.
As per respondent No. 4, the petitioner had only Economics and Business Studies and Accounting.
He was not having Mathematics.
Thus, 5% marks were deducted as per the University Regulations.
It was further asserted that petitioner does not fall in the category of 3.1(a).
The last student admitted in B.Com.
Part I had 78% marks and 53 students who have more marks than the petitioner are in the waiting list.
5.
Respondent No. 5 also filed the separate reply controverting the assertions of the petitioner.
6.
The short question that comes up firstly for consideration is as to whether the gradation given to the petitioner had been correctly assigned or not ?
The gradation certificates are issued for the Sports students having outstanding career in the sports in the following manner :  Grade-A - Sportsman/Woman of International standing i.e. those who have represented India in the following International tournaments/Meets/ Competitions/Championships etc. :  (i) Olympic Games.
(ii) Commonwealth Games.
(iii) Asian Games.
(iv) Test Matches/One Day matches in Cricket.
(v) Davis Cup in Tennis.
(vi) World Cup Tournaments in respective games.
Grade-B - Sportsmen/women who have participated or took first three positions in the following tournaments/meets/competitions/championships etc. as the case may be :  (i) World University Games.
(ii) Asia Federation Cup/Asian Tournaments.
(iii) First three positions in recognised National Championship inter-State Championship organised by the recognised National Federation/IOA.
(iv) Recognised International Meets/Championships for Juniors.
(v) Asian School Games.
(vi) A sports person representing All India combined University teams in the National Championships.
(vii) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in All India Inter-varsity tournaments.
(viii) First three positions in the National Championship for women/National Sports Festival for women, organised by Sports Authority of India.
(ix) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the National Championship for juniors.
(x) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the National School Games organised by the National School Games Federation.
(xi) KVS Team participation in National School Games.
Grade-C - (i) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Championship/Inter-District Championship in the Senior Section and by virtue of this representing in the All India National Championships.
(ii) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the University/Inter-College tournament and by virtue of this representing in the All India Inter-University Tournaments.
(iii) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Championship/Inter-District Championship in Junior Section and by virtue of this representing in the National School Games.
(iv) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the State School Games and by virtue of this representing in the National School Games.
(v) A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the KVS regional tournaments and by virtue of his representing in the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan Games.
(vi) A sports woman getting any of the first three positions in the State/ U.T.
Women Festival and by virtue of his representing in the National Women Festival.
Grade-D - (i) Participation in the Sr. National Championships.
(ii) Participation in the recognised Jr. National Championship.
(iii) Participation in the National School Games.
(iv) Participation in the National Women Festival.
The petitioner was stated to have participated in National School Games without participating in State Level tournaments and was thus given the necessary grade.
This question came up for consideration before this Court in the case of Amandeep Singh v. Punjab, University Chandigarh and others, 1995(4) S.C.T.
319, Civil Writ Petition No. 10231 of 1994, which was decided on 3131995.
This Court held that the grading of the petitioner in that case was not to be disturbed because he has not been discriminated.
It was further noted that a person who may be a member of the team may not have physically participated in the sports/game and yet may have participated as a member of the team.
Therefore, fresh evaluation if done cannot be held to be arbitrary.
Keeping in view the said fact and that there is no rejoinder, there is no ground to set aside the gradation that has been awarded to the petitioner.
7.
In that event learned counsel for the petitioner urged that as per the instructions there were minimum qualifying marks with respect to certain students, having taken 10+2 examination but 5% marks could not be deducted.
At this stage, this Court is not going into this controversy, reason being that the petitioner has not cared to include the persons whose admissions may have to be cancelled on that score.
Therefore, no opinion is being expressed.
8.
For these reasons, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.