VS Aggarwal, J - Kurukshetra University, Kurkushetra (respondent No. 1) had issued the Schedule of admission and information Brochure for admission to 4/5 years BE Engineering/Architecture/Agriculture courses for the year 1999- 2000.
The last date for receipt of the complete application form for Common Engineering Entrance Test (CEET) was 1641999.
There was a specific mention that the applications received late will not be considered.
It has also been mentioned that no column of the application form shall be left blank.
The petitioner claims that he was fully qualified and eligible.
He submitted the application form complete in all respects for admission in BE Course.
The petitioner belonged to Backward Class (A) category and submitted his application against seat reserved for Backward Class (A) category.
The petitioner was allotted the Roll No. and he appeared in the CEET.
On the basis of the written test, the petitioner secured rank No. 7727 and merit No. 13929.
After the result of the examination was declared, the respondents had asked the candidates to submit all the documents with the application form for admission.
The same had to be filed by 25.6.1999.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that this application form was rejected and was told that caste certificate had not been filed which is missing in the application form.
The petitioner submits that he has submitted the application form complete in all respects and the action of the respondents is arbitrary and discriminatory.
He accordingly prays for quashing of the action of the respondents and for a direction to the respondents that the petitioner should be admitted as per his merit.
3.
In the reply filed, the writ petition has been contested.
It has been pleaded that the candidates who had appeared in the entrance test i.e. CEET 1999, after the declaration of the result, were required to submit the application form for admission.
The last date initially was 30.6.1999 which was extended to 771999.
Alongwith the application form the candidates were required to enclose the attested copies of documents.
The candidates were required to attach certified copy of the relevant certificate in the prescribed proforma.
It has been mentioned in the Admission Brochure that no certificate would be entertained after the last date prescribed.
When the application forms were received, these were scrutinized by the members of the Admission Committee.
It was found that backward class certificate had not been attached by the petitioner and, therefore, he could not be admitted.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner insisted that the required certificate had since been appended with the application form, while it is being denied by the respondents.
To set this controversy at rest, original application form of the petitioner was called.
In item No. 17, the petitioner with respect to submission of backward class reserved category certificate has mentioned that he had filed the necessary certificate, but the members of the Admission Committee had recorded that BC certificate is not attached.
The relevant rule from the Admission Brochure in this regard reads as under :-  "i) Application on the prescribed form, in candidate's own handwriting, accompanying the following enclosures and complete in all respects, should reach the Chairman, Admission Committee, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra - 136 119 on or before 30699 (Wednesday) 500 pm Attested copy of the each of the following documents (as applicable) should be enclosed with the Application Form : 1.
CEET Result Card 2.
CEET Admit Card 3.
10+2 Detailed Marks Card (Attested by Head of the Institution last attended) 4.
Character Certificate from the Institution.
(i) From where passed the 10+2 examination indicating the Roll No. in 10+2 examination and the name of the father.
(ii) Last attended if not covered under (i) above.
5.
Matriculation/ High School Certificate indicating date of birth.
6.
Medical certificate of fitness (Annexure-I) 7.
A bank draft for Rs. 250/- in favour of the Principal, REC, Kurukshetra payable at SBI (Code No. 6260) REC, Kurukshetra.
8.
Address slip and self-addressed & stamped acknowledgement Card.
9 to 18 xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Note :- No certificate/document affecting the category i.e. from General to reserved, 20% or 80% State quota etc; will be entertained after the last date prescribed for the receipt of application.
Candidates must, therefore, ensure that they have enclosed the required attested copies of the certificates in respect of their claim relating to reservation (SC/ST/BC/SP/AFP/PH/CFF), 80% or 20% category, employment."
5.
It is on the strength of the same that the respondents contended that as backward class certificate has not been appended with the application form by the petitioner, the application form was incomplete.
6.
Full Bench of this Court in the case of Rahul Parbahkar v. Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar and others, 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 475 : 1997(3) SCT 526 (P&H) (FB), has considered the controversy with respect to late submission of the application form.
It was held that when the date or time has been stipulated in the advertisement and also in the Information Brochure, it must be strictly adhered to.
It is not to be altered by this Court even in exercise of the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In the cited case, the petitioner had sent his application for taking CEET 1997 examination.
The application was received by the Co-ordinator late.
The petitioner had challenged the action alleging that the delay was caused by the postal authorities and he should not be denied the admission.
It was held that the Brochure which stipulated that no application would be entertained after a particular time and date must be strictly adhered to.
Thus, the question of making leniency in the case of the petitioner does not arise.
7.
As regards the controversy as to if certain certificate had been appended or not, it is a disputed fact.
At this stage, this Court is not competent to go into the said controversy.
The petitioner, if so advised, may file a civil suit to get the matter adjudicated.
But, as at present, when there are no mala fides on the part of the Admission Committee when they found a particular certificate not to be appended, the petitioner cannot make a grievance and insist that the must be given admission.
8.
For these reason, the writ petition must fail and consequently dismissed.
Petition dismissed.