Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, an Executive Engineer, challenges the selection and appointment of Prof. Malwinder Singh as an Estate Officer of the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
He alleges that the third respondent did not fulfil the prescribed qualification of "twelve years experience of construction and maintenance of buildings, utility services etc in a University/Government/Semi-Government Organisation...." He prays that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 as an Estate Officer which was approved by the Board of Management on May 24, 1999, be quashed.
2.
The third respondent has not filed any written statement.
However, the reply has been filed by the Vice Chancellor of the University on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the post of an Estate Officer was advertised on November 22, 1998.
In response to this advertisement, 11 applications were received.
On scrutiny, five candidates including the petitioner "were considered suitable by the Chairman of the Selection Committee and were called for interview on 20.4.1999."
The selection committee "after examining the academic qualifications, experience etc. of all the candidates and interviewing them, found respondent No. 3 as the meritorious candidate and recommended his name for appointment to the post of an Estate Officer."
The recommendation was placed before the Board of Management.
It was approved.
Accordingly, the appointment letter was issued to respondent No. 3 on 24599."
It is maintained that the third respondent fulfilled the prescribed qualifications and that he had the requisite experience.
The petitioner filed a replication to controvert the averments in the written statement.
It was asserted that respondent No. 3 did not have the requisite experience.
3.
Mr. Sumeet Mahajan, counsel for the petitioner contended that respondent No. 3 did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
He, was, thus, ineligible for appointment.
On the other hand, Mr. H S Riar, counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 maintained that the third respondent was rightly selected and appointed.
Respondent No. 3 had not put in appearance despite service.
4.
Admittedly, respondent No. 3 has worked as an Assistant Professor, an Associate Professor and a Professor in the Department of Civil Engineering of the University.
Immediately prior to his appointment as an Estate Officer, he was working as a Professor at the Respondent-University.
According to the information supplied by Mr. Riar, the pay scale of the post of Professor was Rs. 4500-7300.
The post also carried a special pay of Rs. 500/-.
As against this, the post of an Estate Officer was in the pay scale of Rs. 4500-6700 with a special pay of Rs. 300/-.
These pay scales were undoubtedly revised but the post of Professor continues to be in the higher scale.
It is not disputed that the third respondent was already working in the Professor's pay scale when he opted for the post of an Estate Officer which was in the lower pay scale.
Whey ?
Respondent No. 3 has chosen to remain away and, thus, avoided giving an answer.
Mr. Riar could only say that the third respondent had a right to make his own choice.
The fact remains that the third respondent has opted for a post carrying a lower pay scale than the one on which he was already working.
5.
The Act enlists the officers of the University.
Section 19 deals with the post of an Estate Officer and provides as under :-  "The Estate Officer - The Estate Officer of a corresponding University, who shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board, shall be responsible for the custody, maintenance and management of all the buildings, lawns, gardens and other properties of the University."
A perusal of the above provision would show that the Estate Officer is the custodian of the buildings, lawns, gardens and other properties of the University.
He is responsible for their maintenance and management.
Are these functions better than those of a Senior Member of the Faculty ?
Do these functions make the chair of the Estate Officer more cushy than the Professor's seat of scholarship ?
Respondent No. 3 may be the best person to take his own decision but his choice and silence leave a few questions unanswered.
6.
On merits, the basic issue is - Does the third respondent fulfil the prescribed qualifications ?
To answer this question, it is necessary to refer to the advertisement.
It lays down the following qualifications :-  "Essential : (i) B.E./B.
Tech.
in Civil Engg.
with at least second division.
(ii) Twelve years experience of construction and maintenance of buildings, utility services etc. in a University/Govt/Semi-Govt. Organisation out of which at least five years experience must be at the level of pay scale of Rs. 3700-5300 (unrevised) or above.
(iii) Matric level certificate of Punjabi language.
(If not, the candidate is required to pass the same within one year of appointment).
Desirable : Good personality and administrative ability and capacity to maintain estate, sanitation, security and maintenance of buildings."
Section 19 of the Act provides that the Estate Officer shall be responsible for the maintenance and management of the buildings, lawns and gardens.
Keeping in view the duties, the prescribed qualifications have a reasonable nexus with the job requirement.
The candidate must have experience of construction and maintenance of buildings/utility services etc.
This experience should be in a University, Government or a Semi-Government Organisation.
7.
According to the University, the third respondent fulfilled the requirements.
The details have been given in the document at Annexure R-1 which reads as under :-  "Field experience of Respondent No. 3 (Dr. Malwinder Singh) 1.
Worked as Chief of Survey Party-cum-Construction Supervisor for PETER KEWIT Cconstruction Co, USA - Job involved providing utility services i.e laying W/S and Waste Water pipes and construction of grain storage silos for a major US Federal Govt. project (period 8 months - from June-September, 1961 and June-September, 1962).
2.
Worked as Assistant Sanitary Engineer with the Chief Engineer of Rapid City South Dakota, USA.
Job involved the construction of a new Sewage Treatment Plant for the Rapid City, SD, USA (period 9 months : Jan-September, 1963).
3.
Served as Consulting Engineer with Commonwealth Associates Consulting Firm of Michigan, USA.
Job involved construction of High -rise buildings of Steel & Reinforced concrete and 500 KVA Transmission Steel Tower (period 2 years 5 months i.e from June, 1964 to October, 1966).
4.
Worked as Engineer-in-Charge at field site on 'Research-cum-Demonstration Project on Sprinkler Irrigation' village Bubania, Distt.
Muktsar.
Project involved the construction of Pumping Station, Water Storage Reservoir, Cast iron pipe installation, underground reinforced concrete pipe installation and sprinkler sets etc. (period 2 years : July 1970 to June 1972).
5.
Chairman of the Expert Committee responsible for working out the detailed specification and negotiation with Water Proofing Specialist firms and final inspection of construction for carrying out the special repairs of roof of College of Agricultural Engineering building, PAU with roof area of more than a lakh sq.
feet (period 2 years : August, 1989 to July 1991).
6.
Co-Investigator of the team responsible for the planning, design, construction, supervision and evaluation of `Biogas plants on farmers' fields with deep-poultry-litter as feedback for biogas production.
Project involved in the construction of large number of biogas plants on farmers' fields (period 2 years : March, 1989 to February, 1991).
7.
Principal Investigator of a Consultancy Project titled `Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis of Paddy Husk Ash available in Punjab'.
(period 2 years : March 1989 to March 1991).
8.
Principal Investigation of the consultancy project on `Study of Pollution parameters & Design/Construction of a suitable In-House-Pre-Treatment facility' for Markfed Canneries, Jalandhar (period 1 years 5 months : August 1986 to December 1987).
9.
Member of the field study team responsible for the Design and Construction of inexpensive biogas plants on farmers' fields in the districts of Ludhiana, Faridkot, Sangrur, Amritsar, Patiala, Kapurthala and Jalandhar (period 2 years : April 1984 to March 1986).
10.
Served as Consulting Engineer responsible for Upgrading of Effluent Treatment Plant of KNIT Ltd, Sultanpur Road, Kapurthala.
Job involved the collection and testing of samples of industrial affluent and construction of suitable treatment plants (period 1 year : August 1990 to July 1991).
11.
Responsible for the planning, design and construction of Institutional Biogas Plants of 5000 cubic feet capacity for supplying biogas to University Hostels.
funds provided by MNES and Punjab Government (period 2 years : April 1992 to March 1994).
12.
Chairman of the Expert Committee responsible for Investigation and major repairs to eliminate the large sagging of RCC beams and diaphragms of COAE building.
This work was satisfactorily carried out under his direct supervision (6 months).
13.
Consultant for XEN, PWD (Public Health), Muktsar for the construction of a 5000 gallons overhead RCC Water Storage Reservoir, 1979 (2 months).
14.
Acted as an Engineering Consultant for a large number of Industries/ Government departments regarding Installation/construction of Pollution Control Devices and determination of soil beaing capacity in the field etc. to quote a few :- (i) Madan Dyeing & Finishing Factory, Ludhiana (Jan-July, 1988).
(ii) Garrison Engineer (AF) Halwara (September-Oct 1988).
(iii) Subhash Dyeing Ludhiana (Jul 1985 to March, 1986).
(iv) International Dye Chemicals, Khanna (Sep, 1988 to Apr 89).
(v) M/s Bhagat Ram Gupta, Barnala (Jul-Dec 1990).
(vi) Oswal Woollen Mills, Ludhiana.
(vii) Kabir Paper Mills, Sunam.
(viii) Arihant Cotsyn Ltd, Ludhiana.
(ix) Food Specialities Ltd, Moga.
(x) Garrison Engineer (Af), Halwara.
(xi) Poddar Tyres Ltd., Ludhiana.
(xii) Punjab W/S and Sewerage Board, Ludhiana.
(xiii) SDO, Pb.
Public Health Deptt., Moga.
(xiv) Central Handtool Institute, Jalandhar.
(xv) Xens, PWD, B&R Barnala and Malerkotla and XEN, Pb.
Marketing Board, Amargarh, Sangrur.
VERIFICATION  It is verified that the facts mentioned above are correct and based on office records of the Deptt.
of Civil Engineering and that of the office of Dean, College of Agril.
Engineering, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
Sd/- dt. 10.12.98 Sd/- dt. 10.12.98 Prof. & head Deptt.
of Civil Engineering Pb.
Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
Dean College of Agril.
Engg.
Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the assignment at Item No. 5 was purely in the nature of the allotment of work to a contractor.
The job had to be executed by the selected contractor under the supervision of his Engineers.
The third respondent cannot claim credit of having two years of experience.
He further pointed out that construction of biogas plants at the fields of farmers may have been planned by the University.
The third respondent may have been one of the investigators.
However, the construction was not got done by the team.
In any case, nothing has been produced on the record to show as to what job was actually performed by the respondent.
Still further, it was pointed out that the major part of the period is covered by Item No. 5.
Similar was the position in respect of Item No. 7.
Learned counsel pointed out that the period from March 1989 to March 1991 is virtually common in Item Nos. 5, 6, 7, 10 and even 14.
On this basis, it was contended that the third respondent did not have 12 years of experience of construction and maintenance of buildings as prescribed in the advertisement.
9.
It is quite clear that the third respondent has been holding a teaching assignment at the University.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been averred that the third respondent "in his capacity as Assistant Professor/Associate Professor/Professor in the Department of Civil Engineering of the University developed three Post graduate Courses and two Under-graduate courses in the area of Analysis and Design of structures to achieve a higher level of performance of course objectives.
He also prepared Laboratory Manual for strength testing of Engineering materials (cement, concrete, steel and wood)."
Surely, while working in the University, respondent No. 3 was not supervising construction and maintenance of buildings.
He was teaching.
The assignments indicated at Item Nos. 4 onwards appear to have been given to respondent No. 3 by virtue of his position in the University.
It is nobody's case that the third respondent was absent from the University and attending to the different jobs in the field.
Could he still be credited with the requisite experience ?
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that he could not be.
We think that he is right.
10.
The petitioner has averred that after the publication of the advertisement, the members of the Faculty in the college of Agricultural Engineering had made a representation to the Vice Chancellor for the relaxation of the qualifications and pleaded that "the teaching experience in civil engineering be considered for experience requirement."
This representation was rejected vide order dated February 4, 1999.
Despite that, respondent No. 3 had been given credit of experience for the period during which he was actually teaching at the University.
We think that the complaint of the petitioner is not without merit.
11.
Mr. Riar contended that the Court does not interfere with the recommendations of a duly constituted selection committee.
He referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. Dr. B S Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 434.
Counsel is absolutely right.
The Court is always reluctant to enter academic thickets.
However, in the present case, we are satisfied that the third respondent did not satisfy the prescribed conditions of eligibility.
In such a situation, it would not be correct to negative the challenge.
12.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of an Estate Officer, are set aside.
The University shall proceed further to make the appointment in accordance with law.
No costs.
Petition allowed.