OP Sharma, J - The petitioner was a probationary Constable in J&K Armed Police.
His services have been terminated on the ground that he was unlikely to become a good police officer.
He challenges the order of termination on the ground that it casts a stigma on his career and as such amounts to punishment for which neither any enquiry was held nor opportunity to prove his innocence was afforded to him.
The order impugned has been justified by the respondents on the ground that it is in accord with Rule 187 of J&K Police Manual under which a police official can be discharged during the period of his probation if he is not "likely to become a good police officer."
2.
Mr. Bhardwaj appearing for the petitioner argued that the order impugned casts a stigma and therefore is liable to be quashed because no enquiry was held before terminating his services.
Mr. Goni however submitted that the order impugned is an order of discharge simpliciter authorised by Rule 187 of the Police Mannual having no attributes of a stigma and therefore neither any enquiry was necessary nor the principle of natural justice is violated.
3.
It is not disputed that petitioner unauthorisedly remained absent from duty with effect from 27.7.1990 until the impugned order was passed on 11121990.
The petitioner has tried to justify his unauthorised absence on health ground which the respondents dispute because he did not apply for leave.
It is also averred by the respondents that even earlier he had remained absent without leave for a period of 158 days with effect from 13111988 to 2061989 but taking a lenient view the period of his unauthorised absence was treated as earned and extraordinary leave under rules.
This fact as not been controverted by him.
But this time his continued unauthorised absence it appears convinced the competent authority that he was not likely to become a good police officer and he decided to proceed under Rule 187 of the Police Manual which reads as follows :  "187.
Discharge of inefficient - A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment."
It is under this Rule that the impugned order has been passed which reads :  "HEADQUARTERS J&K ARMED POLICE XI BATTALION MANLGAM, SGR.
ORDER  No. 946 of 1990 DATED 11121990  The following probationary Constables are hereby terminated from service with effect from the dates shown against each in accordance with Article 187 of J&K Police Manual as they are not likely to become good police officers :-  1.
Const.
Darshan Lal No. 451/XI w.e.f.
1571990.
2.
Const.
Ab.
Hamid No. 463/XI w.e.f.
27.7.1990.
Sd/- Commandant, JKAP XI Battalion, Manlgam, Sgr."
4.
The question involved is whether the order can be said to cast a stigma when it simply reproduces the ground on which he could be discharged under Rule 187.
In other words whether the discharge order on the ground that the petitioner was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer ceases to be a discharge order simpliciter.
Mr. Bhardwaj appearing for the petitioner submitted that the order of termination is not an order of discharge simpliciter, because the ground of discharge is that petitioner was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer which casts a stigma on his career.
In support of this he relies on the decision of Apex Court in case State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SC Cases 567 : 1995(2) SCT 427 (SC).
However while Rule 187 of the Police Rules is pari materia with the rule under which the services of Jagdish Chander (supra) were terminated, the order of discharge was not the same as in this case because he was discharged on the ground that, "as he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer because he is a habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and undisciplined."
5.
So apart from the fact that he was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, the appointing authority had also given reason for the discharge.
Their Lordships quashed the discharge order by holding that :  "5.
It would thus be clear from the order of discharge that it is not an order of discharge simpliciter.
On the other hand, the SP considered the record and found him to be on habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and undisciplined.
The findings of habitual absence and indiscretion necessarily cast a stigma on his career and they would be an impediment for any future employment elsewhere.
Under those circumstances, the principles of natural justice do require that he should be given an opportunity to explain the grounds on which the SP proposes to pass an order of discharge and then to consider the explanation submitted by the police officer.
Then the SP is competent to pass appropriate orders according to the rules.
Since this part of the procedure had not been adopted, the order of discharge is vitiated by manifest error of law."
6.
From the above it is clear that the findings of habitual absence, negligence and indiscipline were held to cast stigma on his career.
No fault was found with respect to the motive for the discharge namely that he was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
So while the motive for the discharge was undoubtedly in accord with the rule position, the ground of discharge casts a stigma on his career.
In other words the motive for the discharge was that he was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer but the ground or foundation of discharge was his habitual absence, negligence and indiscipline.
The distinction has always been recognised about the motive and the grounds on which the order of discharge is founded.
Since the motive in the present case is that the petitioner was unlikely to be an efficient police officer, the order of his termination does not suffer from any legal infirmity in view of the law laid down in KV Krishnamani v. Lalitkala Academy, 1996(5) SCC 89 : 1996(4) SCT 255 (SC) by holding that :  "4.
It is contended by the appellant that since the averments made in the counter would constitute foundation for dismissal for misconduct, an enquiry in this behalf was required to be made.
On the other hand, it is contended by the respondent that during the probation the appellant did not acquire any right to the post.
If on being found suitable he was regularised, only then he would have acquired the right to continue in the post.
During probation, it was found that his services were not satisfactory and reasons were given in support thereof.
Thus they do not constitute foundation but motive to terminate the services.
We find force in the contention of the respondent.
They have explained that the driving of the staff car was not satisfactory and that, therefore, they have terminated the services of the appellant during probation.
The very object of the probation is to test the suitability and if the appointing authority finds that the candidate is not suitable, it certainly has power to terminate the services of the employee.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be held that the reasons mentioned constitute motive and not foundation for termination of service.
Therefore, we hold that the High Court has not committed any error of law."
7.
In view of the above, order of termination in this case does not cease to be an order of discharge simpliciter because it is in accord with Rule 187 of the Police Rules.
Since vires of Rule 187 have not been challenged, the petitioner cannot successfully challenge the order founded on the reading of the rule to which he submitted at the time of joining service.
8.
This petition is even otherwise liable to be dismissed because of unexplained delay and laches.
The petitioner was dismissed because of his prolonged absence.
The plea that he was under treatment of Dr. Choudhary could not be a ground not to apply for leave to the competent authority.
The averment that he telegraphically applied for leave has been denied by the respondents, a fact not controverted by him.
So it is a mere ipse dixit of the petitioner which has no basis.
Coming to the plea of illness as a justification for absence, the certificate issued by Dr. RK Choudhary dated 981993 reads as under :-  "Certified that Mr. Abdul Hamid, S/o Mr. Allah Rakha, R/o Hardani Tehsil Samba consulted the undersigned from time to time during the period from 20.4.1990 upto date i.e. 981993.
He was suffering from Depression illness.
Present he is recovered from mental illness and he is physically and mentally fit."
Assuming that he was under depression, it is a question of fact disputed by the respondents.
They were to consider this only if he had applied for leave and the same was rejected.
Moreover, the medical certificate suggests that the petitioner was not hospitalised as he used to consult doctor Choudhary periodically and not regularly in his private clinic.
So on his own showing he was neither physically unfit to resume duty nor incapacitated to apply for leave.
However unauthorised absence having not been disputed by the petitioner, it is only the legality or otherwise of the impugned order that has to be decided and not the reason for his absence howsoever justified it may be.
Moreover, as a member of the belt force he should have realised that he could be discharged during probation.
He invited it firstly by maintaining studied silence about his absence and then remained silent for more than three years before challenging the impugned order.
It is settled law that delay disentitles a party from the discretionary relief under Article 226 of the Constitution as laid down in Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1997 SC 2366 : 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC), which reads as under :  "That apart, as this Court has repeatedly held, that delay disentitles the party to the discretionary relief under Article 226 or 32 of the Constitution.
It is not necessary to reiterate all catena of precedents in this behalf."
So the petition is liable to be dismissed even on the ground of laches and delay.
Hence there is no substance in this petition which is dismissed accordingly without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.