GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to quash the order dated 3181998 issued by respondent No. 2 terminating the petitioner's contract of service.
2.
The facts incorporated in the petition show that after having served Indian  Air Force from 1956 to 1992 as a Combatant and then as Commissioned Officer, the petitioner joined service as Adjutant/Senior Administrative Officer in the Centre for Punjab Youth (Training and Employment), Chandigarh.
On 591995, he was appointed as Deputy Registrar (Administration) in Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal.
From that position, he retired from service w.e.f.
30.4.1998 on attaining the age of superannuation.
Just 5 days thereafter, he was engaged on purely contract basis of a period of 6 months.
His grievance is that even before the expiry of the period of contract, the respondent No. 2 has, with mala fide intention, terminated the contract of employment.
The petitioner has averred that the impugned order has been passed because he had made complaint against the irregularities committed by the respondent No. 2 while working as Director of the Institute.
According to him, the respondent No. 2 has misused his position as Director of the Institute to victimise him for the boldness shown in making complaint against the mismanagement of the Institute.
3.
We have heard Shri G.S.
Bal.
In our opinion, there is no valid ground to exercise the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for directing the respondent No. 1 to retain the petitioner in service till the end of the contract period.
What the petitioner is seeking is the enforcement of the pure contract of service which is not regulated by statutory provisions and we do not find any rhyme or reason to compel the respondents to continue the petitioner in service during the entire period of contract which, as per his own showing, will expire on 3111998.
The petitioner can, at the best, claim damages by proving that he has been wronged by the respondent No. 2 by being deprived of his right to serve during the total period of contract.
4.
The allegation of mala fide levelled against the respondent No. 2 does not inspire confidence because it is the respondent No. 2 who had engaged the petitioner on contract basis for a period of 6 months after he retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
It is difficult to believe that after having engaged the petitioner on contract basis, the respondent No. 2 became his enemy and deprived him of the monetary benefits which he would have earned by remaining in contractual employment upto 3111998.
However, we need not further dilate on this aspect because the petitioner can avail remedy in a Civil Court for passing a decree for payment of salary/damages in lieu of his remaining contractual service.
5.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to avail appropriate remedy in a Civil Court.
Petition dismissed.