GS Singhvi, J - Shri Hargobind Rai, who attained the age of 58 years on 3131997, has filed this petition for grant of the following substantive reliefs :  "xx xx xx (ii) the respondents be directed to pay to the petitioner his retiral benefits in view of the grounds raised by him in the instant writ petition; (iii) the respondents be directed to pay the petitioner salary for the period he was not allowed to discharge his duties at the Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta in district Bhatinda; (iv) it be declared that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of salary and retiral benefits as claimed in this writ petition; (v) it is further prayed that since the petitioner was not allowed to retire prematurely by the respondents and was not paid salary, the respondents be directed to pay to the petitioner an interest of 18% on the amount found due to him with effect from the date it was due to the petitioner; (vi) it is further prayed that the petitioner be granted the consequential benefits in the nature of arrears of salary, seniority, promotion etc. xx xx xx (ix) the respondents be directed to pay emoluments to the petitioner due to him from July 1, 1991 to March 31, 1997 ie the period during which the petitioner discharged his duties as Head Master at Gandhi Memorial High School, Kot Kapura.
xx xx xx" 2.
A journey through the jumbled facts shows that the petitioner joined service on 6111956 as J.B.T.
Teacher in the School of District Board, Ferozepur.
On provincialization of the cadre of teachers, he was posted in Government Primary School, Baghewal Tehsil Fazilka, District Ferozepur.
He was appointed as Social Studies Master in 1965 by direct selection.
By an order dated 25121985, the petitioner was transferred from Government Senior Secondary School, Kot-Kapura, District Ferozepur to Government Senior Secondary School Bhagta, District Bhatinda.
He neither challenged this order in a Court of Law on the ground of violation of the policy of transfer or on the ground of mala fides or arbitrary exercise of power, as has been now alleged in paragraph 5 of the writ petition, nor he reported for duty in the School at Bhagta and in this manner, he not only disobeyed the order of transfer but remained absent from duty.
After keeping himself away from duty for 5 years, the petitioner enacted a farcical show of his willingness to serve the government when he approached the Principal, Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta just before the commencement of winter holidays in the School and submitted application dated 24121990 for being allowed to join duty.
However, the fact of the matter is that he never wanted to join at Bhagta.
This inference is being drawn by us from the following facts :  (i) After re-opening of the Schools in January, 1991 the petitioner did not report before the Principal of the School nor did he make representation to the higher authorities making a grievance that he is not being allowed to join duty.
(ii) After receipt of the report dated 381994 submitted by the Enquiry Officer in the context of charge-sheet dated 731991/441991, the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab wrote letters dated 2121995 and 561995 to the petitioner asking him to join duty but he did not comply with these directions.
(iii) The District Education Officer (S), Bhatinda also wrote letter dated 2061995 but the petitioner did not give any response.
(iv) It appears that on the one hand, the petitioner was avoiding to join duty and on the other hand he was in search of the greener pasture.
He submitted application dated 461991 for appointment as Headmaster in Gandhi Memorial School, Kot-Kapura in response to the advertisement published in "Daily Tribune" dated 28.5.1991 and he joined duty in that School immediately after issuance of the order of appointment dated 2961991.
On that very day, he submitted application Annexure P2/T to the Director, Public Instructions (S), Punjab for voluntary retirement from service.
3.
The respondents took real cognizance of the petitioner's absence from duty after 5 years when order dated 731991/441991 was issued by respondent No. 2 for initiation of disciplinary enquiry against him under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 on the charge of violating Rule 3(I), (II) and (III) of the Punjab Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966 for remaining wilfully absent from duty continuously w.e.f.
26121985.
After receiving the enquiry report, respondents No. 2 and 3 did try to persuade the petitioner to join duty by writing letters dated 2121995, 561995 and 2061995 but they failed in their attempt because the petitioner was already enjoying the post of Headmaster of Gandhi Memorial School at Kot-Kapura.
Ultimately, notice dated 3111996 was served upon the petitioner along with a copy of the enquiry report and he was given opportunity to make representation.
Final decision on the enquiry report was taken by respondent No. 2 after the institution of the writ petition.
The order dated 161998 passed by her reads as under :  "In these circumstances, though he is liable to be inflicted stringent punishment but taking a lenient view I, Vidya Wati, Director of Public Instructions (S), Punjab, Chandigarh, am inclined to retire Shri Hargobind Rai, SS Master, Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta with effect from 3131997 i.e. date of his superannuation with the stipulation that absence period of delinquent shall be treated as `Dies Non' as defined under proviso to Rule 139 of Civil Service Rules Volume-II.
The period of absence i.e. 28.12.1985 to 3131997 shall not be counted for any purpose."
Simultaneously, letter dated 161998 was sent to the petitioner requiring him to submit application for settlement of his pension etc. To this, he replied on 1591998 by saying that he will do the needful after the decision of the writ petition.
4.
Shri JS Khehar, Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that the petitioner should be deemed to have retired from service w.e.f.
2961991 i.e. the day on which he submitted application Annexure P2/T.
Learned counsel argued that the requirement of 3 months notice should be treated as satisfied because the petitioner had tendered 3 months salary in lieu of notice.
Shri Khehar invited our attention to the averments made in paragraph 8 of the writ petition and the written statement as well as the contents of the enquiry report in support of the petitioner's plea that he had deposited 3 months salary in lieu of notice.
Shri Rupinder Khosla controverted the submission of Shri Khehar by arguing that the theory of deemed retirement from service cannot be invoked by the petitioner because disciplinary enquiry stood initiated against him vide order dated 731991/441991.
He submitted that an employee facing a regular departmental enquiry cannot seek voluntary retirement from service.
Another submission of the learned Deputy Advocate General is that the application submitted by the petitioner for voluntary retirement could not have been accepted because he did not give 3 months notice in terms of Rule 3(2) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1975 Rules')  5.
In our opinion, the contention of the learned Deputy Advocate General deserves to be accepted.
Rule 3 of the 1975 Rules, on which learned counsel for parties have placed reliance, reads as under :  "3(1)(a) The appropriate authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in public interest to do so, have the absolute right, by giving an employee prior notice in writing, to retire that employee on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice.
(b) The period of such notice shall not be less than three months : Provided that where at least three months' notice is not given or notice for a period less than three months is given, the employee shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and allowances, at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the date of retirement, for a period of three months or, as the case may be, for the period by which such notice falls short of three months.
(2) Any Government employee may, after giving atleast three months' previous notice in writing to the appropriate authority retire from service on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice : Provided that no employee under suspension shall retire from service except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority."
6.
An analysis of the above extracted rule shows that under Rule 3(1)(a), the appropriate authority has been vested with absolute right to retire an employee in public interest, by giving prior notice in writing on the day on which the employee concerned completes 25 years of qualifying service or attains 50 years of age.
Rule 3(1)(b) lays down that the notice required to be given under Rule 3(1)(a) must be of 3 months.
Proviso to this rule entitles the employee concerned to claim pay and allowances for the period of 3 months or for the period by which such notice falls short of 3 months.
Rule 3(2) gives a corresponding right to the employee to retire from service on or after the completion of 25 years of qualifying service or attaining 50 years of age.
For this purpose, the employee is required to give 3 months previous notice in writing to the appropriate authority.
However, in contrast to Rule 3(1)(b), Rule 3(2) does not envisage deposit of pay and allowances of 3 months in lieu of notice by the employee for his voluntary retirement.
In other words, giving of 3 months notice in writing is a condition precedent for exercise of option by the employee who wants to retire from service after completion of 25 years qualifying service or attaining 50 years age.
The rule making authority has, in its wisdom, not used the words "or by giving 3 months pay and allowances in lieu of notice" between the word `notice' and the word `in' in Rule 3(2).
Therefore, keeping in view the settled proposition of law that the Court will ordinarily refrain from adding the words in the existing statute, we are not inclined to hold that the expression "or by giving 3 months salary in lieu of notice" may be read as implicit in the scheme of Rule 3(2) of the 1975 Rules.
In our opinion, it is not a case of inadvertent omission by the rule making authority.
Rather, deliberate use of different expressions in the two clauses of Rule 3 is clearly indicative of the intention of the rule making authority to insist on giving of 3 months notice by the employee as a condition precedent for acceptance of his request for voluntary retirement.
7.
In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to go into the contested issue whether or not the petitioner had deposited 3 months salary along with the application Annexure P2/T.
8.
The petitioner's claim for payment of salary for the period between 25121985 and 3131997 deserves to be negatived for more than one reason.
Admittedly, he did not join duty in Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta, District Bhatinda in pursuance of the order of transfer.
For a period of 5 years, he remained in oblivion.
The departmental authorities neither tried to find out his whereabouts nor did they take appropriate disciplinary action against him for wilful absence from duty.
The total inaction on the part of the higher departmental authorities to take cognizance of the petitioner's continuous absence for 5 years does not leave any doubt in our mind that all of them had directly or indirectly connived with the petitioner and abetted his act of gross indiscipline of not joining duty for a period of 5 long years without even questioning the legality, correctness and justification of his transfer from Government Senior Secondary School, Kot- Kapura to Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta.
The story, which he has subsequently concocted attributing malice animus to the Personal Assistant to the Education Minister, which has unfortunately found approval in the casual and cryptic report submitted by the enquiry officer, has not at all impressed us.
If at all the petitioner was convinced that his transfer was illegal, arbitrary and unjustified, then he should have approached the higher authorities of the department for redressal of his grievance or approached the Court for vindication of his stand and rights.
By directing the payment of salary to him for the entire period of absence, we are not going to put our seal of approval and thereby legitimise the petitioner's absence from duty for 5 years.
9.
The fact that the petitioner applied for appointment as Headmaster, Gandhi Memorial School, Kot-Kapura on 461991 and was appointed on that post on 2961991 is not in dispute.
The date of his joining has not been disclosed by the parties but it will not be unreasonable to presume that he must have joined the post of Headmaster on 2961991 or immediately thereafter.
He continued to hold this post till 3131997, the date on which he would have ordinarily retired from government service.
Therefore, as far as the government is concerned, the only period during which he can have some semblance of claim for payment of salary is from 24121990 to 2961991.
We should have dealt with this part of the petitioner's claim in greater detail but keeping in view the fact that vide order dated 161998, the respondent No. 2 has declared the entire period of his absence from duty as `Dies Non' and the petitioner has not prayed for quashing of that order, we refrain from making an adjudication on the petitioner's right to be paid salary even in respect of that period.
10.
The issue which now survives for consideration relates to the petitioner's claim for payment of salary in respect of the period during which he worked as Headmaster in Gandhi Memorial School, Kot-Kapura.
Shri Khehar laid considerable emphasis on the fact that the petitioner was selected by a duly constituted committee which consisted of the Deputy Education Officer, Ferozepur as a representative of the District Education Officer and argued that in view of the regular appointment of the petitioner as Headmaster of the School, the government should be directed to release the grant-in-aid in respect of the post of Headmaster held by the petitioner in a private educational institution because at the time of his appointment, the petitioner's relation with the government was subsisting and he cannot be treated to have been lawfully appointed on the post of Headmaster.
11.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and are inclined to agree with Shri Khosla that the petitioner cannot seek issuance of a mandamus directing the government to release the grant-in-aid in respect of the post held by him in Gandhi Memorial School, Kot Kapura.
The sequence of facts narrated herein above shows that after having remained absent from duty, the petitioner made a show of joining the duty when he presented himself before the Principal of the Government Senior Secondary School, Bhagta on 24121990 i.e. just before the School was to close for winter vacations and then joined the post of Headmaster of a private school.
It is unfortunate that an officer of the rank of Deputy Education Officer became a party to the selection of a serving government employee for appointment as Headmaster of a private School even though he did not apply through proper channel and concealed the factum of his status as a government employee.
However, this cannot be treated as sufficient to entitle to the petitioner to claim relief against the government because his appointment was not approved by the competent authority and the relief, if any, can be sought by the petitioner only against the management of the private institution in which he had served.
12.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to seek appropriate legal remedy against the management of Gandhi Memorial School, Kot Kapura for payment of salary in respect of the period during which he had served as Headmaster of the said School.
As regards his post-retiral benefits, the petitioner may make an application to the competent authority who shall finalise his case within 3 months of the submission of such application.
Petition dismissed.