GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This is a petition for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Dental Surgeon Class-II against one of the posts reserved for Scheduled Castes.
2.
It appears from the perusal of the record that the petitioner applied for selection and appointment in pursuance of Advertisement No. 3/97 (Annexure P- 4) issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission for recruitment on 100 posts of Dental Surgeon Class-II.
Out of the advertised posts, 20 posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes (50 per cent for Scheduled Castes-A Block and 50 per cent for Scheduled Castes-B Block).
In the result notified by the Commission, the petitioner's roll number appeared at No. 13 among the candidates of Scheduled Caste-B category.
His grievance is that the respondents have, in spite of the non-availability of sufficient number of candidates of Scheduled Castes-A category, failed to appoint him in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular No. 22/55/90-3GS-III dated November 9, 1994 and in this manner, his fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment has been violated.
3.
During the course of hearing, we asked learned Counsel for the petitioner to show as to when the selected candidates were appointed by the government and whether the petitioner made any representation to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 or for Scheduled Castes-A category, which remained unfilled due to non-availability of requisite number of suitable candidates.
To this, learned Counsel replied in the negative.
This shows that the petitioner has failed to fulfil the condition of notice of demand for justice which he ought to have satisfied before invoking jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus.
4.
In Amrit Lal Berry v. Collector of Central Excise Central Revenue and others, AIR 1975 SC 538, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the High Court should not issue writ of mandamus without insisting on compliance of the requirement of notice of demand for justice.
5.
Applying the ratio of that decision to the facts of this case, we decline relief to the petitioner at this stage and dismiss the writ petition.
However, the petitioner shall be free to make representation to the respondents or serve notice of demand for justice claiming appointments as Dental Surgeon, Class II, against one of the unfilled posts meant for Scheduled Castes-A category.
Petition dismissed.