HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - By this judgment, I purpose to dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18116 of 1996, 9091 of 1997, 16501 of 1997 and 10827 of 1997.
The facts being common, have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 10827 of 1997.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 20th December, 1975 and was boarded out on 13.10.1982 being medical category EEE with 70% disability as suffering from Schizophrenia.
The petitioner thereafter made a number of representations for the grant of disability pension but his claim was finally rejected by the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Vide his letter dated 831983, Annexure F-4 to the petition.
He filed an appeal and this too, was rejected by the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, vide his letter dated 14101985, Annexure P-6 to the petition.
A subsequent appeal/representation filed in December, 1985 met the same fate and this information was conveyed to the petitioner on 481986 vide Annexure P-7 to the petition.
Despite the denial of his claim, the petitioner still continued to make representations, but to no effect.
The present petition has, accordingly, been filed by him through his wife Inderjit Kaur as he is suffering from a disability and as such unable to look after his affairs.
3.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been filed by the respondents.
The stand taken is that though the petitioner was disabled to the extent of 70%, but he was nevertheless not entitled to the payment of disability pension as his disability was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service, as per the advice of the medical board that had examined him on 1591982.
4.
Mr. Sehgal, the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that paragraph 173 of Pension Regulations for the Army Part-I 1961(hereinafter called "the Regulations" provided that an individual, who was invalidated from service on account of disability attributable to or aggravated by military service with disability assessed at 20% or more was entitled to a disability pension.
He has also made a reference to Rule 14 of the Entitlement Rules for Casual Pensionary Awards 1982 (hereinafter called the Rules), wherein it has been provided that a disease which had led to an individual is discharged or death would ordinary be deemed to have arisen in service, if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service, but if medical opinion, for reasons to be stated noted, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease would not be deemed to have arisen during service.
Mr. Sehgal also argued that as no note had been recorded as to the petitioner's condition at the time of his enrolment or at the time of his discharge as provided in the second part of the Rule, the presumption was that the disease that the petitioner was suffering from, could be attributed to military service.
Mr. Sehgal has also relied upon Rules 5 and 9 of the Rules to argue that a presumption that a member entering service was in sound physical and mental condition, was to be drawn and the onus of proof with regard to the claim to disability pension did not rest upon the claimant and, in fact, lay with the Army Authorities in case this claim was to be denied.
In support of his arguments, Mr. Sehgal has relied upon Sham Lal Malhotra v. Union of India and others, 1995(2) R.S.J.
493, Gurdip Singh (retd) Subedar (Hon Lt.) v. Union of India and others, 1997(5) S.L.R.
341 : 1997(3) SCT 414 (P&H) (D.B.)
; Jarnail Singh v. Union of India and others, 1997(3) SCT 484 (P&H) (D.B.)
and Vesumathy Reddy (Smt.) v. Union of India and others, 1997(2) S.L.R.
152.
5.
As against this, Mr. Dahiya, the learned Counsel appearing for the respondents has relied upon Rule 14 which was to the effect that if a disease was to be accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of Military service determined or contributed to its onset and that the condition was due to the circumstances of duty in Military Service.
In support of his plea.
Mr. Dahiya has in particular referred to Rule 14(c) and to the Judgment of the Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Baljit Singh, 1997(1) S.L.R.
98 : 1997(1) S.C.T.
386.
6.
Mr. Dahiya also relied on Rule 9 and has argued that it was for the appropriate Medical Board to opine with regard to the nature of the disease that had disabled the claimant and as the Board had given a categoric finding that the disease was not attributable to military service, the petitioner could not succeed.
He has finally urged that the disease must nevertheless stand noted in Annexure III to Appendix II appended with the Rules and as the disease Schizophrenia did not find mention in the list of the disease, the petitioner could not succeed in any eventuality.
7.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
8.
Regulation 173 and Rule 14(b) and (c) are reproduced as below :-  "Unless otherwise specially provided a disability pension consisting of service element and disability element may be granted to an individual who is invalided out of service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service in non-battle casualty and is assessed at 20% or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rule in Appendix II."
"14(b).
A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if the medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
"14(c).
If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of Military Service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service."
9.
The judgment cited by Mr. Sehgal do support his case with regard to the presumptions to be drawn on an interpretation of the aforesaid provisions.
The Division Bench of this Court in Sham Lal Malhotra's case (supra) observed as under :-  "A combined reading of the provisions reproduced above shows that the cause of disability which has led to the person concerned being discharged from the service will be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of entry in the Armed forces or that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined the service."
For arriving at its decision, the Division Bench relied upon a number of other judgments quoted therein.
As I am bound by the judgment of the Division Bench, I deem it unnecessary to refer to the other judgments cited by Mr. Sehgal.
10.
Mr. Dahiya's reliance on Baljit Singh's case (supra) is, to my mind, misplaced on facts as that was a case dealing with an injury and not a disease.
It is the conceded proposition that sub-rules (a) to (c) of Rule 14 (earlier Rule 7) must be read together and it must be established amongst other things that the conditions of military service had determined or contributed to the onset of the disease or its aggravation, but it must, nevertheless be borne in mind that onus to deny a claim rests on the authorities and not on the claimant as postulated by Rule 9 which provides that the claimant shall not be called upon to prove the condition of entitlement and that he will receive the benefit of any reasonable doubt and that this benefit would be given more liberally to the claimant in the field/afloat service cases.
It will be seen from the record that the Medical Board had, while rejecting the claim, merely observed "constitutional disease, hence not connected with the service".
To my mind, the onus put on the authority under Rule 9, could not be said to have been discharged in this situation, more particularly as the board did not consider that he had put in service almost continuously in the field, and as such the case for the grant of disability pension was to be considered more liberally.
11.
The last argument advanced by Mr. Dahiya with regard to the actual disease itself that flow from Appendix II to Annexure III must also be rejected.
It is undoubtedly true that in order to make a claimant eligible to the payment of disability pension, it must also be proved the disease that had caused the disability was listed in the aforementioned Appendix.
Admittedly, Schizophrenia does not find specific mention in it.
Mr. Sehgal has, however, relied on Bhag Singh v. Union of India and others, 1996(4), R.S.J.
55, a Division Bench Judgment of the Himachal Pradesh High Court, wherein a similar argument made by the respondent Union of India was repelled with the following observations :-  "There is an Annexure with the Rules in Appendix II to Regulation 173 to Pension Regulations for the Army Part-I-1961 which deals with classification of various diseases which are to be effected by climatic conditions, affected by stress and strain, affected by dietary compulsions, training, marching etc. and normally affected by the service.
In the list of diseases affected by stress and strain of military service, the disease known as "psychosis" and "psychoneurosis" have been included.
Needless to say, these diseases relate to mental disorder of an individual.
Schizophrenia, with which the petitioner was suffering from and which disease he developed during his military service, can definitely be said to be adversely affected by the stress and strain of the military service.
It must, therefore, be held in the light of the above quoted observations that the petitioner too, who is a Schizophrenic, (as was the petitioner Bhag Singh in the cited case), would be entitled to a disability pension, to be determined on the extent of his disability.
12.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed, the orders Annexures P-4 and P-6 and P-7 are quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay the disability pension to the petitioner from the date that if fell due within a period of four months from today.
A copy of the order be given dasti.
Petition allowed.