THB Chalapathi, J - This petition is filed by the retired teahers who worked in the schools in the State of Punjab, the management of which was taken over by the State of Punjab from the control of the District Boards.
On 1-10-1957, the management of the schools was taken over by the State of Punjab and the services of the Teachers in the District Board schools were provincialised.
Treating the petitioners as fresh entrants from the date of taking over of the schools, the pension and other retiral benefits were fixed with effect from 1-10-1957.
According to the petitioners, they are entitled to have their pension and retiral benefits fixed taking into account their past service rendered, when the schools were under the management and control of the District Boards.
This question is no more res integra.
It has been held in State of Punjab and others v. Harnam Singh and others, JT 1997(2) SC 190 : 1997(3) SCT 194 (SC);that the erstwhile teachers in the District Boards and Zila Parishads working are not entitled to the benefit of their previous service rendered by them when the Schools were under the management and control of the District Boards for any of the benefits including pension.
It has been observed therein as follows :-  "The question, therefore, is whether the view of the High Court that the previous service rendered by the respondents/erstwhile teachers in District Boards, and Zila Parishads would be counted for the purpose of seniority and other benefits, is correct in law.
In view of the aforesaid clauses, it would be abundantly clear that the Government has been given discretion to take any of the existing members into the service vis-a-vis the existing Government employees.
It would be reasonable to conclude that the Government have taken over the schools run by the Boards and Zila Parishad as Government schools with the aforesaid conditions to safeguard the service conditions of the existing employees of the Government vis-a-vis the new entrants.
Under those circumstances, the staff working in the former Zila Parishads or Board taken over by the Government would be treated as fresh entrants into the Government service from the date of taking over.
Therefore, it would also be clear that unless there was a condition at the time of take over to treat the previous service of the employees as part of service under the Goverment service, it would not be counted.
In other words, it will be subject to the terms of take over."
2.
Their Lordships also referred to an earlier decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Dev Dutt Kaushal, JT 1995(6) SC 225 : 1995(4) SCT 575 (SC).
3.
In view of the authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court, I do not find any merit in this petition since the petitioners were to be treated as fresh entrants after the management was taken over by the State of Punjab from the District Boards and, therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to have their previous service rendered, while working in the school at the time when these are under the control of the District Boards, counted for any benefits including pension.
4.
This petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.