Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J - In this batch of writ petitions the validity of the Regulation for admission to Post Graduate Medical Courses in the Medical Colleges in the University of Health Sciences, Andhra Pradesh, for the Academic Year 1996-97, (for short the regulations) is questioned as being arbitrary and violative 14 of the Constitution.
2.
To appreciate the contention raised by the parties it would be enough to refer to the facts of the case mentioned in the affidavit accompanying Writ Petition No. 15637 of 1996, which will be representative of the facts in the other cases.
3.
The petitioners passed MBBS Examination and appeared for Post- Graduate Medical Entrance Test for admission to Post Graduate Medical courses in the year 1995-96.
The first petitioner was granted admission in MD (Microbiology) and the second petitioner was granted admission in MD (Bio- Chemistry).
While they were studying these courses in Gandhi Medical College, the Health University notified PG Medical Entrance Test for admission to the Post-Graduate Medical courses for the academic year 1996-97.
The petitioners, with a view to obtain better ranking and to opt subjects of their chose, intended to take the said entrance test.
In view of regulation 6(ii) of the regulations the petitioners were not permitted to take the entrance test unless they discontinue the course which they were studying and refund the bond amount and stipend received by them.
In these circumstances they filed this writ petition challenging the validity of regulation 6(ii) of the regulations.
4.
The Registrar, University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada, filed counter affidavit stating that admissions to various PG Degree and Diploma courses for the year 1995-96 were completed and the admissions were closed on 271996.
The classes, however, commenced from 361996.
Along with the application form, a copy of the regulations for admission to Post-Graduate Degree and diploma courses in the academic year 1995-96, was given to the students and thus the petitioners were made aware of existence of the impugned regulations.
They have chosen subjects of their choice during selection for admission to the said courses.
If the petitioners are not interested in the subjects of Micro-Biology or Bio-Chemistry, they ought not to have chosen those subjects depriving other eligible and interested candidates the chance to study the said courses.
The impugned regulation has been made with a view to avoid wastage of man power and money and to discourage the students from taking up admissions to various courses and give up studies in those subject in the middle of the courses.
The University, after careful consideration of the wastage of the precious Post-Graduate Medical seats in various courses and considering the fact that the candidates are neither completing the courses they have chosen and in which they were admitted nor allowing the other eligible, interested candidates to study the course which was leading to national waste by way of man power as well as money, the impugned regulation 6(iii) was incorporated in the admission regulations for the year 1995-96.
Such a regulation has also been adopted by the Tamil Nadu Government in the admission regulations.
Earlier also upto 1991-92 such a regulation was in force.
It is submitted that the University is not prohibiting any candidate from appearing for the entrance test.
They have placed a condition for appearance in the entrance test.
The students were put on notice about the impugned regulation one year in advance, that is in the regulations of 1995- 96.
5.
Mr. SL Chennakesava Rao, the learned counsel who led the batch of these writ petition, brought to our notice that for the last five years the impugned regulation was not there, it was introduced only in the academic year 1995-96.
The rule has been added in the present year which causes great hardship to the student.
6.
The learned standing counsel for the University submits that there is no arbitrariness or illegality in the impugned regulation, the regulation is framed in the best interest of the medical education and to eliminate wastage of PG seats and the money.
He further submits that the point is squarely covered against the petitioner by the judgment of the Division Bench of the court in University of Health Sciences v. Dr. A Sudhakar, 1990(1) An.
WR 361(DB).
7.
The short question that arises for consideration in this batch of writ petitions is : Whether Regulation 6(ii) of the Regulations is arbitrary and illegal ?
8.
The regulations for the admission to Post Graduate Medical Courses in the Medical Colleges in University of Health Sciences, Andhra Pradesh, are framed to fall in line with the regulation of the Medical Council of India framed under section 33(j) and (1) read with section 20 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
Regulation 6 of the Regulations for the academic year 1996-97 reads as follows:  "6.
Eligibility :- (i) Candidates who have passed MBBS Examination recognised by Indian Medical Council and who will complete internship on or before 31.7.96 are eligible to apply subject to the fulfilment of the conditions stipulated in regulation 4.
(ii) Candidates who are already admitted and studying PG Degree and Diploma courses shall not be permitted to appear for entrance test until they complete the courses or discontinue the course by remitting the bond amount and stipend taken upto that date before submitting the application form for the entrance test and such candidates shall submit the discontinuation certificate issued by the Head of the Institution along with the application form.
Note:- The candidates if found to have concealed any information regarding this matter, the registration of such candidates is liable for cancellation as well as his/her script and forfeiture of his/her claim for appearing in the Entrance Test and he/she will not be considered for selection into any course and disciplinary action will be taken by the University of Health Sciences".
Thus, this regulation prescribes eligibility of the candidates to take entrance test prescribed for admission to Post Graduate Degree/Diploma courses.
Clause (i) of regulation 6 prescribes two conditions, viz, (a) the candidate should have passed MBBS Examination recognized by the Indian Medical Council; and (b) the candidate should have completed internship on or before July 31, 1996.
Clause (ii) puts an embargo on taking of Entrance Test by those candidates who were already admitted earlier and who are studying PG Degree and Diploma courses to appear for Entrance Test.
This embargo does not apply if they remit the bond amount and stipend taken upto the date before submitting the application form for the Entrance Test.
In proof of the same they have to submit the discontinuation certificate issued by the Head of the Institution along with the application form.
9.
What is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners, is that the embargo imposed in clause (ii) of regulation 6, is unreasonable and arbitrary.
They argued that if the candidates are selected in the courses of their choice, having regard to the rank in the entrance test, they will give up the courses at that stage but there is no vaid reason to stop them from taking the entrance test.
No doubt the argument appears to be attractive, but on deeper examination it is unacceptable.
It has to be kept in mind that those who are seeking admission to Post-Graduate Medical courses, whether in Degree or Diploma, are specialising in a particular subject.
Therefore to keep up the high standard of education expected of a specialist in a particular discipline they should have full training both in theory as well as in practical and for that purpose they should undergo training for the full period.
It is for this reason that the regulations prescribe the Post-Graduation course as full time courses.
From this it follows that if a course is full time course the candidates cannot be allowed to contend that they will study two full time courses simultaneously because that would be contradiction in terms.
It is an admitted fact that there is no bar on any candidate to complete the course in one subject and then take up another in a different subject, whether in Degree or in Diploma.
The restriction imposed by clause (ii) of regulation 6 is applicable only when a candidate having taking taken admission in Post- Graduate Degree or Diploma course is still prosecuting his study because if at that stage he entertains the idea of preparing for fresh entrance test he would neither be concentrating on the subject in which he is undergoing training nor will he be confident of securing admission in a different course; at that stage it is only an adventure by him and even in the event of his securing admission in the course of subject of his choice the study undertaken by him would go waste and as in the middle of the course the seat cannot be filled up so the seat would also go waste.
Recovery of the amount paid to him as stipend and the liquidated damages agreed upon by him to be paid in the event of discontinuance of studies cannot be adequate compensation for the wastage.
Therefore to put a check on those students who are not really serious about taking up the studies but take admission for the sake of obtaining Post-Graduate Degree or Diploma the impugned regulation imposes a restriction that they should refund the amount received by them as stipend and pay the bond amount which represents the liquidated damages for the money spent by the State on the education of the student before appearing in the entrance test.
This restriction is, in our view, a reasonable restriction to make the students think twice before venturing to appear in the entrance test while studying PG Courses in one subject.
10.
The same view was taken by the Division Bench of this court in University of Health Sciences v. Dr. A Sudhakar (supra) (of which one of us, viz, Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J was a member).
The Bench held thus :  "Rule 6(3) is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory nor unreasonable.
Rule 6(3) is designed to achieve an objective conceived in general public interest and cannot be said to be unreasonable.
It is designed not only to save the wastage of public funds, but also to ensure that a person who gets admission into a course, should first complete that course before he thinks of joining another course whether degree or diploma; whether in the same subject or in another subject.
The idea is to discourage abandoning of these courses midstream and the consequent waste of valuable training and of public funds."
11.
Further it is brought to our notice that students were put on notice in the regulations for admission to post-graduate medical courses for the academic year 1995-96 when clause (iii) of regulation 6 was incorporated.
The said clause reads as follows:-  "6.
Eligibility :-  (1) xx xx (2) xx xx (3) Applicants who are already admitted and studying the Post- Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses shall not be permitted to appear for Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Test from the year 1996-97 Entrance test until they complete the course or discontinue the course by remitting the bond amount and stipend taken upto that date before submitting the application for the Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Test."
12.
A plain reading of this clause makes it clear that the students who were admitted and are studying the Post-Graduate Degree and Diploma courses pursuant to the entrance test 1995-96 will not be permitted to appear for the Post-Graduate Medical Entrance test from the year 1996-97 entrance test unless they complete the course or discontinue the course by remitting the bond amount and stipend taken upto that date and that they have to do so before submitting the application for Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Test.
13.
For the above reasons, we are unable to sustain the attack of the petitioners on the impugned regulation.
14.
Mr. SL Chennakesava Rao, however, invited our attention to the observation of the bench in University of Health Sciences v. Dr. A Sudhakar, (supra) at Para 19 of that judgment.
There the bench observed that an aspect which troubled quite a bit, was some of frequent changes of the rule almost every year - be it by the Goverment or by the University - and has emphasised that one of the characteristics of law is its certainty and definiteness and that a rule once made should not ordinarily be changed unless the situations demand amendment of the rule either by virtue of the judgment of the court or due to a cogent reason.
It is also pointed out that such frequent changes in rule give room for allegation of mala fides and ulterior designs and that the authorities would do well to keep that aspect in mind.
The Bench also referred to the concern expressed by another learned single judge.
Having gone through the observations, we cannot but agree with the observation of the learned Judges and reiterate that the University should not frequently change the rule to create uncertainty in the minds of the students.
15.
Subject to the above observation, the writ petitions are dismissed but, in the circumstances of the cases, we direct the parties to bear their own cost.
Standing Counsel's fee is fixed at Rs. 300/- in each writ petition.