GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is a Backward Class (Block-A) of Haryana being Kumhar by caste and who has been recommended for appointment as A-Class Naib Tehsildar by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as `the respondent-Board'), has challenged the decision of the respondent No. 2 not to appoint him for the purpose of accommodating the respondent No. 3.
2.
Shortly stated, the facts of the case are that vide advertisement No. 6/95, the respondent-Board advertised six posts of A-Class Naib Tehsildar for Commissioner, Gurgaon Division.
Of these, two were reserved for Scheduled Castes, two for Backward Classes and two for Ex-servicemen of Haryana.
By a corrigendum published in the Tribune on 3091995, the respondent-Board intimated that the total number of posts shall be read as 7, of which one was shown as reserved for Scheduled Castes (Block-B), two for Backward Classes (Block-A) and four for general category of Haryana.
After interviewing the candidates, the respondent-Board prepared a select list in which the petitioner's name came to be placed at No. 10 in the over all merit and at No. 2 among the candidates of Backward Classes (Block-A).
The candidate who was at No. 1 among the Backward Classes (Block-A) was appointed to the service but the second post was filled by appointing the respondent No. 2, who belongs to Backward Classes (Block-B), on compassionate grounds.
3.
By placing reliance on the circular No. 22/36/95-3GS-III dated 20th July, 1995 issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, the petitioner has pleaded that the posts reserved for Backward Classes (Block-A) cannot be filled by appointing a candidate of Backward Classes (Block-B).
He has also challenged the appointment of the respondent No. 3 on the ground that the policy of compassionate appointment cannot be used to defeat the right of duly selected candidate to be appointed against the advertised posts.
The petitioner has also pleaded that a large number of posts of A-Class Naib Tehsildars are vacant in various divisions and there is no justification to deny appointment to him for the purpose of accommodating respondent No. 3 at Gurgaon.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as well as respondent No. 4 have admitted the factum of petitioner's selection for appointment as A-Class Naib Tehsildar.
They have also stated that as per the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary, posts reserved for Backward Classes (Block-A) can be filled only from candidates belonging to Block-A and the posts reserved for Block-B can be filled only from the candidates belonging to that category.
Qua respondent No. 3 it has been stated that he was appointed on compassionate grounds and an intimation to this effect was sent to the respondent-Board with the request that only one candidate belonging to Backward Classes (Block-A) should be selected.
In his reply, the respondent No. 3 has defended his appointment on the basis of the judgment by the Government.
He has pleaded that the competent authority appointed him vide order dated 22111995 as per the policy formulated by the government.
4.
Having heard Shri RC Setia, Shri Jaswant Singh and Shri PS Patwalia, we are of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him as A-Class Naib Tehsildar.
Admittedly, the petitioner has been selected by the respondent-Board for appointment as A-Class Naib Tehsildar and his name was placed at No. 2 among the candidates of Backward Classes (Block-A).
It is also an admitted position that but for the appointment of the respondent No. 3, the petitioner would have been appointed as A-Class Naib Tehsildar on the basis of the selection made by the respondent-Board.
5.
In view of the above stated admitted facts, the only issue which calls for adjudication by the Court is whether the denial of the appointment to the petitioner is legally sustainable or not.
Annexure-P4 is the circular issued by the Government of Haryana for reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes (Blocks `A' and `B'), Ex-servicemen and Physically Handicapped persons.
The relevant extract of this circular is reproduced below for reference purposes :-  "From  The Chief Secretary to Govt.  Haryana.
To  (i) All Heads of Departments.
(ii) Commissioners Ambala, Hisar Rohtak/Gurgaon Divisions.
(iii) All Deputy Commissioners & Sub Divisional Officers (Civil) in Haryana.
(iv) The Registrar, Punjab & Haryana High Court.
Dated Chandigarh the 20th July, 1995.
Subject :- Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes (Block `A' & Block `B'), Ex-servicemen & Physically Handicapped persons in direct recruitment to Class-III and Class-IV Govt. jobs.
Sir,  I am directed to invite your attention to Haryana Govt. letters as indicated in the margin on the subject noted above and to say that in view of the directions given by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in writ petition (Civil) No. 930 of 1990, Indira Sawhney & others v. Union of India and the recommendations of the Second Backward Classes Commission set up by the Haryana Govt., the State Govt. has further reviewed the existing policy of reservation of posts of SC, BC, ESM and Physically handicapped in Govt. job in the State of Haryana and have decided to enhance the reservation for Backward Classes from 10% to 27% in respect of direct recruitment to Class-III and Class-IV posts.
2.
It has further been decided to create two blocks i.e. Block `A' and Block `B' within the Backward Classes for the purpose of the above-mentioned reservation as per list enclosed.
3.
Henceforth the quantum of reservation for various categories in direct recruitment to Class III & IV posts, will be as under :-  i) SC : 20%  ii) BC (Block `A') : 16%  iii) BC Block `B') : 11%  iv) ESM./Dependents of ESM : 11%  v) Physically Handicapped  (Orthopaedically Handicapped)  Deaf & Dumb & Blind : 3%  The Posts reserved for Block `A' of Backward Classes would be filled up from candidates belonging to castes of Block `A' only.
Similarly, posts reserved for Block `B' would be filled up from members of the castes comprising Block `B' of Backward Classes.
xx xx xx xx xx xx  6.
In the light of the revised quantum of reservation in respect of Class III and Class IV direct recruitment quota posts the roster points for reservation for different categories in a block of 100 posts in each cadre would now be as follows :-  Scheduled Castes :  5-10-15-20-25-30-35-40-45-50-55-60-65-70-75-80-85-90-95-100.
Backward Classes :  6-12-19(ESM)-26-32-44(ESM)-49-56-62(PH)-68-74-(ESM)-79-86-92-99.
Block `B'  9-18-27(ESM)-36-46-54(ESM)-63-72-81(ESM)-89(PH)-98.
ESM Ex-servicemen :  8 Against General Category, 19 against BC (Block `A').
27 against BC (Block `B'), 37 against General Category.
44 against BC (Block `A'), 54 against BC (Block `B').
63 against General Category, 74 against BC (Block `A').
81 against BC (Block `B') & 91 against General Category.
xx xx xx xx xx xx"  6.
From the perusal of the above extracted portion of the instructions issued by the government it becomes clear that the posts reserved for Backward Classes (Block `A') are to be filled from candidates belonging to castes of Block `A'.
Likewise the posts reserved for Block `B' are to be filled from members of castes of Block `B'.
Roster points for Backward Classes Block `A' and Block `B' are to be determined in terms of para 6 of the circular dated 20th July, 1995.
7.
When the respondent No. 2 forwarded the requisition for recruitment of A- Class Naib Tehsildar to the respondent-Board, he must be deemed to have made exercise for termination of the posts reserved for Backward Classes Block `A' and Backward Classes Block `B'.
The advertisement issued by the Board shows that two posts were reserved for Backward Classes Block `A'.
Therefore, in terms of the instructions issued by the government both the posts could have been offered only to the candidates of Backward Classes Block `A'.
Admittedly, that has not been done.
Instead of appointing the petitioner, who belongs to Backward Classes Block `A', the respondent No. 2 appointed the respondent No. 3 against the post reserved for Backward Classes Block `A' even though the said respondent is a Backward Class Block `B'.
It must, therefore, be held that the appointment of respondent No. 3 is contrary to the instructions issued by the government and by appointing him the respondent No. 2 has deprived the petitioner of his right to be appointed against reserved post of Backward Classes Block `A'.
8.
We also find substance in the argument of Shri Setia that action of the respondent No. 2 to appoint the respondent No. 3 against the post of Backward Classes Block `A' which was duly advertised through the Board is arbitrary and unjustified.
The official respondents have not denied the assertion made in the writ petition that other posts of A-Class Naib Tehsildars are available in the other Divisions of the State.
The policy of compassionate appointment does not contain any provision which restricts the appointment of a dependent of the deceased government servant within a particular department or division.
Therefore, instead of appointment the respondent No. 3 as A-Class Naib Tehsildar against the reserved post of Backward Classes Block `A', the official respondents should have appointed him in some other division instead of creating a situation in which the petitioner stands deprived of his valuable right to be appointed to the service on the basis of the recommendations made by the respondent-Board.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondent No. 2 to appoint the petitioner as A-Class Naib Tehsildar against the post reserved for Backward Classes Block `A'.
The petitioner shall get seniority in the cadre as per the merit determined by the respondent-Board.
We also direct the official respondents to accommodate the respondent No. 3 within Gurgaon Division, in case any other post of A-Class Naib Tehsildar has become available in the meanwhile and if no such post is available in Gurgaon Division then the respondent No. 3 shall be adjusted in any other Division where the post of A-Class Naib Tehsildar is available.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within two months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.