THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is seeking issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the order dated 30th November, 1992 terminating the services of the husband of the petitioner and also to issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the consequential benefits.
2.
The husband of the petitioner joined Haryana Roadways in March, 1968.
While working as a Driver in the Haryana Roadways, he met with an accident on 2361988 and sustained injuries on the head and both bones of his right leg were fractured.
He was admitted in the Hospital and remained under treatment till 14.2.1989.
The husband of the petitioner joined the duty on 151989, but due to his injury to the right leg, he could not perform his duties efficiently.
Thereafter he remained on leave from 2521991 to 2521992.
Though the petitioner's husband requested the authorities to give him light work, the authorities of the respondent-department insisted that he should perform his duty as a Driver.
The petitioner's husband made a representation to the authorities to permit him to take voluntary retirement on 1101992, but his request was rejected.
Thereafter the department instituted a departmental enquiry under Rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
The enquiry proceeded ex parte and on the basis of the enquiry report, the husband of the petitioner was issued a show cause notice why his services should not be terminated.
Thereafter the impugned order dated 30.11.1992 was passed by the authorities terminating the services of the petitioner's husband.
The husband of the petitioner preferred an appeal to the 2nd respondent which was also dismissed on 11101995.
Subsequently, the petitioner's husband submitted another appeal to the Government.
Meanwhile the husband of the petitioner died on 2951996.
After the death of the petitioner's husband, she approached the authorities to release the pension of her husband since her husband put in service of 24 years.
Challenging the order of termination and seeking direction to release pension to the husband of the petitioner, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
3.
In the written statement, it is admitted that the petitioner's husband met with an accident and sustained injuries.
But according to the respondents, the husband of the petitioner was declared medically fit for duty and, therefore, he was asked to perform his duty as a Driver, but the petitioner's husband pleaded lame excuses to perform his duty for which he was recruited.
In spite of notice, the petitioner's husband was not present and, therefore, the enquiry was proceeded ex parte and on the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer the services of the petitioner's husband were terminated and there are no grounds warranting interference with the same.
4.
The fact remains that the petitioner's husband while working as a Driver in Haryana Roadways was involved in an accident resulting in injury to his head and fracture of both the bones of his right leg.
The report of the Medical authorities also shows that there was a shortening of the leg.
After the discharge from the Hospital and availing of leave and taking rest, the petitioner's husband resumed the duty, but the petitioner's husband was asked to drive the vehicle.
The petitioner's husband pleaded with the authorities that he was not fit to drive the vehicle in view of the fracture to his leg in the accident and therefore, he be assigned some light work, but the authorities insisted that he should perform the duties of a Driver for which he was recruited.
Even in the written statement, the stand of the respondents is that the husband of the petitioner was avoiding to do the duties for which he was recruited.
There cannot be any dispute that a person who suffered injury to his leg should not be allowed to drive a passenger vehicle since his driving capacity was not the same as used to be prior to his suffering the injury to his right leg.
It can be seen from the record produced that the husband of the petitioner had been making representations time and again to give him light work due to his incapacity to drive the heavy vehicle owing to weakness in his right leg.
He had also pointed out that it involved risk to the precious life of the passengers.
It is also on record that the petitioner's husband sought the voluntary retirement on 1101992, but instead of acceding to his request for voluntary retirement, the Department has chosen to proceed against him departmentally and ultimately terminated his services by the impugned order.
The appeal filed by the petitioner's husband was also rejected on 11101995.
The petitioner's husband died on 2951996.
That necessitated the petitioner to approach this court seeking the relief of quashing the order of termination of her husband and to release the pension and family pension.
5.
In these circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that the order of termination cannot be sustained.
It is not a case where the driver was guilty of any misconduct.
He genuinely made a request to the authorities that he was not able to drive the heavy vehicle at the risk of the life of the passengers since he suffered a fracture to his right leg.
When the petitioner's husband was not able to perform the duty, he sought voluntary retirement.
In all fairness the Department should have acceded to his request for voluntary retirement.
6.
During the course of arguments, the learned Additional Advocate General, Mr. PK Mutneja sought for time to get instructions from the Department in view of the facts and peculiar circumstances of this case and fairly stated that the case of the petitioner's husband should have been considered on sympathetic grounds since the petitioner's husband suffered injuries while on duty.
Accordingly, the hearing of the case was adjourned.
On the next date of hearing, the learned Advocate General produced a letter from the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, to Advocate General, Haryana, bearing No. 1315/A- 2/DA/98 dated 2221998, wherein it has been stated as follows :-  "Keeping in view the observation of the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh about the quantum of punishment the case of the petitioner has been considered sympathetically and this office has no reservation, if the punishment of termination of services of the deceased husband of the petitioner is substituted to that of administering the warning and of accepting the voluntary retirement of the deceased husband of the petitioner from the date his services were terminated by treating the period of absence from duty of the deceased as leave of the kind due."
In view of the stand taken by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, and in the circumstances of the case, I feel that it is just and proper in the interests of justice to set aside the order of termination and substitute the same with a warning and to accept the voluntary retirement of the husband of the petitioner from the date when his services were terminated by treating the period of absence from duty as leave of the kind due.
In case the petitioner's husband was not having leave to his credit for the entire period of absence, the same may be treated as extraordinary leave and on that basis the pensionary benefits of the petitioner's husband should be calculated and the petitioner be paid all the arrears of pension within two months from the date of receipt of this order and also grant the Family Pension to the petitioner in accordance with the rules.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed..