VK Bali, J (Oral) - Nafe Singh and seven others through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seek writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them the benefit of directions issued in Civil Writ Petition 4743 of 1986 (Randhir Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on Feburary 17, 1988, vide which all Ticket Verifiers employed with the respondent-department on whatever basis, on the principle of `Equal Pay for Equal Work' were held entitled to pay scale of Ticket Verifier, who were employed on regular basis.
It may be clarified here that as there was no regular post of Ticket Verifier, all Ticket Verifiers, in the petition referred to above, were given the regular pay scale of a Conductor.
It is not disputed that the judgment rendered by this Court in Randhir Singh's case (supra) has assumed finality as no appeal was carried against the same.
It is also not disputed that insofar as petitioners of the said case are concerned, they were given pay scale admissible to a Conductor.
On the basis of the admitted facts, as have been referred to above, the sole but forceful contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that the respondent-department cannot discriminate between the persons equally situate and that too when others equally situate have been given a regular pay scale admissible to a Conductor on the dint of the orders passed by this Court in Randhir Singh's case (supra).
2.
We find merit in the contention of the learned counsel, as noted above.
The contention of Mr. Bindal, learned counsel representing the State that the petitioners were not employed on regular basis and therefore, as per the law governing the field as on today they are not entitled to regular pay scale, cannot come as an impediment of the way of the petitioners in getting the desired relief as the case, as on today, has been based on the basis of hostile discrimination between the employees equally situate.
As referred to above, there is absolutely no dispute insofar as facts of this case are concerned and, in particular, that the Ticket Verifiers, equally situate, i.e. who were employed on the same terms and conditions as the petitioners were, have been placed in the pay scale of Conductor.
3.
This writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-department to fix the pay scale of the petitioners as admissible to a Conductor in the roadways department.
The viewers (arrears ?)
are, however, ordered to be restricted from the date of filing of the present petition.
No orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.