RP Sethi, J - Vide order dated 18121989 (Annexure P/1), the petitioner was placed under suspension and directed to be paid the subsistence allowance under Rule 72 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part I.
He was reinstated vide order dated 3171992 (Annexure P/3).
It was, however, mentioned in the said order that the reinstatement of the petitioner was without prejudice to the disciplinary proceedings pending against him as a result of the departmental inquiry.
Since the petitioner was not paid his salary for the period of suspension, he made various representations, which were not considered with the result that he filed the present writ petition with the prayer for payment of salary for the aforesaid period alongwith interest.
2.
In their reply, the respondents have submitted that while working as teacher in Government High School Mahawati, the petitioner was placed under suspension as he allegedly wrote a filthy letter to a girl student.
Father of the said girl lodged the FIR against the petitioner with the police.
The petitioner was tried in the Court of Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Panipat, and ultimately acquitted on account of non-production of the evidence.
The departmental proceedings could not be finalised on account of the alleged pendency of the criminal case against the petitioner.
After his acquittal in the criminal case, the petitioner was served with a notice under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (P & A) Rules, 1987 on January 27, 1995, which was ultimately converted into a minor punishment under Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules.
3.
The admitted facts of the case are that the petitioner was placed under suspension on 18121989 and reinstated on 3171992.
It is also admitted that the petitioner was directed to be paid the subsistence allowance for the said period.
It is also not denied that upon his reinstatement, no order was passed with respect to payment of salary for the period he remained under suspension.
It is now conceded that in the departmental enquiry, the petitioner has been decided to be punished by imposing a minor penalty.
In the absence of any order to the contrary, the respondents were not justified in withholding the salary of the petitioner for the period of suspension after his reinstatement.
The acknowledged principle is that upon reinstatement, a civil servant is entitled to all the consequential benefits unless directed otherwise.
This Court in Raj Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) S.C.T.
474, Civil Writ Petition No. 5757/1994, decided on August 16, 1994, considered a similar plea as advanced by the respondents, justifying their action on the ground that since an enquiry was contemplated against the petitioner, he was not entitled to the grant of relief, as prayed for in his petition.
It was held :-  "This submission of the learned counsel for the respondents is without any substance inasmuch as the petitioner was reinstated, he was entitled to all consequential benefits.
The respondents were at liberty to hold an enquiry in accordance with the provisions of law and pass appropriate orders regarding punishment, if so required.
Pending enquiry or awarding of punishment under the service rules, the petitioner cannot be deprived of his arrears of salary and Annual Grade increments.
The respondents have not been able to justify their action on the basis of any rule or authority of law."
4.
In Sulekh Chand and Selek Chand v. Commissioner of Police and others, Judgements Today 1995(1) SC 23 : 1995(2) SCT 411 (SC), it was held that once a delinquent was acquitted by a criminal court, the employers were not justified to overlook his case regarding promotion.
5.
It has next been contended by counsel for the respondents that since the petitioner was acquitted on technical ground, he was not entitled to the grant of relief as prayed for in the present petition.
The contention is without any substance because perusal of judgment (Annexure P/2) shows that the petitioner was acquitted of the charge as the prosecution failed to prove its case by leading any cogent evidence.
Under the circumstances, the writ petition is allowed with the direction that the petitioner shall be paid arrears of his salary for the period of suspension minus the amount of subsistence allowance paid to him.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.