THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition was originally filed in the year 1985 to quash the order dated April 12, 1985, reverting the petitioner to his original post of Vaidya.
2.
Subsequent to the filing of the writ petition, the Government passed orders cancelling the regularisation of the services of the petitioner on April 12, 1982 as Assistant Professor vide order dated April 24, 1990 (Annexure P-9) and appointed him on temporary basis vide order dated April 25, 1990.
(Annexure P-10).
Consequent upon the orders passed on April 24, 1990, and April 25, 1990, the petitioner amended the writ petition, challenging the orders of the Government of Punjab vide Annexures P-9 and P- 10.
3.
The petitioner being Graduate in Ayurveda Medicines and Surgery was appointed as Demonstrator in the Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala, in 1967.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Vaidya in 1968.
While in service, the petitioner did his post-graduation in Ayurveda.
While he was doing his post- graduation course, he was deputed to teach the subject in which he was doing his MD course vide order dated April 21, 1976, to the under-graduate students.
Thereafter, it appears the petitioners successfully completed his MD Course in 1976 itself.
The services of the petitioner were regularised by the Director of Ayurveda, Punjab by his order dated April 12, 1982 (Annexure P-3).
Thereafter, it appears the Government issued instructions vide its Memo No. 1(12)-HBIV-82/5725 dated April 15, 1982, directing the Director of Ayurveda not to interfere with the postings and transfers etc. of the staff working in the Government Ayurveda College, Patiala.
In pursuance of the said instructions, the Government of Punjab stayed the orders issued by the Director of Ayurveda on April 12, 1982 under which the services of the petitioner were regularised and promoted as such to the post of Assistant Professor/Senior Lecturer.
Challenging the said order, the petitioner and some others affected by the said order, filed some writ petitions in this Court - C.W.P.No.
11763 of 1982.
Those writ petitions were disposed of on an assureance given by the Government that the Government would pass final orders after calling for objections/replies/explanations from the affected parties.
Accordingly, the Government called for objections from the affected parties by issuing a notice on October 8, 1984, vide Annexure P-4.
The petitioner submitted his objections on October 20, 1984, for the stay of the order dated April 12, 1982, vide Annexure P-5.
Thereafter, after considering the objections of the affected parties including the petitioner, the Government passed the order dated April 24, 1990 (Annexure P-9) cancelling the order of the Director, Ayurveda, dated April 12, 1982.
On the very next date, the Government also issued the orders posting the petitioner and others as Assistant Professors on temporary basis.
4.
The main grievance of the petitioner was that the order dated April 12, 1982, was passed by the Director, Ayurveda, prior to the instructions issued by the Government on April 15, 1982, directing the Director not to interfere with the postings and transfers of the staff working in the Ayurveda College, Patiala.
Therefore, according to him, the order issued on April 12, 1982, (Annexure P-3) have to stand and that the ground on which the cancellation of the said orders was issued, did not exist and therefore, the orders cancelling the order dated April 12, 1982 of the Director, Ayurveda, is liable to be quashed.
5.
There is no dispute that the petitioner is placing reliance to continue as Assistant Professor only on the basis of the order of the Director, Ayurveda, dated April 12, 1982 (Annexure P-3).
It is, therefore, to be seen whether the Director passed the orders dated April 12, 1982, in accordance with Rules.
Under Rule 8(1) of the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III- Technical) Service Rules, 1963, "All appointments to the Service shall be made-  (a) in the case of Senior Lecturers, Junior Lecturers, Assistant Professors, Vaidyas, Hakims and Up Vaidyas, fifty per cent by promotion from amongst the members of the Service, provided the persons to be promoted possess the qualifications, specified in column 4 of the Appendix A and fifty per cent by direct appointment through the Commission or the Board, as the case may be;" Annexure P-3 in my view does not amount to an order of appointment, though a reference was made to Rule 8(1)(a) of the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class III-Technical) Service Rules, 1963, in the said order dated April 12, 1982.
It is pertinent to quote the relevant portion of the said order which reads as follows:-  "In pursuance of Rule 8(1)(a) of the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class III-Technical) Service Rules, 1963, and Government directions in regard to the regularisation of adjusted teaching staff in Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala, the services of the following 'adjustees' who are Post Graduates and also working against the post(s) of Assistant Professor/Senior Lecturer satisfactorily, are hereby regularised with immediate effect and are promoted as such to the post of Assistant Professor/Senior Lecturer of respective specialities in the pay scale of Rs. 825-25-850-30-1000/40-1200-50-1400-60-1580 plus usual allowances sanctioned by the Government from time to time with effect from April 12, 1982."
Thus, from a reading of the above order, it is clear that the Director, Ayurveda, had regularised the services of the adjustees.
He was not making any fresh appointment.
On a close reading of the said order, it is clear that he was not making appointments after considering the qualifications and experiences as prescribed under the Rules, along with the other eligible candidates.
All the six persons whose services have been regularised, have already been working as 'adjustees'.
This is an undisputed fact that the petitioner has been working as an 'adjustee' by virtue of an order passed by the Director, Ayurveda on April 21, 1976, (Annexure P-2), the relevant portion of which reads as follows:  "The following students of MD Course, Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala, who are holding regular appointments as Vaidyas under this Department and who after submission of thesis have been allowed preparatory holidays are hereby deputed/adjusted in the public interest to teach the subjects to the students of the under-graduate course in the said institution with immediate effect" x x x x  Their deputation/adjustment will be subject to the following conditions that :- (1) This arrangement will last till suitable candidates through Punjab Public Service Commission or Department become available or till the decision of the Punjab High Court in Civil Writ No. 5572 of 1975 whichever is earlier.
(2) This arrangement can be terminated at any time without assigning any reason or notice.
(3) This being purely temporary arrangement, none of these officials shall have any claim concerning seniority.
(4) During this temporary arrangement, these officials shall be allowed the usual pay scales of Vaidyas viz. 350-600 w.e.f.
15.4.1976 against the posts of Assistant Professors shown against their names above."
Thus, it is clear from the said order dated April 21, 1976 that the petitioner has not been appointed as Assistant Professor.
He has been only deputed to teach the students of the Under-Graduate Course in the Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala.
Annexure P-6 does not confer any right on the petitioner to continue his services as Assistant Professor.
In fact, it is also clear from Annexure P-2 that the scale of pay of Assistant Professor has not been given to the petitioner.
He is allowed the pay scale of Vaidya only.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot stake his claim as Assistant Professor on the basis of order dated April 21, 1976.
As already observed, it is an admitted fact that no order of appointment has been given to the petitioner, appointing him as Assistant Professor.
Therefore, there is no question of regularising the services of the petitioner as Assistant Professor by the Director, Ayurveda, by his order darted April 12, 1982.
Hence, order dated April 12, 1982, has not been passed in accordance with Rules.
There must be an appointment first, then only the regularisation comes in.
When there is no appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Professor, there is no question of regularising his services.
It appears, some representations had been made to the Government in the manner in which the regularisation has been made by the Director, Ayurveda.
This necessitated the Government to issue instructions dated April 15, 1982, and keep the regularisation of such persons in abeyance and after calling for objections from the affected parties and after affording them an opportunity of being heard, the Government cancelled the orders regularising the services of the persons appointed by the Director vide his order dated April 12, 1982.
On a consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case, I am clearly of the opinion that the order of the Government dated April 24, 1990 (Annexure P-9), does not require any interference by this Court.
In view of the interest of the student community, the Government has passed the orders on the very next date ie on April 25, 1990, appointing certain persons including the petitioners as Assistant Professors on temporary basis.
It appears till now the regular appointments have not been made by the Government.
According to the petitioner, he was the only eligible candidate in the year 1982 when a vacancy of Assistant Professor in his subject had arisen.
It is the further argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the other persons who have been impleaded as private respondents in this writ petition are not qualified in his subject to be appointed as Assistant Professor.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that it is in the interest of justice to give suitable directions to the Government to make regular appointments as there cannot be temporary appointments for a long time.
6.
I accordingly direct the Goverment to consider the claims of the Vaidyas and other eligible candidates working in the Department for promotion as against the vacancies in the relevant subjects and promotions be made from amongst the staff as against their quota of fifty per cent from the dates when the vacancy in the subject has arisen and necessary orders shall be passed by the Government in pursuance of this direction within a period of two months from today.
The Government shall take into consideration the qualifications and experience prescribed under the Rules while making regular appointments.
The Government cannot keep the appointments temporarily for long time.
The orders appointing the petitioner and some others on temporary basis have been passed as long back as on April 25, 1990, six years have elapsed.
It is, therefore, obligatory on the part of the Government to make regular appointments against the vacancies from the date from which they have arisen in the subject concerned.
Subject to the above directions, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.