Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner had approached this court in the year 1992 with a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to admit her to the three years course leading to the decree of Master of Dental Surgery on the basis of her marks in the B.D.S.
examination.
She had also prayed for the quashing of the notification dated September 9, 1991 by which the State Government had directed that the selection shall be made on the basis of an entrance test.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed her B.D.S.
Examination in the year 1990.
On June 30, 1991, she completed the house job.
While she was still doing the house job, the State Government issued a notice on March 8, 1991 inviting applications for admission to the three years course leading to the degree of Master of Dental Surgery.
Before the selection could be made, a fresh notice was issued on July 10, 1991.
Candidates were given another opportunity to submit their applications.
The petitioner applied for admission.
She was interviewed on August 8, 1991.
She alleges that her name was included in the merit list.
However, on September 9, 1991, the State Government issued a fresh notification by which the selection already made for admission to the three years M.D.S.
course was scrapped.
It was further directed that fresh merit list shall be prepared after conducting an entrance test.
Two candidates challenged this notification through Civil Writ Petition No. 12245 of 12757 and 1991.
Vide order dated June 3, 1992, these petitions were allowed.
As a result, the two candidates were admitted to the course.
The petitioner alleges that both these persons had secured easser marks then her in B.D.S.
examination.
One of them and secured a total of 1808 marks out of 2800.
The other candidate had a total score of 1608 out of 2800.
As against this, the petitioner had secured 1893 marks.
She had in fact stood first in the University examination.
In this situation, the petitioner approached the Court with a prayer that the respondents should be directed to admit her as candidates who were below her in order of merit had already been admitted.
She also pointed out that certain additional seats had become available and that she could be accommodated against one of those seats.
3.
It appears that vide order dated July 23, 1992, the writ petition was dismissed.
However, the petitioner filed a review application No. 229 of 1992.
On August 28, 1992, the Division Bench allowed the review application and recalled the order of July 23, 1992.
It further directed the issue of notice of motion to the respondents.
After the filing of the written statement etc., the matter came up for consideration before the Bench on September 18, 1992.
Their Lordships were pleased to direct that the petitioner be admitted to the three years M.D.S.
course.
Accordingly, the petitioner was admitted.
4.
Initially, the petitioner had impleaded the State Government, the Director, Research and Medical Education and the two Dental Colleges in Punjab as respondents.
However, it appears that a Civil Misc.
Application No. 2231 of 1993 was filed by the Punjabi University through its Registrar.
Vide order dated July 23, 1993, this application was allowed and the University was impleaded as a party.
After hearing counsel for the petitioner as well as the counsel for the respondent-University, the Bench admitted the writ petition and directed the respondents "to permit the petitioner to continue her studies subject to the result of the petition."
It has now come up for final hearing.
5.
During the interval of four years that have elapsed since the admission of the writ petition, the petitioner has not only attended all the classes but was even permitted to appear in the final examination which was held in August-September 1995.
It is in this situation that the petitioner's case has to be examined.
6.
Mr. Agnihotri submits that since the petitioner has already completed her course of studies, the respondents should be directed to declare the result.
Mr. Mohinderjit Singh Sethi, learned counsel for the respondent-University however, contests this claim and submits that since the petitioner was admitted late, the University cannot be forced to declare the result.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner has had a good academic record.
She had passed the B.D.S.
examination in the year 1990.
She had stood first in the University.
She had secured fairly high marks.
It has also not been suggested that she was in any way ineligible for admission.
In fact, it is the admitted position that two candidates who had admittedly secured lesser marks than her had been admitted and their result has been declared.
Still further, Mr. Agnihotri has pointed out that on July 20, 1995, the Principal of the Government Dental College and Hospital, Patiala where the petitioner was studying, has certified that she has "completed her training/course as per the guidelines of Dental Council of India."
In this situation, it is clear that the petitioner was eligible to appear in the final examination.
Should she still be denied the benefit of her efforts ?
It would not be fair to do that.
She has studied for three years.
She has already taken the examination.
If the petitioner is now denied the relief, the time, money and energy spent by her shall be wasted.
This would serve no body's interest.
Not even that of the University.
Consequently, it appears to be just and fair to direct the respondent-University to declare the petitioner's result.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent-University is directed to declare the petitioner's result within one month.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.