MS Liberhan, J - This order will dispose of civil writ petitions Nos. 15999, 16177 and 17438 of 1996, petitioners in these writ petitions have impugned their repatriation from Criminal Investigation Department (hereinafter referred to as `CID') to their respective parent departments, mostly on common grounds.
2.
Though there are some differences in facts, yet the material facts are mostly common in these three petitions and questions relied can be fairly regarded as common questions.
Expurgated version of facts may be taken from civil writ petition No. 15999 of 1996.
3.
Narinder Singh, petitioner No. 2 was recruited as constable in 1970, thereafter sent to CID on 28121975, where he was promoted to higher ranks on ad hoc promotions in officiating ranks.
While working as sub-inspector in CID, the petitioner was repatriated to his parent Force i.e. to the General Police Force.
Similarly, Kulwant Singh, petitioner No. 1 was recruited in 1982, sent to CID on 7.11.1982 from where he was sent for Lower School Course on 1101987.
It was thereafter that he was promoted to various ranks from head-constable to sub-inspector on ad-hoc basis in officiating ranks.
He was promoted as officiating sub-inspector in CID on 1751994.
He was repatriated after reversion though he had qualified various tests held in CID.
4.
The core relevant facts in other petitions are:-  The petitioners were reverted and repatriated to their respective cadres as head constables vide the impugned order dated 2461986.
Some of the petitioners were reverted and repatriated almost on the eve of their retirement.
Reference would be made at appropriate places.
5.
Petitioners in respective petitions impugned the reversion and repatriation on the grounds: (i) it is arbitrary, as there is no criteria for repatriation; it is on the basis of pick and choose; (ii) it is discriminatory as orders of repatriation in case of many similarly situated persons as the petitioners were cancelled or withdrawn.
Reference was made to the writ petition No. 9644 of 1996 wherein petitioners challenged their reversion and repatriation.
Respondent-State therein conceded that the repatriation would be on the rank they were holding in CID, petitioners on their repatriation would not be reverted.
Similar treatment is denied to the petitioners in their respective Departments; (iii) the respondents are estopped from reverting and repatriating the petitioners because of their long service and promotions in the CID, particularly when there was no provision for ad-hoc promotion.
Promotions are said to be regular promotions though described temporary, officiating or ad hoc.
Petitioners would always be deemed to be regularly promoted.
Support has been sought from rule 1318 of Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as `Rules'), providing that in the eventuality of one having worked for two years against a substantive or regular post, one would not be reverted and would be deemed to have been promoted regularly; (iv) the principles of natural justice have been violated while reverting and repatriating the petitioners inasmuch as neither any opportunity for going for training was given nor the petitioners ever opted for CID, where they are said to be on deputation.
The petitioners could neither be reverted nor denied promotions on the ground of having not passed the test in their parent department, especially when their juniors in the parent department were detailed for training on their turn and were promoted which was not done in case of petitioners.
It would be unjust, unfair and arbitrary to revert the petitioners and make them to work as juniors to their juniors after two decades of service without any fault on their part.
6.
Respondents averred and contended that CID has no cadre of its own except the Dog Squad and Language Stenographers.
Persons on various ranks were not available nor are now available or willing to give their willingness or consent to join CID.
In terms or rule 2125 of the Rules, all the posts are filled by taking persons on deputation for three years extendable at the discretion of DIG for two years at a time.
Thus, keeping in view the exigency of service, the Department grants officiating promotions.
It has a sanctioned strength of 123 posts out of which persons are in position against 94 posts and out of these 94 posts persons are working on officiating/ad-hoc promotions against 54 vacancies in the CID.
Despite the petitioners having earned officiating promotions in the CID according to their seniority they did not have a right to be considered for promotion.
In terms of rule 2125 sub-rules 2 and 3 of the Rules, the petitioners retain their lien and position in their parent cadre in their units/district ranges.
Petitioners being on deputation are liable to officiate in the Department in officiating position and would be liable to be reverted and repatriated to their original position in their parent cadre.
The petitioners despite their officiation do not acquire any right to be perpetually in CID where they are on deputation.
It is in one's parent department where one has a legal right or entitlement to be considered for promotion in accordance with rules though in exceptional cases promotions can be given by Deputy Inspector-General (Deputation Wing) with the consent of Deputy Inspector-General of parent cadre.
Promotions otherwise, when one is on deputation would amount to superseding the seniors in the parent department.
Repatriation is neither penal nor a punitive action.
Deputation is always subject to administrative exigency, desirability and suitability.
The petitioner could not claim substantive promotion while on deputation on a post in the department where he has been taken on deputation nor can claim confirmation in the department where he has been taken on deputation on provisionally promoted rank or for having worked for a long period in officiating rank.
Deputationists are sent for various training courses in schools according to their seniority in their parent cadre.
Officiating or ad-hoc promotions of the petitioners were made against vacancies in the CID.
The petitioners were not substantively promoted.
Reference was made to rule 2125 sub-rules 1, 2 and 3, 1624, 1243 and 13.
Respondents relied upon Sohan Singh, SI v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SLR 171 : 1991(1) SCT 535. and SI Ram Phal v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(4) RSJ 572.
7.
The edifice of the Police Act and the Punjab Police Rules provides that the State police would be constituted as Provisional Police Districts and Railway Police Districts, though the same would be further sub-divided into various departments.
Reference has been made to section 3 of the Police Act and rule 1 of the Rules.
CID is one of the separate departments in the Police Force.
Members of Police Force are required to serve not only in the State but anywhere in the country as ordered by the competent authority.
8.
Chapter 12 of the Police Rules provides for recruitment and seniority etc.
Recruitment to the Force is on probation for two years extendable at the maximum for another two years.
Seniority is determined according to confirmation.
Delay in conformation or promotion on account of being on deputation outside the range or district would not affect one's seniority and other consequential benefits in his parent range or district i.e. in feeder cadre.
Upon one's repatriation and on his promotion in his parent district, he would regain his seniority which he originally held vis-a-vis a junior officer promoted or confirmed before him during his deputation.
Special reference may be made to rule 12 of the rules.
9.
Referring to rule 13, one can say that promotion can be made by selection tempered with seniority keeping in view the training acquired or imparted and courses qualified.
Promotions are required to be made from amongst the candidates brought on various lists, prescribed under the Rules.
One is sent on a course on the basis of test held and seniority-cum-merit.
Designated officers are authorised to grant officiating promotions keeping in view the exigencies or the needs of the service or of the Department as well as the availability of suitable qualified candidates.
Officiating promotion or substantive promotion or promotion simpliciter denotes different and distinct connotations and nature of classes of promotions.
Promotions are made on probation for two years extendable at the maximum for another two years.
The authorities in exercise of their discretion treat the officiating period as a period spent on probation.
We may conclude from the scheme of the rules that as a necessary corollary on promotion one has to be specifically put on probation in case of regular or substantive promotion.
Officiating promotion can be made in terms of rule 13 read with rule 21, with specific power of relaxation of any rule for the reasons to be recorded.
10.
Criminal Investigation Department was established to aid and to assist the police force in investigating apart from gathering intelligence.
It helps the State in discharge of its obligation of preventing and eradicating public disorder.
In the CID, except the post of inspector, all other posts under the rules, are required to be filled by persons on deputation from district police.
Initial period of deputation is three years, though at the discretion of DIG, it is extendable by two years at a time.
The deputationists in terms of the express rules retain their original position in the cadre i.e. district or the range.
Officiating promotion in the CID, which would lapse on one's reversion to one's parent department, can be granted.
It is incumbent upon the respondents, that on turn for regular promotion in the parent cadre of the deputationist, he be informed and given an opportunity of reverting back to the cadre.
No regular promotion can be made in the CID from amongst the persons on deputation with an exception that where a deputationist is qualified according to the prescribed standards and his turn for promotion has matured in the cadre to which he belongs, regular promotion by the Deputy Inspector-General of the CID with the consent of the Deputy Inspector-General of the range, may be made.
There is no regular recruitment in the CID with exception that one can be recruited on a contract basis for a specific purpose.
Reference may be made to rule 21 and specifically to rule 2125.
11.
In the Full Bench decision of this Court in Raj Kumar ASI v. State of Punjab and others, 1980(3) SLR 779, it was observed:-  ``The concepts of officiation and probation are distinct and separate; express orders putting a person on probation are required; and mere efflux of time would neither convert the officiating promotion into deemed promotion on probation nor it would result in automatic confirmation.''
After taking into consideration the law laid down in Risal Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(2) RSJ 403, it was observed that one does not acquire any right to hold officiating post as one is taken in the CID on deputation irrespective of the seniority in the parent department, one gets fortuitous- officiating promotion in the CID.
Since promotion in the CID cannot be deemed to be a promotion under rule 13, therefore, there cannot be deemed promotion.
On one's getting officiating and fortuitous promotion while on deputation under rule 2125(2), one cannot claim that he should be treated as automatically confirmed; especially when the claims of seniors in the parent department were not considered while giving officiating/ad-hoc promotion in the CID.
By officiating fortuitous promotion, one cannot be deemed to be promoted in one's parent department.
Otherwise it would be contrary to rule of promotion i.e. seniority-cum-merit.
There cannot be deemed absorption in the CID as rule 2125 provides for power of granting extension only.
There is no specific power or implied power for automatic absorption of a deputationist especially keeping in view the nature of duties and the exigencies of the service.
One neither acquires any right nor can claim to be on deputation for indefinite period.
One can be repatriated at any time, particularly when one's rights are protected in the parent department.
12.
Petitioner's reliance on Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(2) RSJ 283 is of no consequence inasmuch as neither the questions raised nor the facts in the present writ petitions and those of the precedent are pari materia.
The observations made and the law laid down in the precedent are in the context and text of the said case.
Hon'ble Court on facts, came to the conclusion ``the petitioners would be deemed to be confirmed on completion of the probation period of two years in the facts and circumstances of the case.
13.
Similarly, in our considered view, reliance placed by the petitioner on Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(2) RSJ 229 does not support the petitioner's contentions.
In our considered view, the law laid down in Satbir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT 454 : CWP No. 11747 of 1995. can be said to have taken the correct view.
In view of the law laid down by the Division Bench of this Court which is binding on us, it was specifically observed by the Division Bench that neither there can be deemed absorption nor one can claim to be on perpetual deputation.
Thus, in view of the decision of the Division Bench in Satbir Singh's case (supra) and the law laid down, with which we respectfully agree, we may say with utmost respect to the Hon'ble Judge that the view taken in Jagat Singh's case (supra) cannot be sustained.
Thus, the law laid down in Jagat Singh's case (supra) is overruled.
14.
In view of the observations made in the earlier part of the judgment, it can be held that the petitioners have neither any right for permanent absorption in the CID nor have any right to be considered for regular promotion in the CID, especially when seniors in the feeder cadre were still working on lower ranks.
15.
The petitioners challenge the administrative act of the respondents as arbitrary and unreasonable.
The right of the Department of taking a person on deputation and to repatriate him, cannot be denied.
In the realm of service law, there cannot be a perpetual deputation unless some statute provides for it.
The respondents specifically took this stand in view of the nature of duties, respondents' expertise in management, statutory limit of period for which one can be taken on deputation i.e. initially for three years, the period being extendable at a time only for two years that too at the discretion of high -ranking officer namely DIG, the willingness and consent of the official to serve the CID, all these categorically point out and support the contention of the respondents that the CID have no permanent cadre of its own.
Reference may be made to rule 2125 of the Rules.
There is nothing on record nor even suggested that the order of repatriation was made on extraneous considerations or for fanciful reasons.
Repatriation in accordance with rules cannot be termed to be unreasonable solely on the ground that the same has been effected after a long span of time or efflux of time or that some were ordered to be repatriated while others were not, or that there is no fixed scheme, rules or instructions with regard to repatriation.
It is axiomatic that executive or administrative action of the authorities without contravening the laws or without exercise of excessive power or not within the comprehension of an individual being unjust, cannot ordinarily be termed as arbitrary or unreasonable.
An act performed in conformity with the express rules or the law is presumed to be in public interest unless it is shown to be otherwise.
Mere likelihood of hardship being suffered by the petitioners cannot render the statutory or the executive power redundant.
If we may hasten to add, the petitioners by their own act and conduct having accepted the deputation to the CID without any demeanour for a long time and having derived the benefits of officiating against higher ranks or posts, especially when they would not have got these benefits in their feeder cadre nor any right to be considered for promotion on account of their inter-se seniority there, cannot be permitted to challenge their repatriation after having derived all the advantages on account of going on deputation.
We may venture to say that a deputationist after being on deputation at a higher rank or post or on a post with higher responsibilities with higher economical benefits etc., his losing the same when repatriated after a long time though appears to be horrendous, yet on consideration of the law, rules cited at the Bar and the observations made in the earlier part of the judgment, is very much inherent in the exigency of service on deputation.
One is bound to take the disadvantages along with the advantages while accepting the deputation.
In our considered view, the repatriation cannot be termed arbitrary or unreasonable.
16.
At the cost of repetition, we may observe that the statute and the rules itself provide for deputationist's repatriation which is even otherwise inherent in the case of a deputation.
Mere efflux of time would not denude the authorities of their right to repatriate which is a necessary corollary to deputation.
In the realm of equal protection as well as equal opportunity as provided in the Constitution, discrimination would arise only when a person having a right under law, has been denied that right, or benefit is given to a person who has no right to have the benefit given to him, or in case some similarly situated persons have either been deprived of or given a benefit while others not, without their having any reasonable distinction.
As observed in the earlier part of the judgment, deputationists have no right to be perpetually on deputation.
On ground realities deputation may continue keeping in view all the requirements or exigencies of the service etc. of the Department taking him on deputation or of the feeder cadre.
The willingness of the deputationist to serve on deputation apart from the terms and conditions, the statutory rules governing the deputation or the feeder cadre of binding in nature, is quitessential which can be given expressly or impliedly.
There cannot be mathematical equations in administrative actions.
In order to permit the administration to run effectively, some room or play has to be given to the administrators in their administrative actions.
Ordinarily, the courts would not substitute their opinion with respect to justifiability of an administrative action unless the administrative action prima facie, is either contrary to law, perverse or has resulted in substantial injustice etc.  17.
The sole fact pointed out by counsel for the petitioner is that repatriation in case of some of the deputationists has been ordered to be cancelled and some of them have been repatriated in the same rank i.e. without reversion.
In our considered view, the facts and factors pointed out either in isolation or even jointly would not constitute an act of discrimination.
An administrative action can be termed as discriminatory only when the act was actuated by any improper motive or is charged with patent unfairness.
There is neither any basis nor any factual data brought to our notice from which it can be inferred that the act of the respondents is unfair or motivated.
Orders of repatriation appear to be an essential part of the administration, of the process of administering the services of the deputationists.
There is no public service or public interest which stands violated, especially as observed earlier that one has neither a legal nor a constitutional right to go on deputation or to stay on deputation perpetually.
In the absence of a right, discrimination cannot be assumed in abstract, much less with a wooden exactness.
Reference may be made to State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali, AIR 1952 SC 75 and Sukumar Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1993 SC 2335 : 1993(4) SCT 155.
18.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in sequel of his contentions that the act of respondents being arbitrary, unjust and discriminatory, contended that respondents are estopped from repatriating the petitioners on the principle of equitable estoppel and just expectations.
The principles of equitable estoppel and just expectations are relatable to the principle of inherent justice.
It is well-established that there can neither be acquisition of power by invoking the principle of estoppel nor an authority can denude itself from exercising its statutory power by its act or conduct on the principle of equitable estoppel.
We may hasten to add that the public authority is not estopped from exercising its statutory authority either on the ground that it has not been exercising earlier or because of efflux of time it should not be exercised.
The arguments based on the principle of equitable estoppel and just expectations are dealt with without there being any factual matrix either spelt out from the pleadings or the record, from which one could reasonably or plausibly infer that on the basis of some other policy the CID never repatriated any deputationist or there are any administrative actions debarring the repatriation, or there are any rules or instructions so issued by the State for absorption in the CID of a deputationist, especially when the rules envisage deputation for a specific term, extendable from time to time.
We may observe that by reading of the rule 2125 one can categorically observe that in case term of a deputationist is not extended by any specific order, unless the department permits the deputationist to continue, he is expected to go back to the feeder cadre.
19.
The respondents cannot be said to have been estopped from reverting the petitioners and repatriating them to their feeder cadre solely on account of efflux of time or not taking appropriate action of repatriation just on the expiry of three years i.e. the initial term of deputation, especially when it is statutorily provided that the period of deputation can be extended for two years at a time.
20.
As pointed out in the earlier part of the judgment, we may, at the cost of repetition, refer to rules 13 and 21 of the Rules, which specifically provide that ad-hoc or fortuitous promotion can be made while one is on deputation but such promotion is only for the term of the deputationist in the CID.
In case of such ad-hoc promotion while an deputation, one cannot be permitted to carry the ad-hoc rank or the promotion made by the recipient department to one's feeder cadre, especially when his seniors are still working at lower ranks or were not considered for promotion at the time or prior thereto.
To hold otherwise, would not only be unfair but also contrary to the equality clause and amount to violation of the principle of equality and equal opportunity for all.
In our considered view, the order of reversion as well as repatriation does not suffer from lack of jurisdiction or authority either on the principle of equitable estoppel or on the touchstone of doctrine of just expectations which is inherent in the principle of fair- play.
21.
Before parting with the judgment, we may notice the judgment cited by learned counsel for the petitioners namely Sohan Singh SI v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SLR 171 : 1991(1) SCT 535, in order to support his contention that the CID is, in fact, a part of the General Police and a person transferred to the CID cannot be termed to be on deputation.
In view of the findings recorded in the earlier part of the judgment, referring to the statutory rules whereby it has been brought forth that the CID is a department in itself and not a part of the General Police, one cannot say that the petitioners would not be on deputation with the CID.
Reading of rules 1, 13 and 21 harmoniously as well as on the factual matrix brought on record i.e. CID have a fixed strength with no permanent cadre and provision for acquiring contractual services in case of an exigency etc., leaves us with no doubt to hold that the CID is an independent department and persons deputed to serve in the CID from the General Police would be deemed to be and in fact are on deputation.
Otherwise too, the argument advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners is destructive of the argument raised earlier that the petitioners were taken on deputation without the consent.
We may hasten to add that though the counsel has relied upon observations made in the judgment, yet in view of the fact that there was neither any question raised before the Hon'ble single Judge as to whether the CID is a part of the General Police or not, nor such a proposition was debated or decided, observations made are in the context and text of the facts and circumstances of the case and the questions raised therein.
It cannot be said that the Hon'ble Judge has laid down any principle of uniform law that the CID is a part of the General Police by interpreting the statutory rules and regulations.
Thus, with due respect to the Hon'ble Judge, we cannot subscribe to the observations made.
22.
We are of the considered view that in order to get specialised services from employees in the State Administration, trained government servants would be an asset in public interest.
Though the petitioners have neither any right to be absorbed permanently in the CID nor they can successfully challenge the repatriation after reversion, yet in the interest of good administration it would be for the State to frame a policy or issue guidelines on the subject of repatriation.
The State would be well-advised to take care of the repatriated employees who have served on deputation for decades.
23.
In view of the observations made above and the facts and circumstances of the petition in hand, the State is directed to consider the petitioners' case for promotion in the feeder cadre, especially when their juniors have been promoted, keeping in view the length of service put in by them on higher ranks or posts with higher responsibilities while on deputation, their performance in the borrowing department, reasons for repatriation and other relevant ancillary matters required to do substantial justice.
Respondents are further directed to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion according to rules, granting appropriate exemptions from complying with the technicalities of the rules of promotion provided for the police Force.
In view of the law laid down and in view of the facts and circumstances of the present writ petitions, writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms.
Petitions disposed of.