RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner has prayed for a Writ of Mandamus directing respondents No. 3 & 4 i.e. the Chairman, Admission Committee, Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, and the Principal, Guru Teg Bahadur Khalsa Polytechnic, Chhapian Wali, Malout respectively to admit him in the Diploma in Pharmacy course in Session 1992-93.
The admission was to be made on the basis of merit of a Joint Entrance Test, which was conducted by Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology, respondent No. 3.
Petitioner qualified the same by obtaining 70% marks.
Petitioner had passed Matriculation Examination from Government High School, Sukhna Ablu, Faridkot, which is a rural area.
70% of the seats were reserved for candidates belonging to rural area and if a candidate had passed his Matriculation Examination while studying in a school, which is located in rural area, then, he was to be given weightage of 5% of marks.
The case of the petitioner in this writ petition is that respondent No. 5 Sat Dev Singh was wrongly given admission in the reserved category of candidates belonging to rural area as it is alleged that the said respondent does not belong to rural area.
It is further alleged that if respondent No. 5 is excluded, then the petitioner would get admission on merit in the reserved category.
2.
Reply has been filed on behalf of all the respondents.
Respondent No. 4 has stated that in fact respondent No. 5 belongs to rural area and he had produced the requisite certificate in that regard.
Copies of the same have been attached as Annexures R-1 and R-2.
It has further been started that even by giving 5% wlightage in marks to the petitioner for having passed the Matriculation Examination, while studying in a school, situated in rural area, he was still lower in merit than respondent No. 5.
As affidavit was filed by the petitioner that in fact respondent No. 5 had produced a false certificate showing that he belongs to rural area.
Respondent No. 5 again got a clarificatory certificate from the authorities, which had issued the earlier certificate regarding the domicile of respondent No. 5 to be belonging to rural area.
It was mentioned by the authorities that the certificate already issued was correct.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the certificate produced by respondent No. 5, it has been mentioned that he is holder of Yellow Card in the Village-Killa Darshan Singh, Post Office, Batala, Tehsil Batala, District Gurdaspur (entered at serial No. 6380).
According to the learned counsel, this certificate in fake and respondent No. 5 was not entitled to the issuance of any such yellow card.
He has further argued that in the said certificate it is not mentioned as to at what serial number the name of respondent No. 5 in the Voters List exists.
From this, counsel for the petitioner wants to deduce that respondent No. 5 was not a resident of Village Killa Darshan Singh.
4.
I am afraid this Court under Article 226 cannot go into all these disputed questions of facts.
The fact as emerges on record is that respondent No. 5 held a certificate showing him to be resident of rural area.
The certificate has been issued by the prescribed authorities and even later on it was verified by the said authorities that the certificate was correctly issued.
As far as this Court is concerned, this is sufficient evidence to show that respondent No. 5 belongs to rural area.
This certificate was accepted by the authorities, who were to admit the candidates in various, Institutions.
It is not necessary that a resident of rural area must be a voter.
There can be various reasons for a person not being registered as a voter.
That will not mean that the person is not a resident of rural area.
Apart from these considerations, it cannot be lost sight of that by now respondent No. 5 has already completed one year of studies.
Therefore, no case has been made out by the petitioner for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.