RS Mongia, J - Miss Monika Bathla (Petitioner No. 2) whose father Dr. HB Lall (petitioner No. 1) is working as a Lecturer in Applied Physics in Dr. BR Ambedkar Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar (hereinafter called the 'Institution) applied for admission in the Institution to B. Tech/B.E.
Engineering Degree Course for the Session 1992-93 against 2% seats allegedly reserved for the wards of the employees of the Institution.
She was refused admission on the ground that there was no reservation provided for the wards of the employees of the Institution.
This led the petitioners to file the present writ petition.
2.
In the writ petition it has been averred that it is the governing body of the Institution that lays down the rules and regulations for admission of the students in the Institution.
The case of the petitioner as put forth in the writ petition is that the State Government had issued instructions on 1691991 (Annexure p/2) to various Institutions of the State of Punjab regarding the reservation in admission for wards of the employees working in the Department/Institution.
It was pointed out that such reservation admission had already been struck down by Punjab & Haryana High Court in various cases and therefore reservation for the wards of the employees of the Institution was not justified.
It may be mentioned here that in the prospectus issued by the Institution, no reservation was shown to have been made for the wards of the employees of the Institution.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that respondent- Institution was not bound by the instructions issued by the State Government.
The earlier decision of the Board of Governors of the Institution making reservation in question had not been annulled by any resolution of the Board of Governors and therefore the petitioner was entitled for admission against the seats reserved for the wards of the employees of the Institution.
4.
On the other hand, it has been replied on behalf of the respondents Institution that admission for the Sessions 1989-90 was approved by the chairman-Board of Governors of the Institution of 2721989 in which 2% seats were reserved for the children of the serving staff of the Technical Education Department including the Institution in question.
This reservation was made on the State Government pattern.
Further the Board of Governors of the Institution in its meeting held on 1011986 had authorised the Chairman, Board of Governors to take decision in connection with the affair of setting up of Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar and issues decided from time to time to be put up to the Board for information subsequently.
Further it has been mentioned that Punjab Government vide its letter dated 1691991 (Annexure P-2) had decided that with effect from the academic session 1992-93, there was to be no reservation in admission for wards of the employees of the institution.
In view of this, no reservation of seats was made for the children of serving staff of the Institution.
This resolution was got approved from the Board of Governors by a circulation subsequently.
5.
To controvert the reply, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the decision of the Board of Governors not to have reservation for the wards of the employees of the Institution was subsequent to the admission and therefore the admission for the Session 1992-93 would be governed by the earlier decision of the Board of Governors and consequently learned counsel prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued to the Institution to admit the petitioner on the basis of earlier decision of the Board of Governors.
6.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is the definite stand of the respondent that for the session 1992-93 no reservation was provided for the wards of the employees of the Institution.
The decision had already been taken not to have such reservations which was in consonance with State Government Instructions dated 1691991 (Annexure P/2).
On the facts of the present case the resolution of the Board of Governors would amount to ratification of the action taken earlier.
Even if for the sake of argument, it is considered that the earlier decision of the Board of Governors still subsisted which provided for reservation, I am afraid, the same cannot be enforced by a Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for two reasons :-  (i) Such reservation has already been struck down by this Court in various judgments i.e. in  Ajay Kumar Mittal v. Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar, AIR 1948 P & H 278.
Sunil K.S.
Panwar v. Registrar, Panjab University, and others, 1990(4) SLR 4;  Parveen Hans v. Registrar, Panjab University, 1990(1) PLR 490 & Pankaj v. State of Punjab., 1991(1) SLR 741 : 1991(1) SCT 465 (P&H) (DB).
In Parveen Hans case (supra) learned Judge has observed as under :- "Before parting with this matter it must be observed that it was in blatant disregard of the known and settled law that the University created and reserved additional seats for its employees and their wards and this action must therefore invite adverse comment.
It is clearly incumbent upon the University authorities to ensure that such disregard of law never reoccurs.
If such reservation is ever again made, the University authorities would be well advised to bear in mind that it would run the risk of being construed as a deliberate violation of the prohibition reiterated here and those making it would lay themselves open to the penal consequences that the usual course flow from disobedience of the directions of this court."
Consequently it will be bad in law if a writ of mandamus is issued to enforce a particular provision which has already been held to be ultra virses;  (ii) the Resolution of Board of Governors is not statutory in nature which can be enforced through a writ of mandamus.
For the foregoing reasons it is held that there was no reservation for the wards of the employees of the Institution and in any case even if it was there, the same cannot be enforced through a writ of mandamus.
In view of what has been observed above, I find no merit in this writ petition, which is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.