Sivaraman Nair, J - This batch of appeals relate to the validity of orders of the Superintending Engineer of different circles of the Electricity Board relating to the transfer of employees to newly formed circles on the basis of orders of the Board.
The learned single Judge dismissed WP Nos. 7415, 7416, 7420, 8458, 7863, 7175, 5928, 6969, 6104 and 7463/1991 by judgment dated 5111991 holding that the order did not affect any of the enforceable rights of the petitioners, since only the junior-most in the composite circles who were promoted to vacancies which were in existence immediately prior to the formation of the new circle, were transferred in spite of their options.
He held that they were not entitled to insist that their options for continuance in places of their choice should be accepted in preference to their seniors.
The learned single Judge found that the respondents had formulated principles of uniform application which had the effect of recognising inter-se seniority in the composite circle as a criterion for acceptance of rejection of options exercised by the employees.
The employees who were affected have filed appeals - WA 1278/91 from WP 8458/91, WA 1321/91 from WP 5928/91, WA 1330/91 from WP 7416/91, WA 1331/91 from WP 7415/91; WA 1335/91 from WP 7420/91, WA 1332/91 from WP 7863/91, WA 1319/91 from WP 7463/91.
2.
The learned single Judge took a slightly different view and allowed WP 3960/91.
The Electricity Board has assailed that judgment in WA 62/91.
In two other Writ Petitions, interim orders were made by the learned single Judge directing retention of the petitioners in the units of their choice and in some others to promote them on the basis of their ranks in the parent circle.
The Board has assailed those orders.
WANo.
1050/92 is filed from the interim order in WPM.P.
No. 4304/92 in WP 17214/90.
WASR.
No61143/92 is filed from WPM.P.
No. 16756/90 in WP 4775/91.
Counsel on both sides agreed that the respective Writ Petitions - WP 17214/90 and WP 4775/91 may themselves be disposed of, because the same questions which have to be considered in the Writ Appeals arise for consideration in those matters also.
3.
The remaining Writ Petitions - WP 1335/91, 12325/91, 11956/91, 12740/91, 7468/91, 15676/91, 16982/91, 16909/91, 8323/91, 5459/92, 5811/91, 1239/91, 1678/92 and 13278/92 also involve the same questions.
The only difference is that they relate to bifurcation of different circles and consequent allotment of employees to circles other than their choice.
4.
We have heard counsel on both sides at length.
We are of the opinion that in spite of minor differences involved in the different petitions, the questions which arises for consideration is almost identical.
We will refer of the facts involved in WANo.
1278/91 for disposal of WANos.
1278, 1319, 1321, 1330, 1331, 1332 and 1335 of 1991.
We will deal with other appeals and Writ Petitions later.
We will refer to parties as they appeared in the Writ Petitions.
5.
WANo.
1278 of 1991 arises from the common judgment disposing of ten Writ Petitions.
They relate to the allocation/transfer of staff consequent on the bifurcation of Secunderabad Operation circle into Medak and Mahabubnagar circles (WA No. 1278/91 and WP 1335/91).
The relevant facts are the following :  Operation Rural Circle, Hyderabad, consisted of Ranga Reddy, Medak and Mahabubnagar Districts.
Headquarters of that circle was Hyderabad.
The Lines and Sub-station Circle Hyderabad was re-designated as Secunderabad Operation Circle in B.P.Ms.
No. 935 dated 1391988.
Formation of the circle was effective from 1111988.
In that circle, we included some divisions and electricy revenue offices of Ranga Reddy District of former Operation Circle, Rural, Hyderabad as also some divisions and electricity revenue offices of the city area of Hyderabad.
Notwithstanding the formation of the above new circle, no final orders of posting of employees was made.
The posts and staff were allotted to Secunderabad Circle on "as is where is" basis temporarily till final orders in relation to allotment of staff were made.
In B.P.Ms.
No. 96, dated 31.5.1990, Mehabubnagar circle was carved out of the Rural circle, Hyderabad, leaving Medak District alone in the former circle.
The Headquarters of the circle was shifted to Medak; Mahabubnagar circle with headquarters at Mahabubnagar was formed pursuant to the order dated 31.5.1990.
In his Memo dated 461990, the Superintending Engineer of the composite rural circle was directed to allocate staff to the above two circles, based on the instructions contained in Board Memo dated 31.5.1990.
The instructions which are relevant for our present purpose are only that -  (1) all the available vacancies in the respective categories in the composite circle should be filled up as to the date prior to the formation of the new circles.
(2) that the crucial date for formation of the new circle would be the date on which the Superintending Engineer of the newly formed circle took charge :  (3) that after effecting promotions as above, the employees would be given option to choose the circle in which they would like to continue, and  (4) if more persons opted to either of the circles, the seniormost would be accommodated first and the others would be allotted to the other circle irrespective of the option or choice expressed by the employee concerned.
For this purpose, the order in the combined seniority list in the composite circle was to be the governing criterion.
6.
Petitioners exercised option to be retained in Secunderabad circle.
In Memo No. 3415 dated 3491, the Superintending Engineer promoted the petitioners and transferred them permanently to Mahabubnagar circle.
The Superintending Engineer, Mahabubnagar issued a consequential order dated 20.4.92 posting the petitioners of Electricity Revenue Office, Jedcherla.
The respondent served the promotion and transfer orders on the petitioners allegedly on 3151991.
They challenged those orders in the Writ Petition.
7.
The learned single Judge found that the allotment of the petitioner to Mahabubnagar circle was the result of the petitioner being one of the junior- most upper division clerks promoted in accordance with combined seniority in the composite circle prior to the date on which the circle was formed.
He also found that the petitioners could not claim any benefit for the only reason that they were retained in Secunderabad circle on 'as is where is' basis for the time being.
He found that the principle that for acceptance of options, persons, ranked above the petitioner in the combined seniority list of the composite circle should be preferred was uniformly applied in all cases and that principle was unassailable.
It was also found that the mere fact that the petitioner was continued in Secunderabad circle even after its formation did not confer any right on him for such continuance in spite of the options exercised by seniors in the composite circle.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that on the formation of Secunderabad Circle, petitioner was retained on 'as is where is' basis and that conferred on him a title to continue in that circle after its further bifurcation.
Petitioner submitted further that in the absence of any other order of allocation of staff as on 1111988, when the City Circle, Operation, Hyderabad was bifurcated into Operation Circle, Hyderabad and Operation Circle Secunderabad, it was not competent for the respondents to assign or allot them to Mahabubnagar or Medak circles which we carved out of the Secunderabad circle.
Yet another submission was that even though by virtue of the order dated 31590 containing the principle that promotions should be ordered against all vacancies existing in the composite circle prior to its bifurcation, such orders were issued only subsequent to the formation of the new circle and that the relevant orders issued by the 2nd and 3rd respondents clearly indicated that the orders of promotion would be effective only from the dates on which the incumbents took charge long after the crucial date.
It was submitted that promotion could not be ante-dated prior to the bifurcation, and on that assumption, petitioners should not be allotted to a circle other than in accordance with the options exercised by them.
Counsel for the petitioners raised yet another submission that if the options could not be accepted for their continuance in the promotion posts, their options ought to have been considered for retention in the parent circle in the lower posts and they should have been permitted to work out their promotions in accordance with their seniority in that circle.
Denial of even that opportunity is said to be discriminatory.
9.
We are of the opinion that the learned single Judge was correct in holding that the Board applied principles of uniform application in the matter of allocation of staff to the respective circles.
Petitioners have no case that any person who was junior to them according to the combined seniority list in the composite circle was preferred for retention in the Secunderabad operation Circle.
We have therefore to proceed on the basis that the learned single Judge was correct in assuming that the petitioners had to be allotted to circles other than which they had opted by reason of the fact that the available vacancies in the Upper Division had to be filled up by accepting options of seniors in the composite circle.
10.
We are not inclined to accept the submission that in the absence of orders of allocation as on 1111988 on the formation of the Lines and Sub- Station Circle and continuance of the petitioners in the respective posts even after the formation of that circle, the Board was not competent to prescribe standard for allotment of employees, when the newly formed circle was split up again.
We are of the opinion that it is a matter of administrative expediency for the respondents to decide whether employees may not be continued on an ad hoc or temporary basis in places where they were working till a final decision was taken on the question of allotment.
The only fact that they waited till those very circles were bifurcated again is no reason to deny the right of the employer to prescribe reasonable standards and apply the same uniformly with reference to a crucial date which was reasonably fixed.
We have not heard counsel to urge that the fixation of the crucial date - that is, the date on which the Superintending Engineer took charge of the newly formed circle, is in any manner arbitrary or unreasonable.
If the choice of the crucial date is not unreasonable, the allocation of staff with reference to that date cannot be successfully assailed by the petitioners.
11.
True it is that the orders of promotions were not made on the crucial date.
The very principle for allocation of staff was framed only by order dated 31.5.1990.
It is unreasonable to expect that the entire process of filling up all the available vacancies in the composite circle, calling for options from the employees concerned, their acceptance and final allocation should have been completed before the crucial date, which in the present case was 161990.
Naturally, these processes had to take some time.
We do not find any reason to hold that the delay in passing orders for filling up the available vacancies according to the combined seniority list in the composite circle has in any manner prejudiced any right of the petitioners.
What they got was their due or what they would have got by virtue of their seniority, but for bifurcation of the circle.
Petitioners had no case that they were wrongly promoted.
12.
It is of course true that second thoughts have induced some to submit that they were willing to forge promotions.
They had not said so, so far.
There is nothing in the record to indicate that the petitioners had, at any relevant time, indicated to the respondents that they were willing to forgo promotions.
It is not therefore necessary for us to consider now as to what would have been the position had the petitioners refused to accept the promotions when they were ordered.
As a matter of fact, they accepted the orders of promotion and exercised their options for continuance in the promotion category in accordance with the principles contained in the Board order dated 31.5.1990.
They are not entitled to blow hot and cold at the same stretch.
They wanted to retain promotions and be continued in the circle of their choice.
Among the personnel promoted in their turn as per the seniority list of the composite circle, they were undeniably some of the junior-most.
The consequence of their position in the combined seniority list in the composite circle was that they had not claim for preference for retention in the circle of their choice.
We do not find any reason to differ from the judgment of the learned single Judge.
13.
Counsel for the Electricity Board invited our attention to clause 40 of Part-II of the AP State Electricity Board Service Regulations.
That clause is in the following terms :  "40 .Relinquishment of Rights by Members :  Any person may, in writing relinquish any right or privilege to which he may be entitled under these regulations, if in the opinion of the appointing authority, such relinquishment is not opposed to the interest of the administration; and nothing contained in these regulations shall be deemed to require the recognition of any right of privilege to the extent to which it has been so relinquished."
Counsel for the Board is right in his submission that the offer of relinquishment made at this stage cannot be accepted at its face value.
It is not possible for us to consider the consequences of acceptance of such relinquishment.
He seems to be right in the submission that the Board may as well refuse to accept the relinquishment, if it means that many posts in the new circle may be left unfilled or it may accept such relinquishment only on condition that it shall be permanent, so that the Board may make alternative arrangements.
It is not as if petitioners are entitled to insist that offers now made shall be accepted without consideration of its consequences so as to suit their convenience to the prejudice of the seniors in the promoted category, who had opted for retention in Secunderabad operation circle or the interests of the Board.
14.
We are not persuaded to accept thee submission that orders of promotion were made subsequent to the date of formation of the new circle and those orders not being retrospective in effect since petitioners were not given the benefit of such promotions from a date interior to the formation of the new circle, respondents are not entitled to decide against them on the assumption that such promotions were ordered on the basis of seniority in the composite circle.
As a matter of fact, we did not hear counsel for any of the petitioners to urge that promotions were ordered otherwise than in accordance with seniority in composite circle.
Nor did we hear any of the petitioner to urge that persons who were juniors in the combined seniority list of the composite circle were retained in the promotion posts.
Obviously, their promotions were ordered, though on a latter date, to fill up vacancies which were available in the composite circle prior to the date of formation of the new circle.
We find in all these cases that petitioners exercised their options in terms of the Board order dated 31.5.1990 to be retained in the circle of their choice in the promoted category.
It is obvious that such promotions as they got and the benefit of which they wanted to retain were in terms of the Board order and that expressly direct promotions to all available vacancies on the basis of seniority in the composite circle.
The only fact that such promotions were ordered on a date subsequent to the formation of the new circle does not therefore justify the submission that refusal to accept their options in any manner illegal or discriminatory.
15.
Far more important is the fact that the stations to which petitioners were posted in the promotion posts by the orders impugned by them were in the composite circle.
They could have been posted in those stations even in the composite circle, which was then the unit of appointment.
The petitioners cannot therefore insist upon non-tranferability out of the circle of their choice which was carved out of the composite circle.
If they could have been transferred on promotion but for bifurcation of the circle to such stations to which they have now been transferred, they cannot complain of infraction of any of their rights by the impugned orders.
The bifurcation orders were not meant to confer any underserving benefit on them for retention in places of their choice.
No such benefit is part of their service conditions.
That was not sanctioned by any service Rule or agreement of a binding nature.
Acceptance of options of seniors for retention in the places of their choice cannot be created as causing prejudice to the petitioners.
16.
We also find that the orders of allotment and transfer of the petitioners are fully justified by administrative exigencies.
The distances involved in these cases are not so oppressively excessive.
As a matter of fact, all such stations are those to which they would even otherwise, have been transferred.
We find no bonafides in the petitioners' approach to this court for relief against those orders.
Their grievance was more imaginary than real.
It shall not be as if the interest of the institution which employs them shall be the last priority.
Inconvenience caused by posting on transfer to a station to which they could have been posted had thee composite circle continued, does not justify the approach of petitioners to this court.
The Writ Petitions were therefore rightly dismissed.
17.
The Writ Appeals are therefore devoid of merit are hereby dismissed.
WANo.
62 of 1992  Sivaraman Nair, J - We have stated our reasons for affirming the common judgment of the learned single Judge dismissing Writ Petition Nos. 7415 of 1991 and batch, in Writ Appeal No. 1278/91 and batch dated 30.1.1993.
Those reasons shall apply to this appeal also; and on that basis, we have to allow this Writ Appeal filed by the Respondents from the judgment in WP 3960/91.
19.
The learned single judge allowed the above Writ Petition for two reasons which were assumed to be different from the facts involved in the ten Writ Petitions mentioned above (WP 7415/91 and batch).
They were - (1) as on the crucial date of formation of Eluru Circle consisting of West Godavari district earned out of composite Rajahmundry circle (West and East Godavari Districts), petitioners were lower division clerks, and (2) that the transfer of the petitioners in deviation from the principles for such transfers violated Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
20.
A few undisputed facts which are relevant are as follows :  Petitioners joined service in 1969 and 1970 in composite Rajahmundry circle of the Electricity Board.
That circle consisted of East and West Godavari Districts.
Circle being the unit of appointment, they were liable to be transferred and posted in any station in East or West Godavari Districts.
By an order dated 3041960, the Board formed West Godavari District as a separate circle with headquarters at Eluru.
The principles for effecting allotment and transfer of personnel consequent on bifurcation were formulated in Board order dated 31590.
It provided that the crucial date for formation of Eluru circle would be the date on which the Superintending Engineer took charge.
Admittedly, that date was 161990.
The Board had stipulated that all vacancies available in the composite circle should be filled up before the crucial date.
Such an order of promotion was made on 22.5.90.
Petitioners were two of the promotees.
The order was despatched only on 2690 and reached them only thereafter.
They assumed charge as Upper Divions Clerks still later.
The next step was to call for options of the employees to chose circles of their choice for posting as Upper Division Clerks.
Petitioners exercised their option for continuance in Rajahmundry circle as Upper Division Clerks.
It is stated that they had objected to the seniority list of Upper Division clerks promoted upto 31121990 including the petitioners i n that list for the reason that only such U.D.Cs.
as were promoted upto 31590 should have been included.
In order dated 1131991, petitioners were allotted to Eluru circle as Upper Division Clerks.
Petitioner assailed that order in the Writ Petition.
By order in WPM.P.
4892/91, the singlee judge ordered retention of the petitioners as LDCs.
in Rajahmundry circle resulting in their reversion by order dated 2841991.
Though the petitioners filed WPM.P.
11459 and 11460 of 1991 to avoid reversion and to continue them in available vacancies in Rajahmundry circle as U.D.Cs., they did not get any favourable order.
In yet another Memo.
dated 16.1.1990, the Superintending Engineeer, Rajahmundry gave a further opportunity to all employees to opt circles of their choice, reiterating that if there were more optees than the posts available, the excess options would be treated as null and void with no claim for them to revive their claims on any future date.
Seniority list as on 31121990 was communicated later.
Petitioners assailed Memo dated 731991 and the consequent orders, whereby, they were transferred to Eluru circle, since their options were in excess of the sanctioned posts in Rajahmundry circle.
21.
The learned single Judge held that though petitioners were promoted by order dated 2251990, they remained as Lower Division Clerks on the crucial date, namely, 161990 and otions which they had exercised should have been treated for retention in Rajahmundry circle as Lower Division Clerks in view of their seniority in that category.
22.
As the learned single Judge found in his common judgment in WP 7415/91 and batch which we have referred to above, uniform principles were applied in the matter of acceptance of options and the allotment and transfer of employees consequent upon bifurcation of the Division.
The first principle was to fill up all vacancies in the composite circle and then all for options.
Respondents had ordered promotion of the petitioners to such existing vacancies on 2251990.
That was strictly in consonance with the principle contained in the order dated 31590.
The fact that communication of such orders were delayed or that they were received subsequent to the crucial date are no reasons to hold that the promotions were ineffective.
23.
We did not hear counsel for the petitioners to urge before us that such promotions were ordered against vacancies which were not in existence in the composite circle nor that they were ordered not according to seniority.
We are not persuaded to uphold the finding of the learned single Judge that promotion orders having been despatched on 261990 and having taken effect subsequent thereto, petitioners ought to have been treated as seniormost Lower Division Clerks in Rajahmundry Circle and they ought to have been considered for promotion on that basis to vacancies existing in that circle.
24.
Learned counsel for the Electricity Board brought to our notice two orders of the Board dated 7.8.91 and 391991 issuing clarifications of the Board orders relating to allotment of personnel to the respective Districts in accordance with their options and the consequence of junior optees refusing promotions and transfer to the newly formed circles.
The Board clarified that -  "Actual allotment will be as per the principles of allotment given in the Board's Memo dated 31590 and there will be question of a senior who had given his option not being allotted to his places of option while a junior gets allotted by virtue of his silence."
(Memo.
No. D.S./P.S./D.M.
(Estt) 870-XB/90-7 dated 7.8.91)  Dealing with a request of candidates seeking transfer to circles of their choice either on request or mutual basis with other employees, the Board clarified that -  "Such requests of employees should not be entertained as they are against the principles of the Board on the bifurcation of circles issued and also goes against the Writ Petitions pending in the High Court."
These are administrative determinations made by the Board in administrative exigencies.
The policy underlying those decisions are neither arbitrary nor discriminatory.
Those principles also apply uniformly to all employees alike.
We are therefore not persuaded to assume that the petitioners, being senior- most Lower Division Clerks as on the crucial date in Rajahmundry Circle, are naturally entitled for promotion to existing vacancies, notwithstanding the allotment which was made in accordance with principles of uniform application as contained in their order of the Board dated 31.5.1990.
25.
Counsel for the petitioners submitted that subsequent to the bifurcation, Regional Chief Engineers have been appointed resulting in East Godavari being included under Chief Engineer at Visakhapatnam, whereas West Godavary is included in another region.
He submits therefore that those Regionalisations cannot justify the orders of the Superintending Engineers allotting or transferring employees as between the two circles while formed part of two different regions.
26.
We are not impressed by these submissions.
We are concerned only with the correctness of the proceedings of the Board dated 731991 allotting the petitioners to Eluru Circle as U.D.Cs.
Whatever has happened subsequent thereto may not be very material in moulding the relief to be granted in this Writ Petition.
The second aspect is that the Regional Chief Engineers have nothing to do with the unit of appointment, which according to the rules, still remains to be the circle and the competent authority is still the Superintending Engineers.
Appointment of Regional Chief Engineers cannot alter the position obtaining under the statutory rules.
27.
It appears that the far more important fact is that petitioners who were employees in the composite Rajahmundry circle were liable to be transferred to any other station not only in East Godavari District but in West Godavari District as well.
Formation of the new circle was not supposed to give a windfall in the matter of transferability.
They were transferred on the basis of seniority in the composite circle to stations to which they were liable to be transferred.
We do not find any infraction of any of the rights of the petitioners in such orders as could have been passed in accordance with the rules by the competent appointing authority and within the unit of appointment viz., the composite Rajahmundry circle.
28.
In this view, we allow the Writ Appeal and set aside the judgment of the learned single Judge in WP 3960/91.
Consequently, the Writ Petition also stands dismissed.
Writ Appeal No. 1050/92.
WP No. 17214/90.
WASR.No.
61143/92.
WAM.P.
2614/92 WPNo.
16756/90.
WPNo.
12325/91 and WP 11956/91.
29.
Writ Appeal No. 1050/92 is filed from the order of the learned single Judge in WPM.P.
4304/92 in WP No. 17214/90 directing the Electricity Board to consider the case of the petitioner as UDC in Vijayawada Circle, pending further orders.
WASR.
No. 61143/92 is filed from the order of the learned single Judge in WPM.P.
4775/92 in WP 16756/90 directing the respondents therein to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as UDC with reference to seniority list in Vijayawada circle pending further orders.
Both cases arise out of the bifurcation of Vijayawada circle into Vijayawada and Guntur circles.
It is agreed by counsel on both sides that it is more desirable that the Writ Petitions themselves may be disposed of.
We will therefore consider these Writ Petitions along with the other Writ Petitions arising from orders consequent upon the bifurcation of erstwhile Vijayawada circle into Vijayawada and Guntur Circles.
These Writ Petitions are WP 16756/90, 17214/90, 12325/91 and 11956/91.
Similar facts and the same contentions were considered by us in Writ Appeal No. 1278/91 and 62/92 supra.
By order of the Board in B.P.Ms.
dated 30490, erstwhile Vijayawada circle of the Electricity Board was bifurcated into Vijayawada and Guntur Circles.
The Superintending Engineer of the newly formed circle took charge on 2690.
By order dated 161190 petitioner was promoted, among others, as UDC and posted in the Electricity Revenue office, Sattenpally in Guntur District.
That order was based on seniority of the petitioner in the composite circle before its bifurcation.
On 12690 petitioner claimed to have submitted his option for permanent transfer to Operation Circle, Vijayawada for the purpose of seniority, lien, promotion etc. even though he was promoted by order dated 161190 as UDC, he did not take charge in Sattenpally in Guntur District.
He is said to have submitted a representation on 21.11.90 requesting for retention in Vijayawada circle, even as Lower Division Clerk.
He filed WP 16756/90 on 30.11.1990 seeking a declaration that the order dated 161190 promoting him to the post of UDC in Sattenpally in Guntur District was contrary to the option exercised by him and a direction to continue him in Vijayawada circle as per his option.
He sought a further direction to promote him as UDC in his turn as and when vacancies arise in Vijayawada circle.
After lying low for a period of more than one year, he filed WPM.P.
No. 4775/92 claiming that he is one of the seniormost lower division clerks in Vijayawada circle and is entitled to promotion in one of the available vacancies of U.D.Cs.
in Vijayawada Circle.
30.
We have dealt with all the points which arises for consideration in this Writ Petition, while disposing of WA No. 1278/91 and 62/92.
We are of the opinion that the petitioner could not have opted for retention as LDC in Vijayawada circle except in accordance with the terms of the Board order dated 31590.
He was entitled to be promoted according to the seniority in the composite circle and was liable to be posted in any station included in that circle before its bifurcation anticipatory option which may have the effect of relinquishment of promotion was not within the comprehension of the order dated 31.5.1990 containing the principles for allotment of personnel consequent on bifurcation.
It is not for us to venture any guess as to what attitude the Board would have taken, had the petitioner offered to relinquish his right for promotion.
The only question which we have to consider is whether the Board was right in not accepting the option said to have been exercised by him on 1261990 for retention in Vijayawada circle as LDC so as to enable him to claim promotion in that circle as UDC In what terms the relinquishment would have been accepted had it been made, is not a matter on which we need venture any guess at this stage.
The relief which the petitioner seeks cannot be granted.
We therefore dismiss the Writ Petition.
We also set aside the interim order passed by the learned single Judge in WPM.P.
4775/92.
31.
Writ Petition No. 17214/90 was filed for a declaration that petitioner was senior to respondents 3 to 9 in the category of Lower Division Clerks and that he is entitled to be promoted as UDC in Vijayawada circle.
He also sought to quash Memo No. 4488/90 dated 161190 promoting him and posting him in Guntur circle.
Almost similar facts are involved in this Writ Petition also.
In the counter affidavit it has been asserted that the petitioner being one of the senior Lower Division Clerks in the composite circle prior to its bifurcation had to be promoted in one of the available vacancies of U.D.Cs.
in that circle.
He cannot refuse to accept promotion except by relinquishment in terms of Rule 40 of the AP Electricity Board Service Regulations.
The only fact that LDCs.
in the composite circle who were not entitled to be promoted and were allotted to Vijayawada circle were promoted later in that circle is no reason to uphold that the claim of the petitioner for promotion in Vijayawada circle to which he did not belong in terms of the Board Memo.
dated 31590.
The relief which the petitioner seeks cannot therefore be granted.
The Writ Petition is dismissed.
We also set aside the order of the learned single Judge in WPM.P.
4304/92.
32.
In WP No. 12325/91 and 11956/91 almost similar facts arise for consideration.
The relief which the petitioner seeks in WP 12325/91 is to quash the Memo of the Superintending Engineer in Memo.
No. U4/D.No.
1741/91 dated 591991.
That order was passed as a consequence of the bifurcation of the Vijayawada circle into Vijayawada and Guntur, vide B.P.Ms.
59 dated 30490, the principle contained in the Board Memo.
dated 31590 and the consequential directions contained in the Board Memo dated 5991.
We need only note that undeniably petitioner was entitled to be promoted as UDC in the composite circle prior to the bifurcation by reason of his seniority in the composite circle.
That order had to be passed in terms of Board Memo.
dated 31590.
Options were invited thereafter.
The effect of the order dated 5991 was only to promote the petitioner as UDC in accordance with seniority in the composite circle.
The place to which she was posted was also in the composite circle.
She could not have resisted her promotion in her turn in the composite circle and posting to a station which was included in that circle.
The only fact that the petitioner had exercised option on 12690 is no reason to hold that she was entitled to be continued in Vijayawada circle even as LDC We have stated our reasons for turning down the request for such retention in WA 1278/91 and 62/92.
The same applied to the case of the petitioner as well.
The Writ Petition is liable to be and is hereby dismissed.
33.
In WP 11956/91, the relief which the petitioners sought was a declaration for his continuance as U.D.Cs.
in Vijayawada Circle in accordance with the options exercised by them.
They sought further direction to continue them as U.D.Cs.
in Vijayawada circle.
Undeniably, petitioners were seniors in the category of LDCs.
in the composite circle.
They were rightly promoted to vacancies in that circle prior to its bifurcation.
They were also rightly posted to stations which were included in that composite circle prior to bifurcation.
Petitioners cannot resist administrative orders of allotment consequent on the bifurcation.
The relief which the petitioners seek cannot therefore be granted.
The Writ Petition is therefore dismissed.
34.
In the result WP 17214/90, and WP 16756/90, WP 12325/91 and WP 11956/91 are dismissed.
WA No. 1050/92 and WASR.
No. 61143/92 are accordingly disposed of.
35.
WP Nos. 5811/91 and WP 1239/91  These Writ Petitions also relate to allotment and transfer of employees consequent upon the formation and bifurcation of Secunderabad Operation circle into Madak and Mahabubnagar circles.
Our learned brother Eswara Prasad, J, dismissed similar Writ Petitions by his common judgment in WP 7415/91 and batch which we have upheld in WA 1278/91 and batch.
For the same reasons, these two Writ Petitions are also liable to be dismissed.
We accordingly dismiss the same.
36.
WP 15341/1990  The relief which the petitioner seeks in this Writ Petition is a declaration that no options need be called for from him and that he should be continued in Secunderabad operation circle.
He also seeks a further declaration that the action of the respondents in having promoted the petitioner as Accountant and in making him to exercise option only to two circles, Medak and Mahabubnagar and not to Secunderabad Operation Circle is wholly illegal.
The facts involved in this Writ Petition are identical to those which were considered by the learned single Judge in his common judgment in WA 1278/91 and batch.
For the same reasons, petitioner is not entitled to any relief in this Writ Petition.
We hereby dismiss the same.
37.
WP Nos. 7468/91, 12740/91, 15676/91, 16909/91 and 16982/91  These Writ Petitions relate to orders of allotment, transfer and posting consequent upon the bifurcation of erstwhile composite Rajahmundry circle into Rajahmundry and Eluru circles, each of which consist exclusively of East Godavari and West Godavari Districts.
We have considered the same controversy in WA 62/92 which arose out of the judgment in WP 3960/91.
For the reasons stated therein, these Writ Petitions have to be and are hereby dismissed.
38.
WP No. 8328/1991  Petitioners in this Writ Petition assail Memo No. PO/Adm/CI/1820 to 1825 dated 2261991 transferring them to Anantapur Circle and seek a direction to continue them in Kurnool Circle as per the options which were exercised by them.
The six petitioners belonged to the composite Kurnool circle.
That circle was bifurcated into Kurnool and Anantapur Circles on 30.4.1990.
The principles for allotment and transfer of staff consequent on bifurcation were prescribed in Board Memo.
dated 31.5.1990.
On the basis of seniority in the composite circle, petitioners were posted to vacancies which were available in the composite Kurnool circle prior to its bifurcation, since they could not be accommodated in the newly formed Kurnool circle, because their seniors had to be accommodated.
Petitioners challenged that order as illegal and discriminatory.
We have given detailed reasons how the Board was entitled to devise the principles for allotment and transfer of employees.
We do not find any reason to hold that the order promoting the petitioners and allotting them to vacancies which were available in the composite circle prior to its bifurcation, is illegal.
Petitioners 1 to 4 were promoted by order dated 1681990 and were posted in Kurnool circle.
It was thereafter that they were transferred out of the circle, apparently because there were larger number of optees than the number of posts available in that circle.
Petitioners had to be transferred out because they were juniors among the U.D.Cs.
in accordance with the seniority in the composite circle.
We do not find any reason to grant the relief which they seek.
The order issued by the Board is in administrative exigencies, which cannot be challenged.
The relief which the petitioners seek cannot therefore be granted.
The Writ Petition is therefore dismissed.
39.
WP 5459/1992  What the petitioners seek in this Writ Petition is a direction that the crucial date viz., the date on which the Superintending Engineer assumed charge of Vizianagaram operation circle adopted as criteria for finalising the options of the petitioners is arbitrary and illegal.
They seek a direction to continue them in the Operation Circle, Vizianagaram.
The same principles which are contained in the Board Memo.
dated 31590 have been applied to the petitioners vis-a-vis the erstwhile seniors in the composite Vizianagaram Circle on formation of Srikakulam circle by bifurcation.
Petitioners submit that their options ought to have been finalised as on the crucial date which in the present case is said to be 4.4.91.
According to the principles contained in Board Memo.
dated 31590, vacancies available in the composite circle prior to bifurcation had to be filled up according to seniority and options had to be called for from the employees thereafter.
That is exactly what has been done by the Board in this case.
We have given our detailed reasons why the principles contained in the Board Memo dated 31590 and its implementation after affecting promotions to vacancies available in the composite circle prior to its bifurcation are justified on administrative exigencies.
Petitioners relied on the judgment of our learned brother Eswara Prasad, J allowing WP 3960/91.
We have today allowed WA 62/92 and dismissed WP 3960/91, upsetting the above judgment.
The same reasons as are mentioned in WA 62/92 and the other appeals and Writ Petitions apply to this case as well.
The Writ Petition is therefore dismissed.
40.
WP Nos. 1678/92 and 13278/92  These two Writ Petitions relate to the allocation of the petitioners as U.D.Cs.
to Adilabad circle which was formed out of the erstwhile composite Nizamabad circle.
The allotment and transfer had to be made in accordance with the principles contained in Board Memo dated 31590 requiring the promotion of employees according to seniority in the composite circle prior to its bifurcation.
Petitioners being fairly seniors were liable to be promoted to the then existing vacancies.
The fact that orders of promotion could be made only later is no reason to hold that promotion in their turn in the composite circle and posting to stations within that circle prior to its bifurcation and consequent allotment and transfer to such stations is in any manner illegal or unsustainable.
The Writ Petitions are liable to be dismissed for the same reasons which we have mentioned in WA 1278/91 and 62/92 and the other Writ Petitions, and the same are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.