Jai Singh Sekhon, J - Vide this judgment, two writ petitions bearing Nos. 11052 of 1992 (preferred by Avtar Singh) and 11252 of 1992 (preferred by Mrs. Amarjeet Kaur) are being disposed of as the legal controversy involved in both these petitions is the same.
The precise question involved in these writ petitions pertains to the working out of the roster formula for reserve points for the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes for admission in various specialities of the Post Graduate Medical Courses between in service candidates and fresh graduates belonging to this category.
2.
The factual matrix is that Avtar Singh and Amarjit Kaur petitioners in these two writ petitions, after passing the MBBS Degree Course in December, 1990 and January, 1991 from the Medical College, Amritsar and Patiala, respectively sought admission from the reserved category of Scheduled Caste in the Post Graduate Degree at the Medical College, Patiala for the academic session 1992.
The Punjab Government issued notification dated 24th of February, 1992 for selection of students for admission to Postgraduate Medical Courses (three years residency system) and Diploma Courses.
The relevant extract from the prospectus (Annexure P-1) reveals that 25% of the total seats in both the Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar were reserved for students to be selected on All India Basis through Competitive Entrance Test.
Out of the remaining seats, 60% were reserved for in-service candidates, while 40% were to be filled up from fresh graduates.
It is further provided in the prospectus that 25% of these posts are reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes basis, some reservation for Backward Classes, Sportsmen/women, Riot Victims and Physically Handicapped.
Each candidate was to give three preferences in particulars specialities.
Avtar Singh petitioner gave his first preference in Othopeadics, second preference in Paediarics and third preference in Gynaecology.
While Ms. Amarjeet Kaur, petitioner, gave her first preference in Paediatrics, second in Gynaecology and third preference in Ophthalmics.
Both these petitioners appeared in the combined entrance test conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala, on 26th of April, 1992.
The result of the entrance test was declared on 2nd of May, 1992.
Avtar Singh, petitioner, was placed at serial No. 64 in the general merit list, while securing position No. 1 in the category of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Ms. Amarjit Kaur petitioner was placed at serial No. 159 in the general merit list while she stood fourth in the category of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Thereafter, both the petitioners were called for interview at Medical College, Patiala on 3rd of June, 1992.
After the declaration of result, Avtar Singh petitioner was not given admission in any of the speciality while Ms. Amarjit Kaur was given admission ultimately in Ophthalmics against her third choice.
3.
Being aggrieved against the order of Selection Committee in not giving admission against the reserved vacancy of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, both these petitioners have filed writ petitions for issuing a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to reserve 25% seats in each speciality and thereafter to apply the roster formula as per instructions of the State Government issued from time to time in the matter of reserved vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
They have further prayed for directing the respondents to give them admission in the speciality of their choice in Postgraduate Medical three years degree course from the categories of Scheduled Castes.
4.
In counter affidavit filed by Dr. RN Mittal, Principal, Government College, Patiala and Chairman of the Selection Committee on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4, it is admitted that admission to Postgraduate Medical Courses in Government Medical College, Patiala and Amritsar was to be made in accordance with notification Annexure R-1 dated 2421992 of the State Government.
It is further stated that method of reserving points in 100 points roster for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes has to be worked out in accordance with the letter dated 121982 (Annexure R-2) of the Punjab Government which clearly provides that seats falling at serial Nos. 1, 5 and 9 and so on shall be reserved for candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and seats falling at serial Nos. 15, 35 and 55 and so on be reserved for candidates belonging to Backward Classes subject to the condition that reservation in individual speciality for these categories should not exceed 30%.
It is further mentioned that as per Punjab Government Policy, first 60% quota seats are filled up from amongst the candidates belonging to PCMS in-service candidates and thereafter 40% seats are filled up from fresh graduates in 100 points roster prepared for selection separately.
5.
The answering respondent has given further details of three candidates admitted in each speciality of the Postgraduate Medical Courses from all the categories.
It is also averred that the above referred method of giving reservation in Postgraduation Medical Courses admission has been upheld by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 5572 of 1989.
Thus, it is maintained that Dr. Avtar Singh was not entitled to get admission in any of the three specialities opted by him while Ms. Amarjit Kaur was entitled to admission against her third choice in Ophthalmics.
6.
In replication, Avtar Singh petitioner has again reiterated his own stand while controverting that of the respondents.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties, besides perusing the record.
8.
The relevant portion of the notification, Annexure R-1, on the basis of which prospectus for admission to Postgraduate Medical Courses was issued reads as under :  "In supersession of Punjab Government Notification No. 22/19/5HBIII-89/27539 dated 23.11.1990 and corrigendum No. 22/19/5HB III- 89/2536 dated 2911991, the President of India is pleased to order that selection of student for admission to three years Post Graduate-Degree/Two years diploma course for the Session 1992 in Government Medical College, Patiala, Amritsar and Government Dental College, Amritsar and Patiala shall be made by holding a Post Graduate Entrance Test in pursuance of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India directions in Civil Misc.
Petition No. 7657 of 1987 and taking into consideration the academic achievements/weightage of service of candidates.
2.
The President of India is further pleased to order that the said test shall be conducted by the Punjabi University Patiala and Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar alternatively on behalf of the Government of Punjab.
This year the test will be conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala.
3.
Distribution of seats : 25% of the total seats will be filled on all India basis through Competitive Entrance Test.
Of the remaining seats 60% will be filled from amongst the eligible PCMS inservice doctors while 40% will be filled from fresh Graduates who are not in service through Post Graduate Entrance Test.
(i) for 60% Seats :  The test shall be open to the candidates who are in Punjab Civil Medical Service for at least five years.
(The period of 5 years will be computed till the last date of receipt of applications in the University.
A certificate regarding length of the University.
A certificate regarding length of authority PCMS service from the competent authority Civil Surgeon/Principal/Medical Supdt.
EST Hospital should be attached by each candidate with his/her application while applying for the test.
The period of 5 years will include minimum 3 years rural service (2 years rural service for those who served in disturbed border areas).
Ad hoc service continued with regular service will be counted.
(ii) For 40% Open Category Seats.
Only fresh Graduates who are of Punjab Domicile and not in PCMS will be eligible irrespective of the college from where he/she graduated.
DETERMINATION OF MERIT.
The merit of the candidates will be determined by the University by holding PG Entrance Test of eligible in-service PCMS doctors and fresh graduates for admission to three years degree 1992.
The admission will be made once a year and session will start during the month of May  6.
CHOICE OF SUBJECTS.
After the declaration of the result, the choice of subjects for post- graduate and 2 Institutions will be obtained from the candidates.
Seats for various courses will also be intimated to the candidates at the time of interview.
Interview is mandatory for all eligible candidates on the specified date and no separate interview letters will be issued.
The selection in each speciality and Institution will be based on merit-cum-choice of each candidate.
For each discipline a waiting list of 25% of the available seats will be prepared and vacancy (ies), if any, will be filled latest by the 31st August from amongst the candidates on the waiting list.
No admission will be made after 31st August.
Break up of marks for admission to Post Graduate Courses will be as under :-  (a) Marks for Test 80 (b) Marks for academic 20  career/weightage of service.
Total 100 marks (Regarding (A) above.
Out of 80 marks meant for Entrance Test, each candidate will have to secure minimum 25 marks (20 Marks in the case of SC/ST candidates) to qualify for admission to Post Graduate Courses.
Regarding-(b) above.
For in-service PCMS candidates under 60% quota, 20 marks shall be assigned to them as per their length of service, as under :-  For rural service, two marks for one complete year and for urban service 15 marks for one complete year to the maximum of 20 marks.
The last date for calculating for benefit of length of the service will be last date of submission of applications to the University for the test.
For fresh graduates under 40% quota open category of seats, marks out of a total of 20 shall be assigned keeping in view their academic career.
xxx xxx xxx  10.
Reservation for various categories in Post Graduate admission will be as under :-  a) Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes 25% b) Backward Classes 5% c) Sportsmen/Women 2% d) Riot Affected/Displaced 2% persons and wards of persons killed in terrorist action in Punjab.
e) Physically Handicapped 1% The above reservation will be made in each course/college separately subject to the availability of seats as per instructions issued by the Punjab Government from time to time.
2.
The roster for the reserve points in the various specialities/super- specialities will be made on the basis of the combined seats in all the three Medical Colleges, as is being done for the allocation of seats, in case of general points.
xxx xxx xxx  The notification Annexure R-2 of the Government of Punjab dated 121977 pertaining to admission to Post Graduate Medical Courses against reserved seats for Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes provides as under :  No. 7(2)-5HB III-80/1030.
Government of Punjab.
Department of Health & Family Welfare, (Health Branch III).
Dated, Chandigarh the 121982.
OFFICE MEMO :  Subject :- Admission to Post Graduate Medical Courses reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste and Backward Classes.
Reference her D.O.
Letter No. ME(3)-Pb.91/41694 dated 9.12.1981, on the subject cited above.
2.
For admission to Post Graduate Courses 25% seats and 5% seats are reserved for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes respectively.
Similar percentage also exists for recruitment in the service and points falling at Sr. Nos. 1, 5, 9 and so on are reserved for members of Scheduled Caste/Tribes and points falling at Sr. Nos. 15, 35, 55 and so on for the members of Backward Classes, Govt. have decided that procedure being adopted for recruitment in the service shall be followed for allowing admission to the Post Graduate Courses, in the following manner -  (1) After adjusting the Registrars/Demonstrators etc. remaining vacant seats be pooled and seats falling at Sr. Nos. 1, 5, 9 and so on be reserved for the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Tribes and seats falling at Sr. Nos. 13, 35 and 55 and so on be reserved for candidates belonging to the Backward Classes, subject to the (sic) the reservation in individual speciality for the categories should not exceed 30%.
In case eligible candidates of these categories are not forthcoming such reserved seats be filled up from general category candidates.
(ii) Units be allotted to the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes on the basis of ranking of the students on the general selection list of the speciality concerned.
Sd/-  Under Secretary Health (I)."
9.
It is admitted case of the parties that in both Medical Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar, there are 231 seats in Postgraduate Medical Courses.
Out of these 25% have been reserved for being filled on All India basis through Competitive Entrance Test, of the remaining seats, 60% seats are reserved for in-service candidates and 40% seats for fresh candidates.
Out of both these categories 25% seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes while 5% were for Backward Classes.
It is further provided that this reservation will be made in each Course/College separately subject to the availability of the seats as per instructions issued by the Punjab Government from time to time.
Thus, there is no doubt that the carry forward formula of the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is not available in this case as the reservation pertains to each course during admission of each academic year in Government Colleges, i.e. Government College, Patiala as well as Amritsar separately.
However, it is provided in Note 2 under para 10 of this notification (Annexure R-2) that roster for reserve points in various specialities/super specialities will be made on the basis of combined seats in all the Medical Colleges, as being done for allocation of seats in case of general points, which in turn implies that the seats in both the Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar in each speciality have to be taken for making roster for reserve points for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates.
If that is so, then the Note 1 below para 10 of the said instructions providing the reservation in each course/college separately would have to be (sic) Medical Colleges.
Thus, there is no escape but to conclude that if seats falling at Sr. Nos. 1, 5 and 9 of the roster in a particular speciality in both these colleges are available then reserve points 1 and 5 would go to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates of 60% category while roster point No. 9 will go to such candidates of 40% category in each speciality.
10.
The observations of MR Agnihotri, J in C.W.P.
No. 4875 of 1989, upholding the relevant instructions of the State Government are of no help to the respondents in this case as in the relevant instructions there was no provision for working out the roster points on the basis of combined seats available in all the Colleges in a particular speciality.
11.
Similarly, the ratio of the Division Bench of this court in C.W.P.
No. 9168 of 1991 (Dr. Tejinder Singh v. The State of Punjab and others), decided on August 23, 1991, relied upon by the respondents is not relevant for interpreting the instructions (Annexure R-1) issued vide notification dated 24-2.1992, because it was for the first time that note 2 below para 10 of the instructions, providing for working out of the roster points in combined seats available in each speciality in the three Government Medical Colleges was provided by the Government, whereas the instructions issued in February, 1991 for admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses for the year 1991-92, there was no such explanation for working out the roster points for reserved vacancies of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
12.
Now, coming to the merits of the case, it transpires that as per return filed by Dr. RL Mittal, Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala and Chairman, Selection Committee for joint admission to Post Graduate Courses respondent No. 3 on behalf of respondents 1 to 4, it is admitted that in MS (Orthopaedics), the candidates have been selected in the Courses as follows :  MS (Orthopaedics)  Medical College, Patiala :  60% quota 3 candidates 40% quota 2 candidates Total 5 1.
Dr. Vijay Kumar Sethi PCMS 2.
Dr. Jaspreet Singh PCMS 3 Dr. Pritpal Singh PCMS (SC) 1.
Dr. Jasbir Singh Kang Fresh Graduate, 2.
Dr. Sameer Aggarwal Fresh Graduate Medical College Amritsar : 60% quota 4 Candidates 40%v quota 2 Candidates Total 6 candidates 1.
Dr. Sawinder Kumar PCMS Scheduled Caste.
2.
Dr. Gursharan Singh PCMS 3.
Dr. Gurdeep Singh PCMS 1.
(Sic) Fresh Graduate 2.
Dr. Naresh Kumar Fresh Graduate A bare perusal of the same leaves no doubt that in all eleven seats were available in MS Orthopaedics Speciality in Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar.
Obviously, if we work out the roster points on the basis of combined seats in both the colleges as per instructions quoted above, then roster points 1, 5, 9 have to be given to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates.
Now, working out the reservation of 25% in both the quotas of 60% and 40%, it transpires that one of these seats would go to the Scheduled Caste candidate belonging to 40% quota.
If that is so then Avtar Singh, petitioner having topped the merit list in the Combined Entrance Test from the Scheduled Castes candidates, he had to be adjusted in roster point No. 9, but strangely enough out of these eleven seats, in MS Orthopaedics Speciality, only Dr. Pritpal Singh, Scheduled Caste candidate in service category (i.e. 60% quota.)
has been given admission in Medical College, Patiala, while Dr. Sawinder Kumar also of 60% category has been given admission in Medical College, Amritsar in the speciality.
Avtar Singh having given his first option for admission in Orthopaedics in Medical College, Patiala, should have been accommodated at roster point No. 9 as per the latest instructions of February, 1992 but the Selection Committee had failed to do so on the wrong impression that the instruction (R-2) of the year 1982 will hold the field, although those instructions have become redundant to the extent the latest instructions of February 24, 1992 provided for 60% quota for inservice candidates and 40% quota for fresh Graduates.
Out of both these quotas, 25% seats were reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and the roster points have to be worked out for these categories on the basis of combined seats in each speciality in all the Government Colleges.
The only rider to the reserved seats of these categories is that this should not exceed 30% quota in each speciality.
Thus, if three seats out of eleven seats are given to the reserved category, then it will not exceed 30% quota in this speciality.
Consequently, there is no option but to hold that admission to Avtar Singh, petitioner in MS Orthopaedics was denied by the respondents arbitrarily.
13.
Qua the merits of Ms. Amarjit Kaur, petitioner (in C.W.P.
No. 11252 of 1992), it transpires that she has given her first option in Paediatrics and second option in Gynaecology and third option in Ophthalmology.
In the return filed by Dr. RL Mittal, Principal of the Government Medical College, Patiala and Chairman, Selection Committee, on behalf of all the respondents, in para No. 7 (in MD Paediatrics) the following candidates have been admitted :-  "1.
MD (Paediatrics)  Medical College, Patiala.
60% quota 4 candidates 40% quota 2 candidates Total : 6 1.
Dr. Joginder Parkash Dhawan PCMS 2.
Dr. Rajinder Kumar PCMS 3.
Dr. Faquir Chand PCMS(SC) 4.
Dr. Vinod Kumar Gagneja PCMS Medical College Amritsar, 1.
60% quota 2 candidates 2.
40% quota 2 candidates Total 4 1.
Dr. Raj Kumar PCMS(SC) 2.
Dr. Gurpal Singh PCMS 3.
Dr. Ashwani Kumar Fresh Graduate A Dr. Gurpreet Singh Fresh Graduate A bare perusal of the same leaves no doubt that in all there are 10 seats in both the colleges in MD Paediatrics.
Out of these seats one seat in each of these colleges has been given to the Scheduled Castes from 60% category, whereas no such candidate from 40% category has been admitted.
If we work out the roster point of these reserve categories on the basis of combined seats available in each speciality in both the colleges, it transpires that seats at Nos. 1, 5 and 9 have to be given to the Scheduled Caste candidates.
If that is so, then the seat at roster No. 9 would go to Ms. Amarjit Kaur, who is also a Scheduled Caste candidate from the category of 40%.
She had stood IVth in the Joint Entrance Test from the category of Scheduled Caste candidates.
It is not the case of the respondents that any other candidate of this category having higher merit was available.
Consequently, she was entitled for admission in the Post Graduate Medical Course of MD Paediatrics, but strangely enough, she has been given admission against her third choice in MD Ophthalmology.
If three seats out of ten seats are given to the Scheduled Caste candidates from this speciality then these will not exceed the outer-limit of 30% in each speciality.
Thus she is entitled to admission in MD Paediatrics against first option in Medical College at Amritsar.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no option but to accept the writ petitions and direct the respondents to give admission to Avtar Singh, petitioner in Orthopaedics in Medical College, Patiala and Ms. Amarjit Kaur in Paediatrics in Medical College, Amritsar by creating additional seats with permission of the Medical Council of India, if need be and I quash the instructions Annexure R-2 qua the method of filing up the seats in the reserve categories of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes except the outer limit of 30% provided for in each speciality.
It is ordered accordingly.
There is, however, no order as to costs.
Petition accepted.