K Shivashankar Bhat, J - The Appellant in the Writ Appeal and the Petitioner in the Writ Petition applied for admission to the Post Graduate Degree Courses in Medical Sciences.
For the sake of convenience, the facts relating to the Writ Appeal would be stated.
The appellant appeared for the entrance examination held in connection with the selection to the Post-Graduate Degree in Medical Sciences, in April 1992.
The petitioner had chosen the subject of General Surgery for his Post Graduate studies in his application form.
He had not mentioned any other subject though the application provides for ten choices.
Similarly, in the application form he had mentioned only Code 'A' (Bangalore Medical College) as the college of his choice without mentioning any other Code.
In other words, he had not mentioned any other College of his choice for his studies.
In the entrance examination, the petitioner secured 30th rank out of 2251 candidates.
However, the petitioner was not selected to the course of study (MS Degree) though the candidate who secured 36th rank was given a seat in KMC College, Hubli.
Another candidate who secured 50th rank was given a seat in Bellary Medical College.
The appellant also stated in the Writ Petition that one more candidate who secured 51st rank was given a seat in MR Medical College, Gulbarga, and all these candidates were selected for further studies in General Surgery (MS Degree).
These selected candidates are impleaded as Respondents 3, 4 and 5 in the Writ Petition.
It is in these circumstances, the petitioner approached this Court pointing out that denial of a seat to the petitioner was arbitrary since his merit has been overlooked by selecting the candidates to the MS Degree Course.
2.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition on the ground that the petitioner chose only the Bangalore Medical College as the college for his further studies and sufficient seats were not available in the said College to select to appellant because there was only one seat available in Bangalore Medical College for MS Surgery in General merit.
That seat was filled up by the candidate who secured 6th rank.
Since the appellant had not given choice of any other College, he could not be selected.
Similarly, he cannot challenge the selection of other candidates who were admitted to the other colleges in respect of which the appellant had not made his choice.
Hence the present Writ Appeal.
3.
The petitioner in the Writ Petition Dr. Mamata, also appeared for the entrance examination and she secured 17th rank.
She also belongs to the general merit category.
The 3rd respondent secured 19th rank and she also belongs to the general merit category.
The first preference in respect of the subject stated in her application was MD (OBG).
The petitioner had given MD (Radiotherapy) as her second choice.
This petitioner had mentioned 4 Colleges, i.e. Mysore, Bangalore, Davanagere and Belgaum in the order of preference for allotment of a seat.
She was not selected to the MD (OBG) Course because she had not mentioned MR Medical College, Gulbarga, as one of her chosen Colleges in the application.
4.
In the Statement of Objections filed on behalf of the respondents 1 and 2, it is stated that, if petitioner had referred to MR Medical College, Gulbarga, as one of her chosen Colleges, certainly she would have been selected.
Her ranking did not enable her being selected to MD (OBG) to any one of the Colleges at Mysore, Bangalore, Davangere and Belgaum chosen by her in here application.
The 3rd respondent had mentioned MR Medical College as one of her choices and therefore she was selected depending upon the ranking.
5.
The sole question for our consideration in this Writ Appeal as well as in the Writ Petition is : whether the non-mentioning of any of the Colleges would disentitle the person in the merit list for being considered for admission, in case the seat in a particular subject was available in a College not mentioned in the application form ?
6.
There are two Executive Orders referred as the Rules which govern the fact situation : (1) The Karnataka Medical Colleges and Dental Colleges (Selection for Admission to Post Graduate Courses) Rules, 1987, and (2) Karnataka Conduct of Entrance Test for Admission to Post-Graduate Degree and Diploma (Medical and Dental) Courses Rules, 1987.
We are mainly concerned with the first of the Rules and therefore it is referred hereinafter as the 'Rules', for the sake of convenience.
The Rules govern the selection of candidates for admission to Post-Graduate and Diploma Courses specified in the Rules in respect of the seats in the Government Medical College, Government seats in private Medical Colleges and the seats in Government Dental College, Bangalore.
Eligibility for admission is the eligibility specified in the Second Rules referred to above (Entrance Test Rules); Rules provides for the Constitution of a Selection Committee.
Rule 5(1) requires issuance of a Notification specifying the number of Government seats available in the several Colleges in the State.
Admittedly, no such Notification was issued at the relevant point of time, in the sense that when the applications were invited and entertained, the Notification was not available.
In the Statement of Objections filed in Writ Petition No. 21948 of 1992, (which is the subject matter of the Writ Appeal referred to above), at para-5, the contesting respondents stated that the availability of subjects in different colleges were not notified for the reason that the Government was not intimated the availability of the seats in different Colleges in time.
7.
Rule 7 provides for the procedure for selection.
It contemplates preparation of the merit list on the basis of entrance examination.
The opening para of Rule 7 says that subject to the reservation provided under Rule 6 in respect of seats specified under sub-rule 3 of Rule 5, the selection shall be on the basis of merit determined in the merit list prepared under the Entrance Test Rules and such list shall be the First merit list.
Sub-rule 2 states that selection of candidates and their admission to different courses and Colleges shall be done by the use of computer.
Rule 8 provides for the list of selected candidates being sent to the concerned Colleges.
Rule 7 of the Entrance Test Rules also is almost similar.
Rule 8 of Entrance Test Rules states that there shall be an application form and an admission ticket for Entrance Test.
It was contended on behalf of the contesting respondents that in the absence of a choice being made, it is impracticable for the Selection Committee to select a candidate to any College, only on the ground that the candidate could have been otherwise selected having regard to his ranking in the merit list.
8.
Application Form has several columns.
One of the columns requires the candidates to indicate his choice of the subjects, in the order of preference; candidate has to fill up the blanks with the Code numbers of the subjects in the order of his preference; however, the choice is limited to ten subjects only.
Whether this limitation imposed on the number of subjects in valid or not, in the light of the decision in Dr. Ratnakar Shetty v. Selection Committee for P.G.
Degree, 1981(1) KLJ 369, need not be considered here, because, that question is not before us.
However, fact remains that every candidate has the option to select ten subjects of his choice and his preferences are to be indicated.
The Selection Committee has to respect this choice and select the candidate, provided, the ranking of the candidate in the merit list enables him for the selection to that subject, as against other candidates.
9.
Next column requires the candidate to indicate the choice regarding the Colleges.
There are 8 blanks to be filled up in the order of preference and undisputably, only eight Colleges are available in the State.
If a candidate chooses only one College as his first preference and does not fill up other blanks, can it be said that the candidate has chosen other Colleges also and can it be an indication that he is willing to join any of the other seven Colleges, if selected, to a seat in any one of them?
10.
The Application Form requires the "choice" to be indicated in the order of preference.
If a College is not indicated, the normal inference is that the candidate has not choosen that College at all; for example, when the candidate has indicated only those Colleges 'A', 'B' and 'C' in order of preference, it is a clear expression of candidate's choice that his application has to be considered for the seat available in these Colleges only, and that if he cannot be selected to a seat in College 'A', his case should be considered for admission in College 'B' and thereafter for admission in College 'C'.
If the candidate's ranking in the Merit List is 15, and his first choice of subject is Surgery, and among the list of the rankers, there are only 10 candidates competing for seats in Surgery, cases of these 10 candidates are to be considered first and only after selecting them and allotting them to the Colleges of their choice, turn of the 15th rank for consideration would arise and in such a situation, if seats in Colleges 'A', 'B' and 'C' are allotted to these 10 candidates, case of the 15th rank holder could be considered only in respect of seats in Colleges 'D', 'E', 'F', 'G' and 'H'.
But when the candidates has not chosen any of these five Colleges, how can he expect the Selection Committee to consider his case for the Surgery Course in any one of these five Colleges?
11.
The term "choice" is not as wide in its scope as the term "preference".
If the choice is limited to one or two, necessarily, other are excluded.
There is no difficulty at all for a candidate to choose all the 8 Colleges, if he is willing to join any one of the them for studies, indicating his order of preference.
If College at Gulbarga is not to his liking, though, anxiety to study may persuade him to join the said College, he can always indicate the said College as his last preference.
Suppose a College has no particular subject for Post-Graduate studies, still, mentioning of the said College in the order of preference would not harm the interest of the candidate, because, cases of all candidates for that particular subject of study would not be considered in respect of that College.
12.
Both the Rules and the Application Form are prescribed in the exercise of the executive power and there is nothing to indicate that the requirements of the Application Form are to be read as merely directory.
13.
When it is said that a candidate shall send his Application in the prescribed Form it follows that the requirement of the Application Form are as much binding as the Rules or Instructions governing the Selection process.
14.
It was contended that by denying seats to the petitioners even though they are meritorious, State has acted arbitrarily; it was also contended that the allotment of the selected candidates to any College on the basis of the candidate's ranking in the Merit List, is a matter of discretion vested in the Selection Committee; it was also urged that if a candidate deserves a seat on the basis of his ranking, he should be selected to any one of the Government seats in any of the Colleges and that the Committee may allot him to any of the Colleges at its discretion.
Decision of this Court in Arun Prasad v. Chairman, Selection Committee, ILR 1986 KAR 1781 was cited.
The relevant observations are found at page 1785 :  "Rule 11(2)(c) left to itself may lend credence to the contention, but it cannot be read in isolation.
As seen earlier, Rule 11 provides procedure for selection of candidates.
As per the prescribed procedure, only one select list is required to be prepared.
There is no scope for selection within selection, one to the Government Medical Colleges and another to Government seats in the Private Medical Colleges.
There shall be one selection for all seats available for the Government.
When such a select list is prepared in accordance with Rule 11(2)(a) then what remains to be done by the Selection Committee is only allotment of selected candidates to any particular college.
That allotment is within the discretion of the Selection Committee.
This much is clear from Rule 11(2)(b) which states that the Selection Committee shall not be bound to allot any candidate to any particular College.
That only means that no candidate can demand or choose a College of his choice.
It would be for the Selection Committee to allot candidates by using its discretion.
The discretion appears to be wide, but like every other discretion of a responsible authority or body it shall not be patently arbitrary or fanciful."
Said decision was in the context of the old Rules governing the selection.
Nowhere, the candidate was required to indicate his choice or preference; Court was concerned with the effect of the then Rule 11(2)(c) in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution, read with the need to accommodate the candidate belonging to the reserved category in the Government Colleges, as far as possible.
This is clear from a reading of the Decision of the learned Single Judge in the said case, reported in the same volume.
(vide I.L.R.
1986 KAR 1331).
Further, the ratio of the observations of the Bench would indicate that the Selection Committee had wide powers to allot a candidate to any of the Colleges.
15.
So long as the candidate has expressed his choice to join any College, his case would be considered with reference to his preferences.
But, if a candidate has not exercised his choice, the normal understanding will be that the candidate would not join that College, even if selected.
16.
When a candidate chooses one or two of the eight Colleges, his application has to be considered, as an application for admission to that one or two colleges; he cannot be considered as having applied for admission to all the Colleges.
No action of the State can be stigmatised as arbitrary and as denial of equality, because the resultant situation is brought about not by State's action, but, by the callousness and inaction of the candidate in not indicating his choice in respect of all the Colleges.
The candidate has to blame himself, if he has not specified all the Colleges, in the order of preference.
The State has given full opportunity to all the candidates to seek admission to all or any of the Colleges; the opportunity was not availed of by the candidates in these cases.
17.
Neither the Constitution nor any principle of equity requires the State to select the candidate and then invite him (or her) to join the College not chosen by the candidate, when the candidate had earlier not applied for a seat in that College.
18.
If a candidate was careless and negligent while sending his application, he cannot expect the Selection Committee to accommodate him on the assumption that the candidate may be willing to join any College; if so, it was purposeless to have a column in the Application Form providing for the specification of the choice as to the Colleges.
19.
The reasoning of the petitioners if applied to the 'subject of choice', would lead to absurd results.
For example, a candidate may be the tenth ranker in the Merit List.
But in his application, he may have given only one subject like 'Neuro-Surgery' as his choice and the seats available may be only five which may have been filled up by meritorious candidates from rank holders 1 to 9.
In such a situation, can it be said that the Selection Committee should invite him to exercise his option once again in respect of any other subject, or the Selection Committee may select him to any other subject at the discretion of the Selection Committee?
The obvious answer seems to be in the negative.
20.
It was contended that number of seats in respect of various subjects and the courses of studies in these eight Colleges were not disclosed to the candidates at the time of the application and, therefore, candidate cannot be blamed if choice as to the Colleges was not specified.
We have already pointed out that even if a particular course is not available in a college, specifying that College would not affect his case at all, because the next preference would be considered automatically and the situation is the same for all the candidates.
If Neuro-Surgery is not available at Gulbarga, and the candidate has given Gulbarga as his first preference, naturally, his second preference will be respected for consideration.
Rule 7(2) cannot be worked if choice of Colleges is not stated in the application, because, the selection of candidates and their allotment to different courses and Colleges shall have to be done by the use of computer.
21.
Consequently, the Writ Appeal and the Writ Petitions are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.