VK Bali, J (Oral) - Mridula Chandna vide present writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to admit her in Master of Library and Information Science course for the session 1991-92.
The case of the petitioner is that she was entitled to be admitted in the aforesaid course under reserve category of defence personnel as her father was an employee in Ordnance Cable Factory, Chandigarh.
It is also made out in the petition that as a matter of fact one seat was reserved for such a category and the said seat on decision of respondent No. 2 was filled from open category.
2.
The writ petition was admitted and was ordered to be listed for hearing on 13.7.1992 at No. 1.
However, the matter has come up for hearing now and petitioner has successfully undergone the entire course, result of which has been declared and she has been able to score 457 marks out of 800, securing 2nd division.
Notification declaring the result has been supplied to the Court by the learned counsel for the respondents and has been placed on record of the case.
It requires to be mentioned here that at the time of admission of the writ petition, the petitioner was given provisional admission in the course aforesaid and that is how she has been able to complete the entire course.
In view of the development that has been noticed above, I do not want to go into the contentious question posed by the learned counsel and suffice it to say that in such situation even though the admissions are irregular or not strictly in accordance with the prospectus or the rules, the same are regularised by the Courts.
On such order was passed by a Division Bench of this Court in Dr. Kanwaldeep Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(3) RSJ 102.
3.
In view of what has been said above, this petition is allowed to the limited extent that the admission granted to the petitioner at the time of motion hearing is regularised and she shall be deemed to have passed the examination successfully.
There shall be no order as to costs.