Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein prays for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to enroll him as a constable in the Haryana Police.
On behalf of the respondents, it is pointed out that vide letter dated September 11, 1991, a detailed procedure for eligibility and determining the suitability had been laid down.
In this circular conditions of eligibility as also various physical had been prescribed.
It has inter-alia provided that the candidates would be made to run 1500 metres in 6 minutes for general category and in 75 minutes in the case of SC/BC candidates.
Those who were found eligible had to appear in the physical tests prescribed in this letter, which were as follows :-  Sr.No.
Event One Star For SC/BC candidates 1.
100 meters run 150 seconds 170 seconds.
2.
Broad Jump 380 meters 340 metres.
3.
Shot put 560 meters 500 metres.
4.
High Jump 105 meters 90 metres.
5.
800 metre run 3 minutes 35 minutes.
2.
An affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondents, in which it has been inter-alia pointed out that S/Sh.
Vinod Kumar and Chaman Lal, petitioners, had cleared the eligibility tests conducted by the Superintendents of Police Sirsa and Yamuna Nagar respectively, but "both these petitioners failed to qualify in the physical tests conducted at Madhuban and hence they were not recruited."
3.
Mr. IS Balhara in CWP No. 16873 of 1991 and Mr. Sudesh Kumar Sud in CWP No. 17158 of 1991, learned counsel for the petitioners, state that the petitioners had in fact qualified all the physical tests as prescribed and are still willing to take these tests before any impartial authority.
They further state that in case the petitioners fail to qualify the prescribed tests, they would be willing to face the severest punishment.
4.
Mr. Jaswant Singh on the other hand points out that a similar petition, viz. CWP No. 1083 of 1992 has already been dismissed by this Court on March 27, 1992.
5.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties and keeping in view the undertaking given by the learned counsel for the petitioners to the effect that in case the petitioners fail to qualify the prescribed physical tests, they would be willing to face to consequences, I direct that the petitioners should be given a chance to undergo the prescribed physical tests.
The counsel for the petitioners prays in both the cases that they may be tested at the National Institute of Sports, Patiala.
I order accordingly.
6.
The Registry is directed to send a request to the Director, National Institute of Sports, Patiala for getting the petitioners in CWP Nos. 16873 of 1991 and 17158 of 1991 tested in the events as mentioned in the letter dated September 11, 1991.
The petitioners shall appear before the Director or any other person/s nominated by him on a date which may be fixed for the purpose.
The Director shall communicate the date for this purpose to this Court as well as the petitioners directly on the addresses given in these petitions.
The Registry shall communicate the date to the counsel for the petitioners who will ensure that the petitioners contact the Director on the date fixed.
The petitioners shall deposit the charges, if any, for the purpose of the test.
The result of the test shall be communicated to this Court in a sealed cover.
The matter shall be listed for hearing after the receipt of the final result from the Director, National Institute of Sports, Patiala.
7.
A copy of this order along with a copy of letter dated September 11, 1991, prescribing the conditions of eligibility and test be forwarded to the Director, National Institute of Sports, Patiala, for necessary action.
It will be appreciated if the needful is done at the earliest possible.
Order accordingly.