VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner, immediately before her superannuation, filed the present writ petition for a direction to the respondents to make correction of her date of birth in the service book of the petitioner.
She also sought direction that she be not superannuated on January 31, 1991 on attaining the age of 58 years on the basis of the existing entries.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Punjabi Teacher in the Punjab Education Department on 2551963 and at the time of filing the present writ petition, she was working as Punjab Teacher in Government Girls High School, Samrala, District Ludhiana.
In her writ petition, she has alleged that her date of birth was wrongly shown at the time of admission in the Primary School and resultantly wrong date of birth was mentioned in the Matriculation Certificate.
For correcting her date of birth, she made an application to the Registrar, Punjab University, Chandigarh.
In pursuance of her application, Syndicate of the University, in its proceedings held on 1971969 decided to correct the date of birth of the petitioner as 4.4.1935 instead on 26.1.1933.
After necessary correction was made, revised Matriculation Certificate was issued to the petitioner on 1971969.
It has been alleged in the writ petition that the petitioner made representation to the department for correction of her date of birth but no action whatsoever was taken by the department.
She has also alleged that the correspondence between her and the department for correction of her date of birth is going on but no final decision has been taken by respondent No. 1 in this regard.
In support of her claim, she has also annexed certain letters exchanged with the department whereby respondent No. 1 sought certain clarification from the Director, Public Instructions (Primary) Punjab, Chandigarh.
The action of the respondents is not finalising the case of the petitioner about correcting her date of birth is being challenged on the ground of being illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory and against the principles of natural justice.
3.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed a joint written statement.
Respondents not only denied the allegations made in the writ petition but also stated that the petitioner is not entitled to take benefit of two years on the basis of revised Matriculation Certificate issued by the Punjab University, Chandigarh as the same is not binding on them.
It has further been stated in the written statement that it was only on 191986 that the petitioner represented for the corrections of her date of birth.
4.
Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is entitled to get her date of birth corrected which has been wrongly recorded in the service record in view of the revised Matriculation Certificate.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents urged that the case of the petitioner was considered and rejected by the competent authority and the petitioner is not entitled to seek correction of her date of birth in her service record.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, we find no merit in the writ petition.
Indisputably, the petitioner was appointed as Punjabi Teacher in the Punjab Education Department on 2551963.
Though she has stated in her petition that immediately after her appointment, she came to know that wrong date of birth has been recorded in the Matriculation Certificate, yet she never asked the department to correct the same.
Respondents, in the written statement have categorically stated that it was only on 191986 that the petitioner represented her case for correction of her date of birth.
Petitioner has not denied this fact.
Moreover, nothing has been brought on the record of this writ petition to show that the petitioner ever approached the department the department before 191986 for correction of her date of birth.
No doubt on her representation, Punjab University corrected her date of birth and issued a revised Matriculation Certificate but the petitioner has failed to show as to what material was taken into consideration by the Punjab University when it took decision to correct her date of birth.
On her representation, department asked the Director, Public Instructions (Primary) Punjab, Chandigarh, to obtain from the petitioner attested copy of the certificate issued by the Registrar of Births and Deaths showing the dates of births of her sisters and brothers.
In pursuance of this letter, the Director, Public Instructions asked the petitioner to make available the record asked for by the department but the petitioner, vide letter dated 681990 (Annexure P-8) showed her inability to produce copies of birth certificates from the office of the Registrar of Births and Deaths on the ground that the same were not available.
Learned counsel for the petitioner was also not in position to state as to what material was produced before the Punjab University when it decided to correct the date of birth in her Matriculation Certificate.
Department is not bound to act on the basis of the revised Matriculation Certificate when the petitioner failed to produce clinching evidence in support of her claim for change of date of birth when the same was asked for by the department.
Even though the petitioner joined service on 2551963, yet she never represented to the department to correct her date of birth till 191986.
She has given no explanation whatsoever as to why she kept quiet for such a long period more particularly when she got her Matriculation Certificate revised in the year 1969.
It was only towards the fag end of her career that she represented to the department to correct her date of birth so as to take advantage on the basis of her revised Matriculation Certificate.
7.
This Court while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution cannot reinvestigate the matter when the same was rejected by the competent authority after taking into consideration the material put forth by the petitioner in support of her claim.
According to the petitioner herself, the cause of action had arisen to her on 1971969 when she received copy of the revised Matriculation Certificate but she took no action till 191986 when she represented to the department for correction of her date of birth.
Even if the petitioner had gone to the Civil Court, her suit was liable to be dismissed on the ground of limitation.
She could file civil suit within three years from the date of cause of action in view of the provisions of Article 113 of the Limitation Act which provides that in a suit for which no period of limitation is provided elsewhere in the Schedule, the period of limitation is three years from the date right to sue accrues.
If her remedy in the Civil Court was barred, then we fail to understand as to how she can press her claim in writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their won costs.
Petition dismissed.