Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an ad hoc teacher, is aggrieved by the factum of the termination of her services on April 27, 1987.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that she was appointed as a Social Studies Mistress on January 7 1985.
She worked for a month and a few days till February 12, 1985.
Thereafter she worked for 3 days from May 1 to May 3 1985.
She also worked from May 7, to May 17, 1985.
Ultimately, vide order dated October 30, 1985, the petitioner was appointed "on purely ad hoc basis till a person joins by way of (sic) transfer whichever is earlier...." It was categorically mentioned in the order that "this appointment is purely temporary and the services can be terminated without assigning any reason and without any notice."
On April 27, 1987, the petitioner's services were terminated vide order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure PA. Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A two-fold attack has been made on this order.
It is averred that at the time of the termination of petitioner's services, a person junior to her, viz. Mrs. Neelam Mehta, who had been recruited as a Social Studies Mistress in December 1985, was continuing in service.
Further, it has been claimed that the petitioner's services had been actually terminated on account of the fact that she was involved in a criminal case, in which she was actually discharged by the Chief Judicial Magistrate vide his order dated November 16, 1987.
On these premises, the order has been challenged.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had been appointed on a purely ad hoc basis and that her services had been terminated in strict conformity with the terms of appointment.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh, Advocate for the respondents.
5.
As noticed above, the petitioner was appointed on purely ad hoc basis and her services could have been terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
Consequently, the termination of her services by order dated April 24, 1987 was in strict conformity with the terms of her appointment.
It is useful to extract this order.
It reads as under :  "The services of Smt. Asha Rani SS Mistress Govt. High School Bhaudin is hereby terminated in terms and conditions of her appointment order."
A perusal of the above order would show that it has been passed in conformity with the terms of appointment.
It does not cast any stigma.
It does not refer to any case etc., which may have been pending against her.
6.
Even otherwise, a perusal of the order passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sirsa, which has been produced by the petitioner, shows that the proceedings had been initiated on the basis of an alleged incident on November 1, 1986.
There is nothing on the record to indicate that the order of termination was passed on account of the fact that the case was pending against the petitioner.
The mere fact that a reference has been made to the case in the written statement does not mean that the order of termination had been passed on account of the allegation made in the complaint.
7.
Nor do I find any ground to hold that the termination was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India merely on the ground that Mrs. Neelam Mehta, who was teaching in a Middle School, was allowed to continue in service.
Even if it is assumed that Mrs. Neelam Mehta had been recruited as a Social Studies Mistress after the petitioner, there is nothing on record to indicate that her terms of appointment were identical to those of the petitioner.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner and Mrs. Mehta were similarly placed.
Consequently, the question of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India does not arise.
8.
The petitioner faces yet another difficulty.
The order of termination was passed on April 24, 1987.
She was relieved of her duties on April 27, 1987.
The writ petition was filed on July 13, 1989.
There was thus a gap of more than two years.
Mr. RK Malik, appearing for the petitioner, submits that the petitioner had represented.
Even the representation produced on the record appears to have been filed only in January, 1989.
In this situation, the petition even suffers from the vice of delay and laches.
It appears that after the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Piara Singh's case, the petitioner moved a representation and approached this Court, In fact, the averments made in paragraph 4 of the writ petition are clearly indicative of such a position.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.