GC Garg, J - Petitioner in this petition under Article 226 of the constitution of India has prayed for issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing orders, Annexures P-2 and P-3 holding him to be ineligible for appearing in B.Sc.
Part I examination of the Panjab University and for a further direction to the respondents to declare his result of the said examination.
2.
Petitioner appeared in 10 + 2 examination held in April, 1990.
On declaration of result, he was required to re-appear in the subject of Biology.
In the meantime, he joined Government College, Sector 11, Chandigarh and sought admission in B.Sc.
Part-I.
While seeking admission, the petitioner specifically wrote on the admission form that he was seeking admission provisionally at his own risk till declaration of result and he also wrote that he will not claim college fee in case he did not pass the examination.
The petitioner appeared in the subject of Biology of 10+2 examination and the result of the said examination was declared on January 21, 1991.
The petitioner was, declared to have passed but, admittedly, with less than 40% marks in the aggregate.
He submitted his result card to the college authorities in order to get his admission regularised.
The college authorities in turn, conveyed the result of the petitioner to the University-respondent No. 2 on March 15, 1991.
The Roll No. of the petitioner for appearing in B.Sc.
Part-I examination had already been issued by the University provisionally.
While the petitioner was appearing in B.Sc.
Part-I examination, respondent No. 2 conveyed to respondent No. 1 that the petitioner was not eligible to appear in B.Sc.
Part-I examination of the Panjab University as he had not obtained 40% marks in the aggregate of 10 + 2 examination as was required by proviso (i) to Regulation 41 (iii) of the Regulations relating to B.A./B.Sc.
(General and Honours) Examinations.
The petitioner was thereafter conveyed by letter dated June 17, 1991, Annexure P-2 that he was ineligible, having failed to secure 40% marks in the aggregate in 10 + 2 examination and consequently his name was struck off from the college rolls.
The petitioner, who in the meantime sought admission to B.Sc.
Part II provisionally at his own risk and responsibility, was further informed by letter dated January 24, 1992.
Annexure P-3 that his admission to B.Sc.
Part II given to him provisionally stood cancelled as he failed to submit his B.Sc.
Part-I examination result.
3.
The petitioner in the circumstances has approached this Court for grant of reliefs indicated above.
4.
In the return filed on behalf of the respondent-University, it has been categorically stated that the principal of the College submitted pass certificate of the petitioner of 10 + 2 examination (held in September, 1990), on March 15, 1991, after the issuance of Roll Number and on verification made by the University, it was found that the petitioner was ineligible to appear in B.Sc.
Part-I examination having secured less than 40% marks in the aggregate in 10 + 2 examination and he was consequently declared ineligible by letter dated April 10, 1991.
It is further averred in para 12 of the return that respondent No. 1 had been informed by the University that eligibility for students seeking admission to B.Sc.
Part I was that they should at least obtain 40% marks in 10 + 2 examination in terms of proviso (i) to Regulation 41.
Respondent No. 1 in its return has stated that it was clearly provided in the prospectus under the heading "Procedure for submitting applications for admission" as under :  "That the college will not take any responsibility if any candidate is declared ineligible by the University/PSEB after admission to the College."
Since the petitioner did not obtain 40% marks as required by Regulations, he was held to be ineligible.
It is further stated that the petitioner was informed about his ineligibility and thereafter he was never allowed to appear in the remaining papers.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that the petitioner had faithfully and truly conveyed his result to the Principal on January 21, 1991 and he was issued Roll Number and allowed to appear in the examination even after the submission of result card by him and thus; the respondents are estopped by their act and conduct to say that he was not eligible and direction is thus, required to be issued to the respondent University to declare the result of the petitioner for B.Sc.
Part-I examination.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his submission has relied upon Bhupinderjeet v. Panjab University and another, 1989(3) S.L.R.
372; Anil Naq.
v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1981(1) S.L.R.
689 and Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 SC 376.
6.
I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner and find no merit therein.
The petitioner was admitted to B.Sc.
Part-I provisionally at his own risk and responsibility.
The University was informed of the result of 10+2 examination only on March 15, 1991 and it took decision thereon and conveyed the same to the Principal of the college by letter dated April 10, 1991, wherein it was stated that the petitioner was ineligible for seeking admission in B.Sc.
Part-I in view of proviso (i) to Regulation 41 of the Regulations relating to admission to B.A./B.Sc.
Degree Course.
Some delay on the part of the College in conveying the decision of the University cannot clothe him with a right for declaration of result and claiming that he was eligible to appear in B.Sc.
Part-I examination.
As already noticed, he sought admission both in B.Sc.
Part-I and Part-II provisionally at his own risk and responsibility.
Having done so, the petitioner in my view is debarred now to seek a direction from this Court to the respondent-University to declare his result of B.Sc.
Part-I examination.
It is not disputed at all that under the Regulations, the petitioner was not eligible to be admitted to B.Sc.
Part-I of the respondent-University.
Nothing has been brought to my notice from which it may be concluded that there was any mistake in the finding of the university at any stage.
As soon as the University came to know i.e. on March 15, 1991, that the petitioner had passed 10 + 2 examination with less than 40% marks in the aggregate, it conveyed to respondent No. 1 by letter dated April 10, 1991, that he was not eligible to appear in the examination.
The judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner have no application, whatsoever, to the facts of the present case.
7.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.