RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 689 and 690 of 1996, which have been filed by the same petitioner.
2.
Briefly the facts leading to the filing of these two writ.
petitions are, that the petitioner was selected in an open competition by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board as a Ziledar candidate in the year 1960 and after completing the training and passing the requisite examinations, he was appointed as a full-fledged Ziledar on 22nd February, 1963.
Thereafter, he completed his probationary period and also passed the departmental revenue examination and was working as a regular Ziledar in Malout Section at Malout, District Faridkot, in the year 1981.
3.
The Punjab Government vide Memo dated 11th February, 1981. had laid down that henceforth the recruitment of `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidates should be made from the following categories of officials :  I.
From amongst cadre of Kanungos.
80%  II.
From amongst District Revenue Accountants.
10%  III.
From amongst Assistant Consolidation Officers.
6%  IV.
From Ziledars of Irrigation Department 9%  On 2nd December, 1981, Commissioner Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur, who has been arrayed as Respondent No. 2 in Civil Writ Petition No. 689 of 1986, sent the following teleprinter message to (1) Superintending Engineer, Sirhind Canal Circle, Ludhiana; and (2) Superintending Engineer, Ferozepur Canal Circle Ferozepur :-  "It is proposed to appoint officiating Naib Tehsildars on ad hoc basis from amongst Ziledars in Ferozepur Division (.)
It is, therefore, requested that names of three senior Ziledars willing for the post of Naib Tehsildars and having satisfactory record of, service may please be sent to this office alongwith the confidential personal files (with list of Annual Confidential Reports) and Service Books within three days positively (.)
It may also be certified that no complaint/enquiry is pending against them (.)"
The Superintending Engineer, Ferozepur Canal Circle, sent the following message on 2nd December 1981 to all the Executive Engineers in his Circle :-  The Commissioner, Ferozepur Division vide his number A.E.1/81/12182 dated 2.12.1981 has desired to appoint officiating Naib Tehsildars on ad hoc basis from amongst the Ziledars in Ferozepur Division.
The names of Senior Ziledars willing for the post of Naib Tehsildars and having satisfactory records of service may please be recorded to this office along with their personal register and with list of Confidential reports and service books tomorrow positively.
Moreover it may also be certified that there is no complaint or enquiry pending against the Ziledar."
The petitioner, at the relevant time, was working as a Ziledar in Malout Section under the Executive Engineer of Abohar Division, who has been arrayed as Respondent No. 4 in Civil Writ Petition No. 689 of 1986.
It has been alleged in Para 6 of this writ petition that the said Executive Engineer did not circulate the above messages to Ziledars under him to ascertain their willingness as required by the teleprinter massages, reproduced above.
It has further been averred that Respondent Nos. 5 and 6, who were also working as Ziledars under the Executive Engineer of the Abohar Division, were junior to the petitioner, but the name of Respondent No. 5 was specifically asked for by the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division and his name was, accordingly, recommended for appointment as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidate.
The copy of the teleprinter massage from the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division asking for the name of Shri Ajaib Singh, has also been put on the record of the case.
It has further been mentioned that on 4th December, 1981, the Executive Engineer, Abohar forwarded the application of Respondent No. 6 to the Superintending Engineer, Ferozepur Canal Circle, Ferozepur, recommending his name for appointment as `B' Class, Naib Tehsildar candidate.
4.
It is the case of the petitioner that the seniority of Ziledars is at the State Level, and, therefore, his name could be sent for appointment as Naib Tehsildar candidate to both the Commissioners of Ferozepur Division and Jalandhar Division.
In fact, it has been mentioned in Civil Writ Petition No. 690 of 1986 that the petitioner's name was recommended for appointment as Maib Tehsildar candidate to Commissioner, Jalandhar Division.
The recommendation had reached the Chief Engineer Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh.
However, for reasons best known to him, he did not further forward his name to Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar.
These two specific averments have been made in Paras 7 and 8 of Civil Writ Petition No. 690 of 1986, in which Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh, has been arrayed as a Respondent.
In the reply filed by Respondent No. 2 : Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, against Paras 7 and 8, it has been mentioned that the same relate to Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, and no reply has been filed by the Chief Engineer.
5.
Mr. Anand Swaroop, Senior Advocate, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioner, argued that the petitioner had a right to be considered for appointment as a `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidate and it is not denied on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner was not senior to Respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
According to the learned counsel, no reasons arc forthcoming from the official respondents as to why the petitioner's name was not sent to the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division/Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, for consideration for appointment as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar Candidate.
6.
On behalf of the respondents, the only stand taken is that appointment to the rank of `B' Class, Naib Tehsildar Candidate is not a matter of right.
The appointments are made by way of transfer by selection, and therefore, the petitioner cannot make any grievance if he was not appointed as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar Candidate.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, as also going through the written statement filed on behalf of the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division/Jalandhar Division, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Article 16 of the Constitution of India enshrines equal opportunity of consideration for appointment.
If a senior person is to be ignored that can only be done after considering his claim and after finding that he is not suitable for appointment.
However, it cannot be that a pick and choose method can be adopted and any person can be appointed as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar Candidate without considering claim of the seniors.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner's case was ever considered for being appointed as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar Candidate.
It has rightly been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that no reasons are forthcoming in the written statement as to why the petitioner's claim was not considered.
According to me, it is a clear violation of the right of the petitioner guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
No doubt, an employee cannot claim promotion as a matter of right, but certainly he can claim a right of consideration for appointment/promotion.
That is exactly what is being asked for by the petitioner.
8.
I may deal herewith a point raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioner has claimed a right of consideration for appointment with effect from 1981; whereas the present writ petition was filed in the year 1986.
The objection is wholly misconceived.
Initially, the writ petition was filed in the year 1981, i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 612 of 1981, but at the motion stage the same was dismissed in default of appearance of the counsel.
The S.L.P.
Filed against that was allowed by the Supreme Court in September, 1985 and the case was remanded back for decision of merits.
The writ petition was withdrawn by the petitioner, with permission to file a fresh one on the same cause of action.
The present writ petitions were filed in the year 1986.
Consequently, I find that there is no delay in approaching this Court for the relief claimed for.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar Candidate with effect from the date when Ziledars junior to him.
were so appointed.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is found suitable for appointment from such a date when his juniors were appointed as `B' Class, Naib Tehsildar Candidates, he will been entitled to all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
Let this exercise be completed within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.