MS Liberhan, J - This bunch of fifteen writ petitions Nos. 8097, 7681, 14315, 14912, 16241, 16801, 15239, 15368, 16000, 16108, 16109, 17328, 17726 and 18995 of 1991 and 78 of 19921 involve a common question regarding the interpretation of Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Volume II (as applicable to Haryana State), hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules'.
Accordingly, these petitions are being disposed of together by this judgment.
2.
The petitioners have assiduously assailed the selection for lower school course on the grounds that more marks were given than the maximum prescribed for the character rolls; it was an Act of favouritism and the selection was made arbitrarily.
It is further stated that as envisaged by Rule 137 of the Rules maximum marks in all the four tests are required to be fixed and no maximum marks were fixed for examination of the service record.
A person can be sent for the course only if he had obtained at least 50% marks in each test.
Resultantly, the petitioners have prayed for quashing the selection as well as List-B and sought a mandamus directing the respondents to send them to the course in accordance with their respective merit.
3.
The respondents have refuted the averments made by the petitioners.
Selection on the basis of test is admitted.
It is also admitted that assessment of service record is to be made on the basis of education, courses passed and commendation certificates earned during service.
The persons detailed for the course are qualified under the Rules and they all had cleared all the tests.
They were sent in order of merit.
The petitioners' averment regarding providing maximum 15 marks for the character rolls has been denied.
It is asserted that Police Rules do not provide the maximum marks for the character roll to be 15.
The limit of 15 marks is only provided in respect of Class II and Class III commendation certificates earned.
Selection on mala-fides is denied.
4.
It may be noticed that in civil writ petition 14315 of 1991, a specific defence has been taken that total 100 marks were provided and bifurcation of the said 100 marks is as under :-  (a) Written test : 50 marks  (b) Parade : 30 marks  (c) Interview : 5 marks  (d) Character rolls 15 marks  However, in the other writ petitions, providing of any marks for the character rolls has been denied.
5.
The factual matrix is not in dispute.
The petitioners were enrolled as Constables from time to time.
They have undergone various trainings.
In the process of promotion for the next rank, a constable is required to pass the lower school course held by the Police Training College.
The process of selection for the training is provided by Rule 137 of the Rules.
It envisages that List-B shall be maintained by the Superintendent of Police with respect to all the Constables selected for admission in the said course.
The list is to be prepared in the month of January each year.
The number of seats are allotted to a District every year.
The names permitted to be entered in the list is to be in order of merit, to be determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in (i) Parade (ii) Written test in general law (iii) Interview (iv) Examination of service records.
It further provides the eligibility conditions for taking up the test.
It is also provided that a candidate has to obtain at least 50% marks in each test before he is brought on list-B.
The maximum marks for each test can be 100.
The mode of assessment of service record has been provided which shall be on the basis of education, courses passed and the commendation certificates earned during service.
For each of the constituents of the test and for assessment of the service record, marks have been prescribed.
It is not disputed that maximum marks for parade, written test and interview were provided but it is contended that no maximum marks of examination of the service record were marks of examination of the service record were provided.
6.
Rule 137 of the Rules construction of the language whereof has been raised runs as under :-  "137(1) list B (in form 137) shall be maintained by each Superintendent of Police.
It shall include the names of all constables elected for admission to the Lower School Course to be held at the Police Training College.
Selection to the list shall be made to the month of January each year and shall be limited to the number of seats allotted to the District for the year.
For reasons to be recorded, the number of seats can be increased by twenty per cent.
Allotment of seats to each district shall be done on the basis of existing vacancies and the number of vacancies which are likely to occur during the next one year.
Names shall be entered in the list in the order of merit, determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in (i) Parade (ii) written test in general law (Indian Penal Code, Cr.
Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act, and such other local and Special laws as may be specified (iii) Interview and (iv) Examination of Service Record.
(2) xx xx xx xx  (3) Departmental Promotion Committee for each district shall consist of District Superintendents of Police and two Deputy Superintendents of Police, to be named by the D.I.G.
concerned.
The candidates will have to obtain at least 50 per cent of the marks in each test.
The maximum marks for each test shall be prescribed by the Inspector General through a Standing Order, which may be reviewed after every three years.
(4) The assessment of service record will be done on the basis of education courses passed and commendation certificates earned during the service.
The marks assigned to these shall be as follows :- (i) Education :  BA and above : 5 marks  Matric and above : 3 marks  Middle and above : 2 marks  (ii) Courses passed :  Courses upto 1 month duration : 1 mark  Courses upto 3 months' duration : 2 marks  Courses upto 6 months' duration : 3 marks  Courses upto 9 months' duration : 4 marks  Courses exceedings 9 months duration 5 marks  (iii) Commendation Certificates :  Class I : 3 marks  Class II : 2 marks  Subject to a maximum of 15 marks for both.
Class III 1 mark  (5) xx xx xx xx"  The words of the Rule which fall to be construed are 'test' :  (i) Names shall be entered in the list in the order of merit determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in (a) Parade (b) Written test in general laws (c) Interview and (d) Examination of the service record.
7.
A candidate will have to obtain at least 50% of the marks in each test shall be 100.
The assessment of service record shall be done on the basis of education, courses passed and commendation certificated earned during service.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondent i.e. the State of Haryana very candidly conceded that though in the Writ Petition 12238 of 1991 (Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SCT 614 (P&H).)
decided on December 20, 1991, while interpreting Rule 137 of the Rules, the Hon'ble Single Bench of this Court has held that interview and examination of service record by no stretch of imagination can be held to be 'test' yet it is emphatically accepted that interview is a test, but it has been vehemently argued that examination of the service record is not a test.
The learned counsel, however, accepted that one is required to obtain at least 50% marks in each test i.e. parade, written test and interview.
Since the examination of service record is not a test consequently a person is not required to obtain 50% marks in examination of service record.
It was further argued that Police Rules no where provide prescribing of 15 as the maximum marks for the character rolls.
The limit of 15 marks is only provided in respect of class II and II commendation certificates earned during service.
It is submitted that the intention of the legislature treating examination of service record as not a test is discernible by reading Sub-Rule 4 wherein the Rule itself provides various marks.
It has no where provided the maximum marks.
Since no maximum marks have been provided there possibly cannot be any requirement of obtaining 50% marks in the examination of service record.
In order to support his submission, the learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Civil Writ Petition 12238 of 1991 decided on 20121991 (supra).
9.
The emphasis of the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners has been that quint-essence for bringing the names of persons on list-B, is on the basis of the test provided by the statutory Rules i.e.
Parade, written test, interview and examination of service record, as already mentioned above.
It further provides that one has to obtain at least 50% marks in each test to qualify to be brought on List-B The mode of assessment of service record has been provided by Sub Rule 4.
It is clearly discernible that examination of service record being part of a series of tests provided by Rule 13(7)(1) of the Rules, it is one of the tests for bringing a candidate on List-B'.
In our considered view, it is encumbent on the respondent to prescribe maximum marks for examination of the service record in order to determine, out of what marks a person is required to obtain 50% marks.
It was submitted that if the innovation of the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that examination of service record is not test nor any maximum marks are required to be prescribed for it nor the condition of securing 50% marks is attracted to the examination of service record, it would not only render negatory but would if not obliterate, at least dilute the importance of the examination of the service record i.e. the experience, age, benefit of courses passed to the minimum.
There will be no qualifying marks in the case of the test of suitability by examination of service record while it would be so in other cases.
The mode suggested of no minimum marks would put the seniority and number of years of service rendered to not only negatory but would also lead to equating unequals to equals i.e. beginner would be permitted to compete with an experienced one, which does not appear to be the object of the Rule, the purpose whereof is promotion to higher rank and not selection by direct recruitment.
The object of restricting arbitrary discretion of pick and choose for bringing constables on List-B in that even would be lost.
It would result in anomalous results.
10.
Fairness is essential for improving the quality of Government.
Fairplay at the hands of the state whether in administration or in employment, promotion or in any other field is one of the duties enjoined on the State by the Constitution.
The Government cannot Act arbitrarily either in giving jobs or while granting promotions.
It has to Act in conformity with some principles which can stand the test of reason.
What would be fair and reasonable varies in particular facts and circumstances of each case.
It has to be judged from what the law requires to be done in the particular prevailing situation.
11.
There is no doubt that considerations of sympathy while interpreting the statutory provisions are irrelevant.
Government has to function.
Law cannot be dealt with as a question of mathematics.
Basically it has to be looked in consonance with reasons and has to be fundamentally just.
Constructions has to be purposeful.
Public good is the pre-emptory dictate of the Constitution.
Interpretation has to lean in order to promote the main object of the Legislature.
There can neither be any logical corrolaries nor there can be any ready-made answers determined by the general rule or formula or principle in advance.
At the same time rule cannot be placed under legal microscope with an indulgent eye which sees no evil anywhere within its range.
One has to Judge the rule and interpret it on the accepted principles.
12.
Precedently, it is an established rule of interpretation that the interpretation which gives effect to all clauses of a rule should be adopted.
Keeping in view the phraseology of the provisions, the effect of law is to be seen.
It should not be construed in isolation and must be construed harmoniously and in the context in which it is said.
Another predominant consideration for interpretation is the intention of the Legislature which should be seen.
One must look what the legislature wanted to remedy.
At the same time, one must not Act to alter the material in which the provisions are interwoven.
Attempt should be made to give plain meaning to the statutory provisions.
In order to determine the intention of the legislature, one should keep in mind the signs which are most natural and probable, provided by the words, context, the subject matter, effect consequences or the spirit and reasons of law.
Words should be given their literal meanings if they are clear and unambiguous.
The are to prevail unless there are strong reasons to the contrary.
Literal meanings leading to absurdity or patent injustice and inequity have to be avoided.
The object of the rules is to remove the feeling of injustice and partiality and not only giving an appearance of impartiality.
There can be no gainsaying that every construction is not valid for every composition.
The nature of composition demands awareness of certain presumption and also significance of the enactment.
Various other factors like setting of parameters, curtailing of arbitrariness and illogical discretion are the relevant considerations for construction of words in a particular rule.
13.
One of the other principles for interpretation to be kept in view, in order to find out connotations of the words in a statute or statutory rules is that one has to look to the context in which it is used.
It would quite often provided a key to the words used and the sense they should carry meaning of the words vary in the context, the circumstances and the time they are used apart from the other factors.
14.
In Government service jurisprudence, a person is employed as a whole man and not just for a job but for a whole career.
One must be given equality of opportunity of advancement of his career which has been provided by Rule 137 of the Rules in the instant case.
It provides the modalities for a constable to advance his career.
It has provided the parameters limiting discretion of the authorities.
It further provides the minimum requirement for an opening for promotion to the higher post.
Keeping in view the fairplay, the basic principles in service jurisprudence and giving equal chance of promotion to all, it has provided the eligibility conditions to come on List-B  15.
The word 'test' is a word of ordinary current speech, the meaning of which is clear to every one.
It is a mean to determine one's ability to satisfy a particular requirement.
Its various shades of meaning given in the dictionary is an Act or process that reveals the inherent quality as of character, an annultic assessment of a person either generally or specifically recognised which would approve or disapprove the fitness of a person.
It is mode to compare two persons for their suitability.
Test is the basis for evaluation of a person on the touch stone of criterion fixed, to Judge a person.
It is understood as a procedure or process to identify a person to be fit for particular job.
It is procedure for determining the performance characteristic or a diagnostic procedure for determining fitness or suitability of a person.
It is accepted as a technique for measuring objectively the personal characteristic potentiality or accomplishment specifically by comparing the qualities and behaviour of an individual with others.
It is one of the modes to explore aptitude, attitude or knowledge or skill or a person by means of a test to Judge whether a person is suited for the higher post.
It is synonymous with the word 'probe'.
16.
We may venture to state that the legislature with an intention to remove bias and in still feeling of fairness and justice in the disciplinary force particularly the faith that one would get all his dues purely on merits and not by rule of thumb has provided various parameters to guard against the arbitrary discretion.
It is not disputed that the rule envisages that a person must qualify the test of parade, written test and interview and in order to qualify these tests minimum pass marks have been provided as 50% of the marks fixed for each test.
A person may secure very high merit in the aggregate of the marks obtained but in case he fails to secure 50% marks in any of the these tests, he would not be able to make a grade to be brought on List-B Upto this the proposition of law is not disputed.
17.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav and others etc. v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 454 had very lucidly stated that written test assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellect while viva voce makes an over all assessment of a person's qualities.
The rule making authorities in order to find out the merits of a person for promotion tampered with seniority had provided for examination of the service record.
We may venture to state that examination of service record would help the authorities in evaluating his initiative alterness, dependability, co-operativeness his consistency in service and his constant conduct in meeting and dealing with others, his adaptability, his ability for judgment i.e. to make decisions and others finer qualities including the moral integrity.
The examination of service record is as good a mode for judging a person of his suitability for promotion or bringing a person on List-B, which opens the gate for further promotion, as good a test or any other mode for judging a person e.g. parade, written test or interview.
The examination of service record cannot be put in any manner at a lower pedestal than other modes or tests which have been accepted by the learned counsel for the petitioners as tests for determining the suitability or merit of a person to be brought on List-B It is the sole domain of the administration by what mode they want to test the suitability of a person.
One can safely conclude that examination of service record is one of the modes to test a person's suitability for holding higher rank or the promotion etc.
In my considered view i.e. the examination of service record has been put on the same pedestal as parade, written test or the interview.
It is as good a test as any other test.
18.
Reading of Rules 137(1) and 137(3) of the Rules whereby maximum marks have been prescribed for each test and the mode of assessment of service record and the mode of assessment of service record and the mode for awarding marks as provided by Rule 137(4) it is obviously reasonable, to infer and also clearly discernible that Legislature intended to treat the examination of service record as one of the tests.
The context i.e. the words used.
"On the basis of tests in" We may venture to state, indicates that examination of service record is a test making provisions as to what should be examined during the examination of service record and further providing a scale for the grant of marks by sub-Rule (4) is nothing else but providing the limits to the discretionary powers of the Government to give due regard to the seniority of the individual.
It is with an intention to remove any chance of the disc being irredeemably loaded against a candidate.
Holding otherwise i.e. the meaning suggested by the counsel for the respondents that examination of service record is not a test would be straining the plain meaning and placing it to unnatural and forced construction.
The reflection left by reading the Rule is, that these are four tests which have been provided.
Giving intrinsic meaning of the word 'tests' it emerges from reading of the above rule that the Legislature has intended rather treated the examination of service record as one of the tests.
That is the only purposeful construction that one can place nearer to the reality.
The examination of service record gives an edge over others because of the period of service rendered in as much as it provides opportunity to pass courses and earn commendation certificates, which puts a person ahead of others.
Due consideration was thus kept in view for the length of service.
The technology provided by sub-Rule (4) for assessing the service record is a step towards giving the length of service its due.
19.
The inference suggested by the learned counsel for the respondents that examination of service record is not a test appears to be unfair and unjust.
It does fall within the parameters of the term test.
Giving it a meaning as suggested by the learned counsel for the respondents would result in ineffective and anomalous result i.e. the minimum pass percentage provided by each test would be rendered negatory.
A person having served a department for a year would have a march over the person having much larger period of service to his credit if no examination of service record is to be obliterated from the arena of the tests provided by the Rules.
As observed earlier, test is nothing else but examination or assessing of various aspects of suitability of a person.
20.
To sum up, to have a workable approach in applying Rule 137 Sub-Rules (1) (3) and (4) in a judicious and equitable manner.
We see no reason to hold, rather find it hard to accept that examination of service record is not at test.
To hold it not to be a test would amount to twisting of law apart from the fact that it would lower the morale of the disciplined force and undermine the very object of fair opportunity to all giving due consideration to the experience gained by rendering service passing courses and earning commendation certificates.
Analysing the rule in the way suggested by the learned counsel for the respondents would push it to the point of defeating justice apart from the fact that it would obliterate and nullify the basic design put-forth by the rules for giving a fair chance of promotion to the really meritorious persons depending upon their fitness and performance as well as their respective rating.
Again the rational nexus of the object of providing the mode for bringing a person on list-B is in fact that the basic consideration is to be the efficiency, integrity and suitability tampered with seniority and merit on the basis of the courses passed etc.
It would further provide a means to assess the consistency of constables in their career.
21.
We find no force in the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that no maximum marks are required to be fixed for assessment of service record, which is done on the basis of education courses passed and the commendation certificates earned.
Unless maximum marks are provided for examination of the service record the fulfilment of the condition of having obtained, the pass marks of 50% in the tests fixed by sub-rule (3) of Rule 137 of the Rules cannot be determined.
It is obvious that marks awarded under Sub-Rule (4) would then be left in a floating stage.
No proper comparison can be made if the maximum marks are not fixed.
Apart from this the minimum of 50% marks required to be secured by the candidate out of the marks earmarked by sub-Rule (4), cannot be determined.
Securing of 50% marks is the minimum standard fixed by the Police Rules.
I may venture to state that I have failed to understand that how one can be said to have passed securing 50% marks unless the maximum marks are fixed.
Interpreting would thus result in absurd results.
The language of the statutory provisions i.e. tenor of it influenced by Sub-rules (3) and (4) of the Rules reading together leads unmistakably towards the direction of holding it to be a test.
22.
We may state that we find merit in the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents that assessment of a person on the basis of service record cannot be treated as a test as the tests are what is happening now and not what has happened in the past.
The meaning of the word 'test' has to be taken in the context of the rule and not as meaning of any technical term or word or art.
It is mode of comparatively judging a person.
We cannot accept that judging a person from his past performance cannot be treated as a test.
As observed earlier, test is nothing else but a means of analysing or diagnosis of a person to find out his suitability for promotion or determining his merits.
Earning of testimonials is one of the considerations and not the only consideration while examining the record and similar is the case of the courses passed.
23.
The next contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that vires of the Rule are not challenged and that marks should be provided by the experts and not by the Courts and Courts should not enter into this thickets.
In support of his submission the learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan and others, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 1777.
There is no quarrel with the proposition of law laid down but the said proposition does not arise in the facts and circumstances of this case.
Again there is no quarrel with the proposition of law laid down in Tirath Singh v. Bachittar Singh and others, AIR 1955 SC 830 that construction has to be placed in such a manner that it does not modify the meaning of the words and even the structure of the sentence.
24.
Keeping the above observations in view and the admitted facts that maximum marks for examination of record have not been provided, it is impossible to determine whether a person detailed for the course did obtained 50% marks in the test relating to examination of the service record and was thus qualified to be so detailed.
As a natural consequence, the selection is liable to be set aside.
25.
It is not disputed that the course commenced on 1121991 though the matter was referred to the Division Bench keeping in view the fact that provisions of Rule 137 of the Rules are likely to fall for interpretation in a number of cases, it was deemed appropriate to examine the matter by the Division Bench, yet the writ petition did not mature for hearing for quite a long time.
As we are told during the course of arguments that the course has already run for almost two months, it would be unfair to unsettle the settled matters, particularly when the selected persons are not party to the writ petition.
26.
In our considered view, the ends of justice would be amply met if the respondents are directed to fix the maximum marks for the examination of service record and prepare the merit list afresh.
In the eventuality of any of the petitioners found entitled to admission on merit, they would be detailed for the course whenever next course commences by creating additional seats.
If any of the petitioners who has been left out and has not been sent to the course, commenced on 1121991 is later found entitled for being detailed for the course, in view of the observations made above, he would be entitled to all the consequential reliefs like seniority etc. and would be deemed to have qualified the course commencing from 1121991 along with other candidates.
Any person who has been detailed to the course but on reframing of the selection list on merit is found to be not qualified or entitled for the course, would not be not qualified or entitled for the course, would not be sent back as no relief can be granted against him because he is not a party to the writ petition and he would be permitted to continue with the course.
In view of our above observations the judgment of Civil Writ Petition No. 12238 of 1991 (Zila Singh v. State of Haryana and others) decided on 20121991, is over ruled to the extent it held that interview and examination of the service record is not a test.
With the above observations the writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
We hope, in future the State would first provide the maximum marks for each test and then make the selections.