RS Mongia, J.- The petitioner who was working as Superintending Engineer in the Irrigation Department in the State of Punjab, challenges the order dated May 18, 1990 of the Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power by which he was prematurely retired under Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 with immediate effect by paying him three months pay and allowances in lieu of the notice.
The facts giving rise to the present petition are :-  2.
The petitioner after graduating in Civil Engineering in April, 1960 joined as an Assistant Engineer in the P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch), Punjab, in January 1961, after having been selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
He was promoted as Executive Engineer in July, 1973 and further as Superintending Engineer in May, 1988.
The petitioner took over charge of the Ferozepur Canal Circle, Ferozepur on May 30, 1988.
In September 1988 the intense rains and unprecedented floods brought misery in the State of Punjab resulting in loss of human lives, cattle, ruination of crops and accumulation of intensive silt in the fields.
Floods also played havoc with the irrigation system.
There was damage to embankments.
Numerous breaches occurred which necessitated relief cuts to be made in the canal banks to drain off the flood water.
The assessment of extensive damage was done by various State/Central level teams.
According to the petitioner in the Ferozepur Canal Circle alone 500 Km.
length of channels was badly damaged, thereby disrupting the entire canal system of the circle.
The Rajasthan Feeder and Bikaner Canal all along suffered extensive damage.
It has been further averred, that to carry out the heavy repairs, in a record time, no stone was left unturned and if this was not done the water supply in the irrigation channels would not have been resumed and sowing of rabi crops would not have been possible.
3.
For the year 1988-89 for petitioner was conveyed the following Annual Confidential Remarks :-  "In your Annual Confidential Report for the year 1988-1989, while you have been considered as 'very good' officer, it has been pointed out that serious irregularities have allegedly taken place in the repair work carried out in Ferozepur Circle in the wake of September, 1988 floods and all the Executive Engineers working under you have been placed under suspension and your explanation has also been called.
The above remarks are brought to your notice with the hope that you will make earnest efforts to bring improvement in future."
4.
On January 12, 1990 vide Annexure P-2 the petitioner was asked to give explanation regarding alleged irregularities in execution of repairs to work damaged during floods of 1988 in Ferozepur Canal Circle, Ferozepur and misappropriation of funds on the repairs of gate of Hussainiwala Head Works.
The penultimate para of the letter asking for the explanation of the petitioner by the Joint Secretary, Irrigation and Power reads as under :-  "In the above noted works it has been found that you are responsible for lack of supervision and connivance with your subordinate officers/officials/agencies and approved the rates/amounts for execution of work beyond your competency just to have a wrongful gain to them.
You are, therefore, requested to explain your position within 15 days failing which it will be presumed that you have nothing to say in your defence and further action will be initiated at Government level as per rules."
5.
The petitioner gave a reply to the above letter on March 26, 1990 (Annexure P-3) giving his explanation mentioning that he was not negligent and everything had been done according to Cadre Rules.
This explanation runs into about eighteen typed pages.
It is the case of the petitioner that nothing was heard from the respondent as to whether his explanation has been found satisfactory or not.
Instead, he received the impugned order dated May 18, 1990 (Annexure P-4) prematurely retiring him under Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 and he was to be paid three months, pay and allowances in lieu of the notice.
6.
The petitioner's counsel submitted that the petitioner's record throughout has been 'good' to 'outstanding' and, in fact, the remarks for the year 1988-89 cannot be said to be adverse as the perusal of the same would show that petitioner was considered as 'very good' officer but it was only mentioned that some irregularities had been alleged to have taken place in the Ferozepur Canal Circle in the wake of September, 1988 floods and all the Executive Engineers working under the petitioner had been placed under suspension and the petitioner's explanation had been called.
It is further mentioned in the remarks that the same were being brought to the notice of the petitioner so that he could make earnest efforts to bring improvement in future.
According to the learned counsel, the very foundation of the order was the alleged charges mentioned in the letter dated January 12, 1990 (Annexure P-2) and it was on the basis of some ex parte enquiry into those charges that the impugned order of prematurely retiring the petitioner had been passed.
According to the learned counsel, it was a case of imposing punishment and the innocuous order of prematurely retiring the petitioner, in fact, was with a view to punish the petitioner.
The said order, according to the learned counsel, was violative of Article 31 of the Constitution of India as well as the Punishment and Appeal Rules, as the petitioner was never charge-sheeted and no departmental enquiry had been held against him but still punishment had been imposed.
7.
According to the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, the petitioner's explanation was duly considered and he was found to be inefficient officer and was not worthy of retaining in service any more.
8.
It may be observed that petitioner's date of birth is April 20, 1936 and in normal course be would retire in the year 1994.
It has been admitted by the respondent in its reply that the petitioner's record throughout has been 'good' to 'outstanding' except for the year 1988-89 which contains adverse remarks.
Para 3 of the written statement reads as under :-  "Admitted to the extent that Shri Sanghera had earned 'Good' to 'Outstanding ACRs' in the past except one for the year 1988-89 which contains adverse remarks.
The petitioner was promoted as Executive Engineer and further Superintending Engineer on the basis of seniority-cum-merit before earning the adverse remarks."
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It has not been denied, rather it has been admitted that the petitioner's service record throughout has been 'Good' to 'Outstanding'.
Strictly speaking, the 1988-89 remarks cannot be said to be adverse as even for that period the petitioner has been assessed to be a 'very good' officer and some explanation had been called regarding the alleged irregularities committed while dealing with the situation which had arisen because of the September, 1988 floods.
I had summoned the original files where the case of the petitioner had been dealt with for coming to the conclusion that he is to be prematurely retired.
The Adviser to the Governor (with whom the Governor agreed) had suggested the following action to be taken against various officers :-  1.
Only recoveries from those who were responsible for the differences in the amount spent and the amount actually which should have been spent, which is below 10%; 2.
Recoveries and departmental action against those responsible for 10 to 25%; 3.
Suspending those guilty of over 25% departmental action against them which would include J.E.s, S.D.Os.
and XENs.
Explanation of Chief Engineer and Superintending Engineer should be called and departmental action taken against them.
SE to be transferred from the present place of posting.
10.
It was in view of the above that explanation of the petitioner had been called.
From the file I find that the Secretary, Irrigation and Power had observed as under :-  "One feels awfully sorry while going through such a case and there is no doubt that all this was a result of connivance from CE level to the level of SE and below and public funds were thus embezzled and wasted.
Since Shri Sanghera has already crossed 50 years, he is fit for premature retirement on the following grounds :- i) The evidence before the Government indicates that he is an inefficient offices; ii) The evidence also indicate that these irregularities were committed with a view to embezzling Government funds.
Even though his ACR is good, yet the facts mentioned above based on inquiry supported by the explanation called and the explanation received and examined above would indicate the presence of incontrovertible evidence of inefficiency of this officer.
More than two dozen officers including XENs, SDOs of the Circle Incharge of Shri JS Sanghera have been placed under suspension after proper enquiry into irregular expenditure of Rs. 678 lacs in his Circle.
There cannot be better evidence of inefficiency of a Superintending Officer that he could not check, advise or control them nor could he control or monitor properly the correct expenditure of such a large amount.
The work said to be done is less than two months is humanly impossible to be done within the resource made use of.
ACR of Shri JS Sanghera for the period that he worked as SE Canals, Ferozepur Circle in the years 1989-90 written by CE Canals Shri JM Gupta is placed below for reference, as it is every much relevant to the decision of the case :-  "The officer was posted as SE Ferozepur Canal Circle, Ferozepur on 30.5.1988.
During the checking of flood restoration works damaged during the floods of 1988 by the High Powered Committee constituted by the Government, a number of irregularities and over-payments came to notice in this Circle.
He did not exercise proper control over the execution of works.
An officer of doubtful integrity.
Over all Assessment "C"."
"Since there is incontrovertible evidence of inefficiency of this officer and he is of above 50 years of age and his explanation being unsatisfactory and further considering his ACR, we may consider him for pre-mature retirement by giving him three months salary in lieu of notice, thus retiring him with immediate effect.
This would be in public interest.
Otherwise such an intriguing, conniving, inefficient man can be expected to indulge in much more wasteful expenditure in future also for the sake of lining his own coat.
Advisor(s) may kindly see for orders.
He is competent to pass orders in this case, though I am putting it up as a link file with the related case of S Awtar Singh, CE whose conduct is being investigated in this very case."
On the above basis, the impugned order was issued.
11.
It is very clear from the above that the Secretary to the Government on the basis of evidence and enquiry found the petitioner to be an inefficient officer and further according to him the evidence also indicated that the irregularities were committed with a view to embezzling Government funds.
The ACR as recorded by the Chief Engineer had also had its influence on the mind of the authority concerned.
It may be observed that from the files concerning the ACR of the petitioner the then Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Punjab had not agreed with the recording of the ACR by the Chief Engineer and it had been specifically mentioned that :-  "I do not agree with the assessment of the officer by the Chief Engineer (Canals).
There was no complaint about his integrity during the period under report.
Shri I.S.
Sanghera on the whole is a good officer."
12.
It was because of this reason that the remarks of the Chief Engineer were never conveyed to the petitioner and what was conveyed for the year 1988-89 was only as has been reproduced in the earlier paragraph of this judgment.
The concerned authority could not take into consideration the ACR as recorded by Chief Engineer firstly that it was not agreed upon by the earlier Secretary and secondly that it had not been conveyed to the petitioner.
Further as noticed above, the impugned order is based on some ex parte evidence and the findings of some ex parte enquiry.
No regular enquiry was held against the petitioner on those alleged charges.
There is no escape from the conclusion that the very foundation of the impugned order was the evidence and findings as has been noticed above.
In this view of the matter, the impugned order cannot be sustained as it is by way of punishment and is violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India as well as punishment and Appeal Rules.
13.
One Ram Chander who was the Chief Engineer at the relevant time and who was also prematurely retired on somewhat similar allegations had filed writ petition in this Court (CWP 8288 of 1990) challenging the order of his premature retirement.
That writ petition was allowed by the learned single Judge of this Court on March 27, 1991.
While dealing with the aspect as is present in this case, the learned Judge observed as under :-  "Another significant fact which requires consideration at this stage is that the order of compulsory retirement has been passed on the basis of allegation that the petitioner exceeded the budget provisions in the matter of expenditure in tackling the flood situation.
These are definite allegations.
So the order of compulsory retirement is founded on definite allegations.
It will clearly amount to removal within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Madan Mohan, A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 126, the Supreme Court considered the matter whether an order of compulsory retirement passed against a Government servant on the allegations that he had outlived his utility is an action by way of punishment so as to attract the constitutional guarantee of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Such an order cannot be passed without affording the petitioner an opportunity of hearing.
In view of the above legal position, the order of compulsory retirement could not be passed."
14.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed with costs and the impugned order of compulsory retirement dated May 18, 1990 (Annexure P-4) is hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service with all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.