PL Narasimha Sarma, J - The writ petitioner, who was promoted as Traffic Inspector Grade-II with effect from 2291987, filed this writ petition questioning his retirement on attaining the age of 58 years.
He claims that he is entitled to continue in service till he completes the age of 60 years which is the age of superannuation applicable to him.
2.
The relevant facts are as follows :-  The petitioner was originally appointed as a Conductor temporarily in the Road Transport Department, which was an integral part of the ex-Nizam State Railway, on 3041952.
He was promoted as an Assistant Depot Clerk in the year 1967 and thereafter he was promoted as Traffic Inspector Grade-II with effect from 2291987.
He was retired with effect from 31101987 on the ground that he attained the age of superannuation viz., 58 years.
3.
The writ petition is filed questioning the same and contending that he is entitled to continue till he attains the age of 60 years viz., till 31101989.
He relies for this purpose on Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules, which is as follows :-  "The date of compulsory retirement of a Government servant in superior and inferior service is the date on which he attains the age of 55 years and 60 years respectively.
He may be retained in service after the date of compulsory retirement with the sanction of the Government on public grounds, which must be recorded in writing, but a Government servant in superior service must not be retained after the age of 60 years except in very special circumstances : Provided that a workman whether in superior or in inferior service, who is governed by these rules shall ordinarily be retained in service upto the age of 60 years.
He may, however, be required to retire at any time after attaining the age of 55 years after being given a month's notice, or a month's pay in lieu thereof, on the ground of impaired health or of being negligent or inefficient in the discharge of his duties.
He also may retire at any time after attaining the age of 55 years, by giving one month's notice in writing."
This Rule 231 was ultimately omitted by the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Regulation of Age of Superannuation) Act, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
While omitting Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules, a similar provision is made in Section 3 of the Act.
The relevant portion of Section 3 is as follows :-  "Age of superannuation :- (1) Every Government employee, not being a workman and not belonging to Last Grade Service shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of fifty five years.
(2) Every Government employee not being a workman but belonging to the Last Grade Service shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of sixty years.
(3) Every workman whether in superior or last grade service, or in any service notified as inferior shall ordinarily be retained in service upto the age of sixty years : Provided that any workman may be required to retire at any time attaining the age of fifty-five years after being given one month's notice or one month's pay in lieu thereof, on the ground of impaired health or of being negligent or inefficient in the discharge of duties :  Provided further that a workman may also retires at any time after attaining the age of fifty-five years, by giving one month's notice in writing.
Explanation I - In this section the word "workman" means a highly skilled, or semi-skilled or unskilled artisan in industrial and work-charged establishments of Government.
xx xx xx xx xx xx "  4.
The contention of the petitioner is that he is a 'workman' within the meaning of Explanation-I to section 3 of the Act.
To decide this question viz., whether the petitioner is a workman within the meaning of Explanation-I to Section 3 of the Act, we have to necessarily decide as to who is an 'artisan'.
Explanation-I to section 3 of the Act says that 'workman' means a highly skilled, or semi-skilled or unskilled artisan in industrial and work-charged establishments of Government.
It is not disputed that the 1st respondent-organisation is an industrial establishment.
Therefore, the only question that has to be decided is whether the petitioner answers the description of 'artisan', whether highly skilled or semi-skilled or unskilled, do fall within the meaning or 'workman'.
5.
Sri Feelkhana Rama Rao, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that the petitioner is an artisan, whether skilled or semi-skilled or unskilled, and, therefore satisfied the definition of workman within the meaning of Explanation-I to section 3 of the Act.
In support of the said contention, the learned counsel relied upon the judgment of Jeevan Reddy, J, in Writ Petition No. 7674 of 1979 dated 2421981.
The learned Judge was dealing with a case of a person working as Vehicle Inspector.
At the relevant time, Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules was in vogue, which is almost in pari materia with Explanation-I to section 3 of the Act.
While construing the said Rule 231, the learned Judge stated that the crucial question to be decided is whether the post of Vehicle Inspector is a post of workman, and to decide the said question, it has to be found whether the holder of that post can be called an artisan, whether skilled or unskilled.
For finding out whether the Vehicle Inspector is an artisan, whether skilled or unskilled, the learned Judge stated that one has to see the nature of duties and the functions of the holder of the said post.
After referring to the duties enumerated for a Vehicle Inspector and after referring to the meaning of artisan given in Concise Oxford Dictionary, the learned Judge held that the Vehicles Inspector is an artisan and comes within the definition of 'workman' under Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules and, therefore, entitled to continue till he attains the age of superannuation i.e. 60 years.
The crucial test laid down by the learned Judge in the said case was to find out whether the duties attached to the post are predominantly supervisory or predominantly manual.
If they are predominantly supervisory, the person will not come within the meaning of artisan and, therefore, not a workman within the meaning of Rule 231.
If his duties are predominantly manual, then he will be an artisan coming within the meaning of workman.
The learned Judge stated as follows on this aspect in the course of the judgment :  ".....In other words, what the Court has to determine is whether the post involves predominantly duties of a manual nature or whether the duties involved are predominantly of a supervisory or ministerial nature."
The learned Judge referred to and followed another judgment of this Court in Shaik Ali v. Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad, 1974(1) A.L.T.
93 in coming to the conclusion.
Jeevan Reddy, J, in the said case came to the conclusion that the duties of the Vehicle Inspector are predominantly manual in nature and, therefore, he answers the description of artisan and held that he was entitled to continue in service till he attains the age of 60 years.
K. Ramachandra Rao, J, in Shaik Ali's case (supra) also had an occasion to consider Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules.
In the said case, the petitioner was a drainage channel inspector in the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad.
He claimed that he falls within Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules and answers the description of artisan and, therefore, is entitled to continue in service till he attains the age of 60 years.
The learned Judge stated that the description given to an employee is not conclusive in determining the nature of the functions assigned to and performed by him and the question whether a person is a workman has to be determined with regard to the actual work assigned to and performed by him.
Ultimately, the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the petitioner in that case also performs manual duties and not merely supervisory work.
The learned Judge held that the petitioner was an artisan within the meaning of Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules.
In coming to the said conclusion, the learned Judge relied upon the duties of the petitioner therein viz., that he was authorised to inspect and control destribution of water for irrigation from Uppal and effluent channels and report irregularities, which includes to regulate the sluices and shutters of Uppal and effluent channels and let out water from sluices, control the distribution of organic matters disposed of from the purification plant, controlling of adjustable sluices, rectify any fault occurring in the said line by technical methods, remove salt by using drainage apparatus, check the connections in the sewer lines, storm water drains and monitory junctions, etc. On the basis of these duties mentioned above, the learned Judge came to the conclusion that he is an artisan and, therefore, a workman within the meaning of Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Service Rules.
The learned Judge further held that the definition of 'workman' under section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot be imported into Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules, as Rule 231 itself defines who is a workman.
This judgment of the learned Judge also is based on the test to be applied with regard to the duties rendered by the petitioner whether they are predominantly supervisory in nature or predominantly manual in nature.
6.
The Judgment of Jeevan Reddy, J, in Writ Petition No. 7674 of 1979 dated 2421981 was confirmed in Writ Appeal No. 286 of 1981 dated 3171981.
The learned Judges of the Division Bench referred to the definition of the word 'artisan' contained in Concise Oxford Dictionary, Shorter Oxford Dictionary, Stroud's Legal Dictionary, etc., and came to the conclusion that an artificer is stated to be one who makes something as distinguished from one who only does something as held in Palmer v. Snow, (1900) 1, QB 725.
This definition was also adopted by a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Manaklal Upadhya v. Ramesh, AIR 1955 Cal.
290.
While considering the word 'artisan' occurring in Article 7 of the Limitation Act in the said case it was held, relying upon the decision in R Sewaram v. Lachminarayan, AIR 1927 Rangoon 279 and Palmer v. Snow (supra), that the word 'artisan' was not defined in the Limitation Act or in the Code of Civil Procedure and it is stated to mean an artificer and as such is a person who makes something as distinguished from one who does something.
On a consideration of the definition contained in different dictionaries and also the decisions placed before the learned Judges, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the test of 'predominant nature' applied by the learned single Judge is the only suitable test in the context of Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules.
Taking into consideration the duties of the Vehicle Inspector, the learned Judges came to the conclusion that his duties are predominantly manual and, therefore, he is an artisan and as such falls within the definition of 'workman'.
7.
The ratio of the above decision is to find out in a given case as to whether he is discharging predominantly supervisory duties or predominantly manual duties to come within the meaning of 'artisan' so as to fall within the definition of "workman".
In view of the above decisions, we have to consider whether the duties attached to the post of Traffic Inspector, Grade II are predominantly supervisory or predominantly manual.
If they are predominantly supervisory, the petitioner will be "artisan" and fall within the definition of "Workman" under Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules.
The duties of Traffic Inspector are enumerated in the APSRT.C.
Staff Operation manual which are as follows :  "53.11 DUTIES OF SHIFT TRAFFIC INSPECTORS AT DEPOTS : 1.
He shall prepare monthly duty chart of conductors and drivers and arrange for display of the Charts at least 3 days before the commencement of the month.
2.
He shall book duties of spare staff crew in place of absentees every day in the spare duty chart one day in advance.
3.
He shall maintain the (attendance register) musters of all conductors and drivers.
4.
He shall arrange spare staff in place of sudden absentees and ensure that all buses leave on time.
5.
He shall ensure that all staff are in uniform.
6.
He shall record the important events that occur during his shift in the T.I's diary.
7.
He shall supervise the duties of the Depot Controllers working at the depot.
8.
He shall keep a watch on buses due to return to the depot and arrange for relief if a bus does not turn up one hour after the scheduled arrival.
9.
He shall scrutinise SR, Control Charts & MTD 34.38 of all services and bring to the notice of the STI or CI for necessary action, where irregularities are noticed.
10.
He shall attend to an accident, if no senior TI is immediately available."
A perusal of the duties clearly go to show that the duties are predominantly supervisory.
First duty is preparing monthly duty chart of he conductors and drivers and arrange for the display of the charts.
The word "arrange" gives the clue for finding out whether the duty is supervisory.
I am of the opinion that it is supervisory in nature.
Likewise, booking duties of spare staff in place of absentees and preparing the same one day in advance, maintaining musters of all conductors and drivers, arranging spare staff in place of sudden absentees and ensuring that all the staff are in uniform; supervising the duties of Depot Controllers; keeping a watch on buses due to return to the deport and arranging for relief if a bus does not turn up; scrutinising the SRs, Control Charts and attending to an accident if no senior TI is immediately available, in my opinion, are all predominantly supervisory in nature.
The duties, to my mind, are clear and specific and they are supervisory in nature.
In view of my finding that the duties of a Traffic Inspector are predominantly supervisory, I have to hold that he is not an "Artisan" and therefore, not a workman within the meaning of Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules.
I am supported by the Judgment of A Venkatarami Reddy, J in writ petition No. 11096 of 1988 dated 471989 for this conclusion, which is similar to the case on hand.
The learned Judge held that a 'leading' hand viz., the petitioners therein, are not artisans and therefore, they do not come within the meaning of "Workman".
8.
It is true that Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules is now deleted by "the Act".
However, the provision with regard to the age of superannuation contained in Explanation-I to Section 3 is in pari materia.
Whatever be the interpretation of Rule 231 of the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules, will equally apply to Explanation (1) to Section (3) of the Act.
"The Act" came into force on 10 April, 1983 except Section 7 which came into force on 29.4.1969.
Therefore, in my opinion, the petitioner is not an 'artisan' and therefore, not a workman within the meaning of Explanation-I to Section 3 of 'the Act'.
9.
Sri Ramarao, the learned counsel for the petitioner then contended, placing reliance on the Judgment of Sriramulu, J in Chitti Babu v. State of AP, 1985(1) ALR 520, that the definition of workman in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act can also be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining as to who is a workman under 'the Act'.
The learned Judge has not decided any such point in the said Judgment.
The learned Judge referred to Act 23 of 1984 and on the facts and circumstances of the case held that the petitioners in those writ petitions are workmen within the meaning of the Act.
In fact, the Division Bench Judgment in WA Nos. 830 of 1985 and batch dt. 4.11.1988 which was rendered on appeal against the Judgment of Sriramulu, J makes this point very clear.
The learned Judges, on appeal, clearly stated that in all those cases, the facts go to show that they are all skilled artisans and they have been working in industrial work charged establishments and, therefore, they definitely come within the meaning of 'workmen' under the Act.
Therefore, far from supporting the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, the Judgment reiterates the fact that what is to be decided in those cases is whether the petitioners in those cases were workmen within the meaning of Explanation-I of Section 3 of the Act 23 of 1984.
10.
Next it is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that as the averments in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition made, in particular in para 9 indicated that the duties of Traffic Inspector, Grade II involve technical, manual and skilled duties of artisan and they are not supervisory in nature including the duties of attending to accidents, taking sketch of the accident and submitting a report to the authorities to that effect.
According to the learned counsel these functions involve technical and skill and they can be discharged only by a trained person.
The further duty of the Traffic Inspector i.e. checking tickets punched by the conductor and verifying the SR also is a skilled or at any rate manual job and, therefore, he comes under the definition of 'artisan' and, therefore, falls within the definition of 'workman'.
The learned counsel also contended that there is a bold denial in para 5 of the counter and not any specific denial of averments made by the petitioner in his affidavit.
This submission is not tenable in my opinion.
The duties of Traffic Inspectors are all stated in the APSRT.C.
Staff Operation Manual and I shall go by the said duties and not by the averments made either in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition or in the counter-affidavit.
In para 5 of the counter, it was mentioned on behalf of respondents 2 and 3 that an artisan is otherwise called a 'mechanic' and he should necessarily have some technical knowledge in handling machines and that the posts of Controllers and Traffic Inspectors did not carry technical or manual and skilled duties.
In view of what is stated above by me while referring to the duties of the Traffic Inspectors as mentioned in the APSRT.C.
Staff Services Manual, the petitioner is not an artisan and, therefore, will not satisfy the definition of 'workman' mentioned in Explanation-I to Section 3 of the Act.
11.
It is next contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the definition of 'workman' in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act can be imported into Act 23 of 1984.
I am afraid, I may not be able to accept this contention.
Act 23 of 1984 and the definition of 'workman' contained therein is a complete code by itself and the definition of 'workman' in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot be imported into Act 23 of 1984.
To the same effect is the Judgment of Ramachandrarao, J, in Shaik Ali v. Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad which has already been referred to supra.
I respectfully agree with the same.
12.
If every person who does every manual work is stated to come within the meaning of artisan in Explanation-I to Section 3 of the Act 23 of 1984 it will be doing violence to the language.
Artisan in the common parlance is very well known i.e., a carpenter, potter, electrician, mechanics and likewise.
As stated in the Judgment already referred to supra (1), to be an artisan, he should be an artificer and as such is a person who makes something as distinguished from one who does something and, therefore, every person who does something manual, in my opinion, does not come within the meaning of 'artisan'.
There must be some element of technical job.
For all the above reasons, this writ petition is devoid of merit and it is accordingly dismissed, but in the circumstances without costs.
Advocate's fee for first respondent is Rs. 300/-.
Petition dismissed.