Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner was admitted to the 3 years Staff Nurses Course at Medical College and Hospital, Rohtak, for the Session 1983-1986.
She successfully completed her 1-year Nurses Examination and she was to appear in the Final Examination in September, 1986.
The petitioner approached the College Authorities for the issuance of Roll Number, the same was not issued to her on the plea that she stands expelled from the Hostel as well as from the said Course and as such she cannot be permitted to appear in the Annual Examination.
Feeling aggrieved against the action of the respondents, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for seeking direction to the respondents to allow her to appear in the Final Examination of 3 - year Staff Nurses Course to be conducted by Haryana Nurses Registration Council, Chandigarh, respondent No. 4.
While admitting the writ petition on 691989, a Division Bench of this Court passed the following order :-Admitted.
The petitioner be given provisional candidature to appear in the Final year Examination of the 3-year Staff Nurses Course to be held on September 16, 1989, at her own risk and responsibility, subject to the result of the writ petition."
2.
The petitioner, admittedly, has already appeared in the Annual Examination and her result remains to be declared.
After giving thoughtful consideration to the matter, I am of the considered opinion that in case the petitioner's result is not declared and any decision contrary to her interest is taken, it would definitely ruin the entire academic career of the petitioner and she will be left in bewilderness.
Even on compassionate grounds, the instant case deserves acceptance as the petitioner is an orphan and there is nobody in the family to support her.
It has also been brought to my notice that the petitioner was expelled from the training vide order dated 1821987, Annexure R-VI.
This fact clearly reveals that her expulsion was ordered after the completion of her training.
3.
Taking a compassionate view of the matter, a direction is issued to the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner henceforth.
Under the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no orders to costs.
4.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the terms indicated above.
Petition allowed.