Gokal Chand Mital, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 382, 295, 673 and 3869 of 1988 and Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2753, 9373 and 9559 of 1990, as common questions arise therein.
2.
In these cases, two primary points arise for consideration : One regarding the mode of recruitment and the other regarding the seniority of Class I Officers in the Haryana Veterinary Service.
The Officers are governed by the Provincial Veterinary Service (Class I) Rules, 1930 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules'.
For consideration of the two points, rules 4, 13, 16 and 19 of the rules are relevant.
These are reproduced hereunder :-  "4.
Method of Recruitment :  The Service shall be recruited in India -  (a) by the promotion of selected officers of the Punjab Veterinary Service Class II, including temporary officers of the holders or temporary posts in Class II.
(b) by direct appointment, and (c) by transfer from other services, in England by direct appointment through the High Commissioner of India.
13.
Power to make appointments :  When a vacancy occurs, the local Government shall decide whether it shall be filed by promotion or by direct appointment.
16.
Probation :  Every officer directly appointed to the Punjab Veterinary Service Class I shall be on probation for two years.
19.
Seniority :  An officer's seniority on appointment to the Punjab Veterinary Service Class I will be determined with regard to the date on which he is appointed substantively on probation to the above service.
As between person appointed on the same date, seniority will go by age, and promoted officers will carry their previous seniority in Class-II."
A reading of rule 4 shows that the recruitment can be made by promotion from Class II Service, by direct appointment or by transfer from other services.
According to rule 13, when a vacancy occurs, the Government has to decide whether it shall be filled by promotion or by direct appointment.
Rule 13 clearly gives power to the Government to make kits own decision to fill in the post kin any manner provided by the Rules.
However, there were some execute instructions which provided that 50 per cent of the posts shall be filled by promotion and the remaining 50 per cent by direct recruitment.
3.
The officers from Class II Service sought promotion to Class I Service on the basis of 50 per cent quota under the executive instructions and pleaded in the writ petitions that the direct recruits to Class I Service were more than the quota and thus challenged their appointment.
4.
The stand of the State Government is that in sipte of the fact that there were some executive instructions, since they were contrary to the Rules, the executive instructions were never adhered to and, therefore, when the impugned appointments were made the State Government had taken decision to make the appointments by direct recruitment and, therefore, the promotees cannot challenge the appointments.
5.
On consideration of the matter, we find merit in the contention raised on behalf of the State and hold that under the Service Rules, particularly rule 13, it is for the State Government to decide how to fill in the vacancy and once they decide to fill in the vacancy by direct appointment, it cannot be questioned in a Court of law on the grounds raised in the writ petitions.
6.
Adverting to the second point regarding seniority, rule 19 clearly envisages that the seniority in Class I Service shall be determined in regard to the date on which appointment is made, whether substantively or on probation.
This means that the length of service of an officer in Class I Service has to be taken note of for fixing the seniority.
7.
Even in the absence of specific rule to fix seniority, the apex Court, in The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others, v. State of Maharashtra and others, A.I.R. 1990 SC 1607, has held that length of service is reasonable criteria for fixing the seniority and it has to be countered from the date of appointment and not from the date of confirmation.
8.
In the present case, we have rule 19 for fixing the seniority and it does not talk of fixing seniority from the date of confirmation in the Service and, therefore, seniority has to be counted from the date and officer joins in Class I Service, whether on probation or otherwise, and the entire length of Class I Service has to be taken notice of in fixing the seniority.
9.
Accordingly, all the writ petitions stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms, with no order as to costs.
10.
However, in Civil Writ Petition No. 2753 of 1990, one more point arises for consideration.
The petitioner while in Class I Service went on foreign service and was sent back to the parent department on 3071988 and joined on 181988.
The parent department neither gave the posting to him nor the pay till before 24.8.1990.
In sipte of the fact that he was given the posting on 24.8.1990, till he filed the writ petition, his pay for the period 181988 to 23.8.1988 was not released.
Accordingly, we issue a direction in his case to release his salary for the period 181988 to 23.8.1988, forthwith, with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Order accordingly.