RS Mongia, J - Municipal Committee, Bhatinda, had advertised various categories of posts.
The petitioners, some of whom were already working on ad hoc basis, applied for the posts of Clerks, Peons, Malis and Life-Guard for the Swimming Pool.
The interviews for the various posts were held on 5th November, 1986.
It may be observed that at the relevant time there was no elected Municipal Committee of Bhatinda and, therefore, the Deputy Commissioner was acting as the Administrator of the Municipal Committee.
The interviews were held by the following Members of the Committee which had been constituted by the Administrator :-  (i) Shri J.S.
Quomi, IAS,Deputy Commissioner-cum-Administrator, Municipal Committee, Bhatinda.
(ii) Shri Amrik Singh, PCS, Regional Deputy Director, Local Self Government, Ferozepur.
(iii) Shri H.D.P.
Garg, PCS, District Grievances Officer as nominee of the Deputy Commissioner.
2.
On 24th April, 1986, the State of Punjab had issued instructions to the effect that preference be given in recruitment to Class III and Class IV Services to certain categories of persons enumerated therein.
The categories included members of the family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State and members of the families who lost their bread-winner in the riots in Delhi and other places in India between October 31 to November 7, 1984.
The Government had further constituted a Placement Committee to recommend, to scrutinise the candidates falling in the above category for being interviewed, considered for appointment to the various posts by giving them preferential treatment under the above instructions.
Though the Interview Committee had concluded the interviews on 5th November, 1986, but the candidates sent by the Placement Committee could not be interviewed on that day.
Consequently, the interview of those candidates sent by the Placement Committee was held on 14th November, 1986.
The Municipal Committee vide its Resolution No. 460 dated 12th December, 1986 (Annexure P.1) decided to appoint various persons who were selected by the Interview Committee on 5th November, 1986 and 14th November, 1986.
The appointment orders were issued on 15th December, 1986 and all the petitioners joined their duties.
As stated above, some of them were already working on ad hoc basis on various posts.
3.
The State Government vide intimation sent on 26th May, 1987 (Annexure P.2) informed the Committee that the appointments made by the Administrator of the Committee vide Resolution No. 460 dated 12th December, 1986 were not being approved, for the reason that preference has not been given to the candidates who had been recommended by the Placement Committee for being considered for appointment.
In pursuance of the abovesaid order of the State Government, the petitioners were relieved from their duties on 3rd August, 1987.
The petitioners have assailed the validity of the order of the State Government (Annexure P.2) by way of the present writ petition.
4.
The primary argument of Mr. Sarjit Singh, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that under section 39 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) it is the Municipal Committee which is the appointing and dismissing authority and the State Government cannot interfere in the affairs of the Committee regarding service matter.
According to the learned counsel, it is only within the domain of the Municipal Committee as to who is to be appointed or not to be appointed and the State Government cannot annul such a resolution purporting to be acting under Section 236 of the Act.
He further submitted that the reason given in the impugned order is wholly arbitrary, inasmuch as the instructions of the State Government regarding giving preference for appointment to the riot-hit victims etc. stood quashed in C.W.P.
No. 4214 of 1986 (Jagroop Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and another), decided on 30th March, 1987.
He further submitted that even if the instructions were held to be valid, persons recommended by the Placement Committee for interview were only to be given preference and not that they had to be appointed.
It was for the Selection Committee to judge the suitability of the persons recommended by the Placement Committee and if such candidates were found unsuitable they need not have been appointed.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent-State, as well as for the Municipal Committee raised as preliminary objection that the petitioners had no locus standi to challenge the validity of the order of the State Government annulling the resolution of the Municipal Committee and it is only the Municipal Committee which could make any grievance regarding the annulment.
The further submitted that the reason given in the impugned order was not the only reason to annul the resolution of the Committee and there were some other grounds also which had been mentioned in the written statement and were borne from the record.
In support of the preliminary objection, the learned counsel for the respondents cited Shri Baldev Raj Sharma v. The State of Punjab and another, 1972 P.L.R.
144; Karam Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1979 P.L.R.
426; Jagdish Rai Chawla v. The State of Punjab, 1988(4) Punjab Legal Reports & Statutes 661 and Shri Subash Chandra and others v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, A.I.R. 1965 Supreme Court 1275.
6.
I have gone through the above-said authorities and find that in none of these cases any right had come to vest in an individual by virtue of the resolution of the Municipal Committee and further it was held that the individuals had no right to be heard before the annulment of the resolution as they were not the effected persons.
However, in the present case, as observed above, the petitioners had in fact joined in pursuance of the resolution of the Municipal Committee and that resolution was not subject to any approval of the State Government.
A right had come to vest in them that till their services were legally terminated they would continue in service.
In the present case, they are not challenging the annulment of the resolution on the ground that they were not heard prior to the passing of the impugned order by the State Government.
To be fair to the learned counsel for the petitioners, he cited SL Kapur v Jagmohan & others, A.I.R. 1981 SC 136 to contend that the Supreme Court had held that persons like the petitioners had a right to be heard before the State Government was to pass an order detrimental to them.
It is not necessary for me to go into this aspect.
For the aforementioned reason, I overrule the preliminary objection of the respondents.
7.
Since, in the written statement on behalf of the respondent-State, it was averred that there were some other reasons, apart from the one mentioned in Anneuxre P.2, for annulling the resolution, I had sent for the record.
From the persual of the record, I find that the State Government was taking exception to the fact that the Municipal Committee had appointed some Clerks against the posts of Inspectors which were provincialised posts and the Municipal Committee had no authority to appoint any person against the provincialised posts and one of the Clerks had been appointed by converting the post of Fireman into that of Clerk.
8.
It is not necessary for me in this case to go into the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners whether the State Government had the power to annul the resolution or not, because I find that the reason given in Annexure P-2 that preference had not been given according to the instructions of the Government to the riot-hit victims, to be untenable in view of the fact that those instructions stood quashed, and, moreover, the high -powered Selection Committee had not found any person excepting one, who were recommended by the Placement Committee to be suitable for appointment.
Even if the instructions were valid, the same stood fully complied with, inasmuch as the instructions never meant that even if such recommendees of the Placement Committee were unsuitable, they had to be appointed.
Further the State Government was correct in so far as the appointment of Clerks against the provincialised posts of Inspectors were concerned.
These were two in number.
As far as the conversion of Fireman to the post of Clerk is concerned suffice it to mention that only four posts of Clerks were advertised and seven appointments were made by converting two posts of Inspectors and one post of Fireman into that of Clerk.
If four posts had been advertised, seven appointments could not be made.
Consequently, it is held that appointments beyond four Clerks were wholly illegal as the Municipal Committee had no authority to appoint more Clerks than the number advertised.
Similarly, as far as the Peons are concerned, eight posts were advertised, yet ten appointments were made in the anticipated vacancies.
Not more than eight appointments could be made as these were never notified.
Consequently, appointments of Peons in excess of eight posts were illegal.
No fault can be found in the appointment of Malis, as eight posts of Malis were advertised and eight appointments were made.
Similar is the case of Life-Guard for swimming pool.
Only one vacancy was advertised and one appointment was made.
9.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed and the order of the Government annulling the resolution is quashed.
However, it is held that the appointments of Clerks is excess of four posts and appointments of Peons in excess of eight posts by the Municipal Committee are illegal.
Consequently, four Clerks, eight Peons, eight Malis and one Life-Guard for swimming pool are entitled to be reinstated into service.
While reinstating the Clerks and Peons, the merit list as was prepared by the interview Committee would be kept in view, subject to the reservation for Scheduled Caste, Backward Classes and other categories, if any.
Since the petitioners' counsel has made a statement on instructions from his clients that if they are reinstated in service, they would not claim any back wages.
I make it clear that the petitioner or any one of them who is reinstated, would not be entitled to any backwages, but they would be entitled to continuity in service.
The petitioners would be entitled to the costs of this petition from the State-respondent No. 1, which are qualified at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.