Sayed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J - The petitioner is an officer of State Bank of India in the Middle Management Grade-II.
He was promoted to that post in August, 1982 and was functioning as First Officer in the Development Manager (SIB)'s Department, State Bank of India, Hyderabad Local Head Office.
He was transferred to the State Bank of India, Sangareddy branch as Associate Lead Bank Officer in July, 1984.
He made a representation to the General Manager (Planning) to keep the order of transfer in abeyance for certain domestic reasons.
Accordingly, the order was kept in abeyance.
For different reasons the order of transfer was not given effect till December, 1984.
On the ground that the post to which the petitioner was transferred was categorised as Junior Management Grade-I and that the order of transfer was a vindictive one, the petitioner did not report to duty at Sangareddy.
He made a representation to the Development Manager, State Bank of India, to keep the order in abeyance.
However, he was relieved of his duties in his department with effect from 15.1.1985.
The petitioner started marking his attendance in the Register meant for the award staff, though the Bank did not maintain attendance register for the supervising staff, on the apprehension that the period thereafter would be treated as absence.
This state of affairs continued till 1151985 when he was placed under suspension by order dated 951985 on the allegation of gross disobedience.
On 1491985 a charge-sheet was issued to him stating that his acts amount to violation of Rules 32(1) and 32(2) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules (for short "the Rules") and also unbecoming of an officer which is in violation of Rule 32(4) of the Rules.
The petitioner submitted his explanation.
After enquiry the petitioner was found guilty of the charges framed against him.
The disciplinary authority by proceedings (DPC) No. 214, dated 421986 inflicted the punishment of censure and non-payment of salary for the period he was under suspension.
He was further ordered to join duty at Sangareddy as Associate Lead Bank Officer.
The petitioner preferred an appeal on 741986 to the Managing Director and Appellate Authority of the State Bank of India, Central Office, Bombay on the ground that though the punishment of censure is a minor punishment, yet by upholding the order of transfer as lawful and reasonable the punishment of major penalty of reduction to a post lower than his grade was inflicted.
It was further contended that the disciplinary proceedings were concluded without enquiry and as the General Manager and Disciplinary Authority was not the appointing authority, major penalty of reduction to a lower post had been inflicted without jurisdiction and in contravention of the rules and principles of natural justice.
But that appeal was not forwarded to the authority on the ground that the penalty imposed is a minor penalty and the petitioner was advised to appeal to the Local Board at Hyderabad which is the appellate authority for minor penalties.
In the meanwhile, letter No. DPC (LHO) 425, dated 1421987 was received from the Chief General Manager, Hyderabad, directing the petitioner to join duty within a period of 15 days or else face the possibility of losing the job by way of voluntary vacation of service.
The petitioner approached the Managing Director requesting for stay of the said order.
As no orders were passed by the Managing Director, he joined the duty on 2821987 at Sangareddy.
2.
In this writ petition the petitioner challenges the order of transfer darted 1011985 and the consequential disciplinary proceedings and the order imposing the penalty of censure on 421986 and the letter dated 1421987, as being illegal, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
The Chief General Manager of the State Bank of India, filed a counter-affidavit for the respondents.
It is admitted that the petitioner was promoted as Officer, MMG Scale-II with effect from 181982.
It is stated that the petitioner was transferred as Associate Lead Bank Officer, Sangareddy by the Circle Placement Committee on administrative grounds, on 12784.
On the representation of the petitioner he was retained in Hyderabad till 151 1985.
Under terms of Paragraph 47, Chapter X of the State Bank of India Officers (Determination of Terms and Conditions of Service) Order, 1979, every officer is liable to be transferred to any office or branch of the Bank or any place in India.
Whenever relieving orders were about to be served, the petitioner used to request for keeping the relieving order in abeyance; his request was considered upto 15.1.1985 when the was relieved.
In July, 1984 when the petitioner was first transferred as Associate Lead Bank Officer, the said post was not categorised as Officer Junior Management Grade-I But it was so categorised in December, 1984.
The petitioner was informed that the officers available in Officer Middle Management Grade Scale-II were more than the number of posts categorised as such, so posting of officers Middle Management Grade Scale-II in the post categorised for officers Junior Management Grade Scale-I, would not be avoided; but the petitioner would be drawing the salary and allowances of an Officer Middle Management Grade Scale-II.
He was also informed that it does not result in reduction to a lower grade inasmuch as no punishment of reduction to a lower grade was inflicted on him.
The categorisation of officers is done every year by the Bank and in the process it often happens that higher grade officer may happen to work in a lower grade post and vice versa as it is not always possible to create as many posts as there are officers of a particular grade.
After relieving, the petitioner went on marking in the attendance register meant for award staff which is unbecoming of the petitioner holding a responsible post of the officer of the respondent-Bank.
In the circumstances, the management was left with no alternative but to initiate disciplinary action against the petitioner as otherwise it was apprehended that this would encourage indiscipline among other employees and put the Bank, a public institution, to intimidation.
It is admitted that the Chief General Manager is the Disciplinary Authority, but during the material time, as that post was vacant, the General Manager (Operations) was designated as Disciplinary Authority.
This was also notified by the Bank in Circular No. (PER) 151, dated 16111985.
Therefore, the General Manager (Operations) issued the charge-sheet to the petitioner.
The petitioner was provided with the reasonable opportunity to submit his statement of defence in reply to the charge-sheet and accordingly on 211986 he submitted his explanation.
After considering the documentary evidence, the Disciplinary Authority found the petitioner guilty of charges levelled against him and though the petitioner's acts would attract a deterrent punishment, considering the petitioner's young age with a view to afford him an opportunity to show a better account of himself, the Disciplinary Authority took a lenient view and awarded the punishment of censure which is not a major penalty.
Further, the period spent by the petitioner under suspension was not treated as on duty for payment of any amount.
The petitioner preferred an appeal to the Deputy Managing Director against the order of the Disciplinary Authority passed on 741986 erroneously interpreting Service Rule 49(e) i.e. "reduction to a lower grade or post, or to a lower stage in a time scale" as major penalty whereas the punishment imposed on the petitioner was censure which is a minor penalty and the appropriate appellate authority for the minor penalty was the Local Board at the material time but not the Deputy Managing Director.
The petitioner joined duty on 2821987.
In the circumstances, it is prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
4.
Sir K Sudhakar Reddy, the learned counsel for the petitioner, urged three grounds before me :  (i) The impugned order to transfer transferring the petitioner to a lower post is illegal and the petitioner was, therefore, justified in not joining the post as Assistant Lead Bank Officer at Sangareddy.
(ii) The charge memo was not issued by a competent authority, therefore the Disciplinary Proceedings against the petitioner are wholly illegal and without jurisdiction; and (iii) No reasonable opportunity was given to the petitioner inasmuch as copies of the documents requested by the petitioner were not supplied.
5.
First I shall take up the first contention.
The learned counsel for the petitioner elaborates that contention stating that in the month of January, 1985 the post of Assistant Lead Bank Officer at Sangareddy was categorised as Junior Management Grade Scale-I; the petitioner was holding the post of Officer, Middle Management Grade Scale-II which is a higher post, and that he was transferred from a higher post to lower post.
Rule 49 of the Rules provides for minor penalties and major penalties; reduction to a lower grade or post is a major penalty; as the petitioner was posted to a lower post he was justified in not joining the post.
6.
Sri K Srinivasa Murthy, the learned counsel appearing for the Bank, submits that the transfer of the petitioner cannot be termed as illegal having regard to the fact that as a result of categorisation of the posts every year, the personnel holding higher posts are more than the number of posts, as such they have to be accommodated in a lower post and vica versa.
The order is based on administrative exigencies.
7.
It is not disputed that on the material date the petitioner was holding the post of an Officer in the Middle Management Grade Scale-II.
He was transferred to Sangareddy as Associate Lead Bank Officer.
This post was categorised as Junior Management Grade Scale-I which is lower than the post held by the petitioner.
The offer of transfer was not complied with by the petitioner, on 1491985.
The charges framed against the petitioner read as follows :-  "(i) You have refused to obey the lawful and reasonable orders given to you by the Development Manager (SIB) as regards your transfer, under whose jurisdiction you were working at that time; "(ii) Even after relief in the Department of Development Manager (SIB) you continued to stay on the Department without authority and in total defiance of the orders of your superiors and thus failed to perform your duties as an official of the Bank at a place and in the capacity as directed by the Bank.
Your above acts indicate that you had acted in a manner unbecoming of a Bank Official and thereby violated Rule No. 32(1), (2) and (4) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules."
It would be appropriate here to extract Rule 32(1), (2) and (4) which are relevant for our purpose.
"32(1) Every employee shall conform to and abide by these rules and shall observe, comply with and obey all lawful and reasonable orders and directions which may from time to time be given to him by any person under whose jurisdiction, superintendence or control he may for the time being be placed.
(2) Every employee shall undertake and perform his duties as an official of the Bank in such capacity and at such place as he may from time to time be directed by the Bank; (3) xxx xxx xxx (4) Every employee shall, at all times, take all possible steps to ensure and protect the interest of the Bank and discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence and do nothing which is unbecoming of a bank official".
Rule 32(1) requires every employee to conform and abide by the Rules and comply with and obey all lawful and reasonable orders and directions which may from time to time be given to him by any person under whose jurisdictions, superintendence or control he may for the time being be placed.
Sub-rule (2) enjoins every employee to undertake and perform his duties as an official of the Bank in such capacity and at such place as he may from time to time be directed by the Bank.
Sub-rule (4) directs that every employee shall at all times take possible steps to ensure and protect the interest of the Bank and discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence and do nothing which is unbecoming of a bank official.
If the order of transfer of the petitioner is lawful and reasonable, the petitioner is bound to comply with the same.
The impugned order of transfer directed the petitioner to join as Associate Lead Officer Grade-I at Sangareddy which is a post lower than the post held by him on the date of transfer.
In this context Rule 49 of the Rules which enumerates minor and major penalties, would be relevant.
Rule 49 (e) reads are follows :  "Major Penalties :  (e) Reduction to a lower grade or post, or to a lower stage in a time scale."
A persual of sub-rule (e) of Rule 49 shows that reduction to a lower grade or post is a major penalty.
8.
The learned counsel for the Bank, however, submits that as no disciplinary action was taken against the petitioner, and he was not reduced to a lower post by the Bank, but in the absence of availability of a post in the Middle Management Grade Scale-II, due to administrative exigencies, he was asked to work in a post of the Junior Management Grade Scale-I, so, Rule 49(e) is not attracted.
I am unable to agree.
"In determining the question whether the order impugned amounts to penalty within the meaning of Rule 49(e), what is relevant is the effect of the order complained of, not the absence of disciplinary proceedings before passing the order in question which brings about reduction in grade or post of an employee.
If a disciplinary action is taken and as a punishment an employee is reduced to a lower grade or lower post, it undoubtedly amounts to a major penalty within the meaning of Rule 49(e).
If no disciplinary action is taken and the impugned action results in reduction to a lower post, how can it be said that this does not amount to penalty as defined in Rule 49(e) ?
Accepting the contention that without any disciplinary action if an employee is posted to a lower post, it would not amount to imposing penalty, would be putting a premium on imposing major penalty without following the procedure which is a safeguard for the employee.
It would also provide the employers a ruse to do away with the procedural protection of the employee when imposing major penalty of reduction to a lower post albeit without explanation is appended to Rule 49 of Rules enumerating as many as 11 acts or omissions as not amounting to penalty within the meaning of the rule.
Posting of an officer in a post lower than the one held by him, due to administrative exigencies, is not one among the enumerated exceptions in the explanations.
Admittedly in this case the petitioner was posted to a lower post, therefore, in my view, the impugned order which causes reduction in post of the petitioner is an order imposing a major penalty.
It is no doubt true that the petitioner on this own cannot sit in judgment over the order passed by the management and refuse to obey the same.
If any such order is passed, he has a right to challenge the same in an appropriate forum.
However, in view of the fact that disciplinary action is taken against the petitioner for violation of sub-rules (1), (2) and (4) of Rule 32, it is for the management to show that the order which the employee failed to obey is lawful and reasonable.
As already observed above, an order which results in posting the petitioner to a lower post which amounts to reduction in post and a major penalty under Rule 49, cannot be said to be a legal or a reasonable order.
Therefore, the petitioner, in my view, is justified in saying that there has been no violation of Rules 32(1) and (2) of the Rules.
From the above discussion it follows that Charge (i) is not made out against the petitioner and no action can be taken against him on that charge.
9.
The learned counsel for the Bank, however, submits that the petitioner even after having been relieved from the head office, started marking his attendance in the register meant for Award Employees, which act is unbecoming of an officer and, therefore, the petitioner is guilty of violation of sub-rule (4) of Rule 32.
Charge (ii) extracted above refers to the conduct of the petitioner in continuing to stay in the department-without authority and in total defiance of the orders of the superiors and thus failing to perform his duties as an official of the Bank at the place and in the capacity as directed by the Bank.
There cannot be any doubt that the conduct of an officer of a bank has great impact on the discipline of a public institution like the bank where the standard of discipline is expected to be very high .
Continuance of an officer after he had been relieved from a particular department and signing in the Register meant for lower staff, is rightly held to be an act unbecoming of an officer.
Therefore, the order of the Disciplinary Authority finding the petitioner guilty under Rule 32(4) on Charge No. (ii), cannot be said to be illegal or unjustified.
10.
Now I shall take up the second contention.
The contention of the petitioner is that the Chief General Manager is the Disciplinary Authority for the post of Middle Management Grade Scale-II, the disciplinary action was initiated by the General Manager (Operations), so he is not the disciplinary authority and the disciplinary proceedings are vitiated.
In the counter it is stated that as the post of the Chief General Manager was vacant, the General Manager (Operations) was designated as Disciplinary Authority and that was duly notified on 16111985.
The learned counsel further submits that by Circular dated 2281985, all the powers of the Chief General Manager as Appointing Authority, Disciplinary Authority were directed to be exercised by the General Manager (Operations) in terms of the letter dated 211981.
A persual of the said letter shows that the powers were in fact delegated to the General Manager (Operations).
In view of this position, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner fails.
11.
The last contention is that no reasonable opportunity was given to the petitioner as the copies of the documents asked for by him were not furnished to him.
Reliance is placed on State of Punjab v. Bhagat Ram, AIR 1974 SC 2335.
In that case statements of witnesses were recorded during investigation and were produced at the inquiry in support of the charges levelled against the employee.
Instead of copies of those statements, only a synopsis was supplied to him.
It was held by the Supreme Court that no reasonable opportunity was afforded to the employee.
In the instant case no document which was relied upon by the management was withheld, so that case does not help the petitioner.
12.
The next case relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is Kashinath Dikshita v. Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 2118.
The Government in that case refused to furnish copies of the statements of witnesses examined at the stage of preliminary enquiry and copies of the documents which were relied upon by the disciplinary authority to establish the charge against him.
He was not even given the relevant portions of the documents but was asked to make a note by himself.
The Supreme Court held that as the Government failed to show that no prejudice was occasioned to the employee on account of non-support of copies of documents the order of dismissal passed against the employee was bad as no reasonable opportunity of defending himself was given to the petitioner, and therefore, the order of dismissal was held to be violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
As stated above, in this case the petitioner was not denied any document which was relied upon by the management, as such this judgment does not apply to the facts of the present case.
13.
In a recent judgment in Chandrama Tewari v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 117, the Supreme Court stated the principle relating to the supply documents as follows :  "It is now well settled that if copies of relevant and material documents including the statement of witnesses recorded in the preliminary enquiry or during investigation are not supplied to the delinquent officer facing the enquiry and if such documents are relied in holding the charges framed against the officer, the enquiry would be vitiated for violation of principles of natural justice.
Similarly, if the statement of witnesses recorded during the investigation of a criminal case or in the preliminary enquiry is not supplied to the delinquent officer that would amount to denial of opportunity of effective cross-examination.
It is difficult to comprehend exhaustively the facts and circumstances which may lead to violation of principles of natural justice or denial of reasonable opportunity of defence.
This question must be determined on the facts and circumstances of each case.
While considering this question it has to be borne in mind that a delinquent officer is entitled to have copies of material and relevant documents only which may include the copy of statements of witnesses recorded during the investigation or preliminary enquiry or the copy of any other document which may have been relied in support of the charges.
If a document has no bearing on the charges or if it is not relied by the enquiry officer to support the charges, or if such document or material was not necessary for the cross-examination of witnesses during the enquiry, the officer cannot insist upon the supply of copies of such documents, as the absence of copy of such documents will not prejudice the delinquent officer.
The decision of the question whether a document is material or not will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case."
14.
The charge-sheet was given to the petitioner on 1491985.
The petitioner asked for as many as 14 documents to submit his written statement.
In the impugned order imposing penalty, dated 421986, it is stated that the documents asked for by the petitioner are not relevant to the charges in question.
Further, even before me the learned counsel of the petitioner did not show as to what is the relevance of the documents asked for by the petitioner, but not supplied to him.
The petitioner was given ample opportunity to submit his explanation.
On the ground of asking for documents be did not submit his explanation.
Therefore, on this ground alone, the punishment cannot be said to be in violation of the principles of natural justice.
Further, the punishment awarded to the petitioner is one of censure and having regard to the charge said to have been established against the petitioner, it is not excessive and arbitrary.
I, therefore, find no reason to interfere in the impugned order.
15.
For the aforesaid reasons, the Writ Petition fails and it is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.