RK Patra, J - In this application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks quashing of the order dated 1661994 (Annexure-4) appointing opposite party No. 12 as Lower Division Clerk in Saila Grama Panchayat High School, Rahama in the district of Jagatsinghpur.
2.
Petitioner's case is that after completing graduation, he could not prosecute his higher studies because of poverty.
In the year 1990 finding no other way, he applied to the management of Sailo Grama Panchayat High School, which was an aided educational institution (at the time of hearing it was stated that the school has now been taken over by the State Government) for being appointed as a Peon.
On due consideration of the application, the petitioner came to be appointed as a peon in the school.
Having regard to the qualification, the petitioner was assured that as soon as post of clerk would fall vacant in the school, he would be promoted to the post.
On 3131994 consequent upon retirement of one MK Das the post of clerk in the school fell vacant.
The petitioner made representation on 1151994 to the President of the Managing Committee to promote him as a clerk.
The Managing Committee however, published notice on 23.5.1994 inviting applications to fill up the post.
In view of the assurance given to the petitioner earlier, he approached to the President of the Managing Committee opposite party No. 2 who assured him that his case would be duly considered and the holding of interview etc. were just formalities.
The petitioner accordingly made an application for the post.
The Managing Committee constituted a Selection Committee consisting of opposite parties 4, 5, 6, 9 and the Headmaster of the school as members.
On 1.6.1994, written, typing and viva voce tests were conducted and the Selection Committee recommended opposite party No. 12 for being appointed as a clerk.
The Managing Committee in its resolution dated 661994 accepted the recommendation and authorised the Headmaster to issue appointment order.
Accordingly, the impugned order at Annexure-4 was issued appointing opposite party No. 12 as Lower Division Clerk in the school.
The allegation of the petitioner is that opposite party No. 12 is the nephew of opposite party No. 5 who was not only the member of the Selection Committee but also a member of the Managing Committee.
He was an influential member in both the committees and because of relationship, opposite party No. 12 was shown undue favour whose appointment is vitiated as there was no fair selection.
3.
The Inspector of Schools Opposite party No. 4 filed counter affidavit.
He averred that in the interview the petitioner could not qualify himself.
As opposite party No. 12 came out successful, he was unanimously selected for the post and his appointment was approved in the Inspectorate office Memo No. 5655 dated 2371994 al Annexure-B/14.
According to the Inspector of Schools, the relevant records reveal that the recruitment was done after following due procedure.
Opposite parties 1, 10 and 11 filed a common counter affidavit which was affirmed by Opp.
party No. 11.
Their case is that Opposite party No. 5 was the donor member of the Managing Committee and is a respectable person in the locality.
They have denied the allegation that Opposite party No. 12 is the nephew of Opposite party No. 5.
Opposite party No. 12 has filed a separate counter affidavit.
He stated that he was duly appointed on being selected by the Selection Committee.
He also denied the allegation that he is the nephew of Opposite party No. 5.
4.
Petitioner has filed a rejoinder wherein he has furnished opposite party No. 5's genealogy indicating that Opposite party No. 12 is the grandson of Opposite party Nos. 5 and 11.
5.
Shri Routray, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted that the appointment of Opposite party No. 12 as Lower Division Clerk is vitiated on the ground of bias and interestedness.
According to the learned counsel, Opposite party No. 5 is none other than the grand-father of Opposite party No. 12 and the former as member of both the committees (Selection Committee and Managing Committee) participated in the process of selection.
6.
Shri DK Mohapatra, learned counsel appearing for opposite party Nos. 1, 10 and 11, contended that the petitioner having participated in the selection process without raising any objection is estopped from raising the plea of bias after he became unsuccessful in the selection.
He, without disputing the fact that opposite party No. 12 is the grandson of opposite party No. 5, further submitted that under sub-rule (1) of Rule 31 of the Orissa Education (Establishment, Recognition and Management of Private High Schools) Rules, 1991 (hereinafter referred as the "the 1991 Rules") what is prohibited is participation of near relations in a meeting of the Managing Committee in the matter under discussion in which one might be interested.
Shri Mohapatra's point is that from the genealogy furnished by the petitioner in his rejoinder, opposite party No. 12 cannot be held to be a "near relation" as contemplated in the aforesaid provision which states, inter alia, that no member of the Managing Committee shall take part in a meeting if such member or any of his near relations in interested in the matter under discussion in such meeting.
He further submitted that in any case, merely because one of the members of the Selection Committee and Managing Committee was a relation of the appointee the ultimate decision of the Managing Committee cannot be held to have been vitiated on the ground of bias or interestedness.
7.
From the rival contentions raised by the counsel for the parties, the following questions arise for determination :  (1) Whether Opposite party No. 12 is relation of opposite party No. 5; (2) Whether the recommendation of the Selection Committee and the ultimate resolution of the Managing Committee is vitiated merely because of participation of one of its members who is a relation of the appointee; (3) What is the effect of the relationship between Opposite party Nos. 5 and 12 on the entire process of selection leading to the appointment ?
and (4) Is the petitioner estopped from raising the plea of bias after having participated in the process of selection ?
Question No. 1  Opposite party No. 5 has not appeared in the case.
On perusal of the genealogy furnished by the petitioner in the rejoinder, it appears that Opposite party Nos. 5 and 11 are two brothers being the sons of Bauribandhu whose brother is Bhobani.
Opposite party No. 12 is the grand-son of the said Bhobani.
Opposite party No. 12 thus is related to Opposite parties 5 and 11 as the latter's grand-son which cannot be doubted.
Shri Mohapatra also fairly and rightly does not dispute this factual aspect.
It is also not disputed that opposite party No. 5 was one of the members of the Selection Committee who participated in the process of selection.
He was also one of the members of the Managing Committee which was the appointing authority.
Question No. 2  This question need not detain us in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in M/s J Mohapatra v. State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1984 SC 1572.
In that case one of the members of the sub-committee constituted for selection of books for libraries of educational institutions was an author who had submitted his own books for selection.
It was contended before the Apex Court that the selection of books could not be declared invalid because it was the ultimate decision of the sub-committee which was material and the author-members being one of the members therein is inconsequential.
In rejecting the said contention, the Court observed thus :  "........
It is no answer to say that an author-member is only one of the members of the Assessment Sub-Committee and that the ultimate decision rests with the State Government which may reject any book out of the list of approved books.
A similar argument was rejected by this Court in Kraipak's case (AIR 1970 SC 150).
The State Government would normally be guided by the list approved by the Assessment Sub-Committee.
Further, to say that such author-member is only one of the members of the Assessment Sub-Committee is to overlook the fact that the author-member can subtly influence the minds of the other members against selecting books by the other authors in preference to this own.
It can also be that books by some of the other members may also have been submitted for selection and there can be between them a quid pro quo or, in other words, you see that my book is selected and in return I will do the same for you.
In either case, when the book of an author-mother comes up for consideration, the other members would feel themselves embarrassed in frankly discussing its merits.
Such author-member may also be a person holding a high official position whom the other members may not want the displease.
It can be that the other members may not be influenced by the fact that the book which they are considering for approval was written by one of their members.
Whether they were so influenced or not is, however, a matter impossible to determine.
It is not, therefore, the actual bias in favour of the author-member that is material but the possibility of such bias.
All these considerations require that an author-member should not be a member of any such committee or sub-committee."
In view of the aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court, we have no hesitation to reject the contention of Shri Mohapatra that an individual member's role, if any, did not matter because the ultimate decision was taken by the Managing Committee.
Question No. 3  Shri Routray, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that because of the admitted relationship between opposite party No. 5 and Opposite party No. 12, the appointment of the former is vitiated on the ground of bias.
In this connection, he relied on the decision of this Court in Mrs. Philemina Mathews (supra).
In that case the appointment to the post of Assistant Teacher in Stewart School, Cuttack, was under challenge on the ground that the appointee was the first cousin of the Principal who was in the Selection Committee.
A Bench of this Court in which one of us (RK Patra, J) was a member held that the Principal who was one of the members of the Selection Committee was distantly related to the appointee and by accepting the plea of bias or interestedness, the appointment of the concerned teacher was held to have been vitiated.
The aforesaid judgment of this Court was challenged by the Management of the School in the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 8192 of 1994 which was disposed of by order dated 24.11.1994.
It was held as follows :  "The Principal of the School was one of the members of the four-member committee.
Except the allegation that the teacher selected is related to him in a rather distant manner, no other suggestion of bias is made.
We are of the opinion that observations regarding bias on the part of the Principal were not really warranted.
So far as the directions of the High Court to the following effect is concerned, we do not think that any interference should be made by this Court......" In view of the aforesaid order of the Supreme Court, reliance by the learned counsel on the decision of Philomina Mathews (supra) is misconceived.
In Dr. Sasmita Bhuyan v. The Governing Body of Christ College (O.JC.
No. 2725 of 1995) disposed of on 1221996 a Bench of this Court (to which one of us (RK Patra, J) was a member) took note of the order passed by the Supreme Court referred to above.
The rule against bias springs from the well-known maxim "Nemo Judex in Re sus" (no man is a Judge in his on cause).
Justice should not only be done but should manifestly be seen to be done.
This legal principle has been aptly stated in Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Volume I, para 68 as follows :  "Disqualification for financial interest.
- There is a presumption that any direct financial interest, however small, in the matter in dispute disqualifies a person from, adjudicating Membership of a company, association or other organisation which is financially interested may operate as a bar to adjudicating, as may a bare liability to costs where the decision itself will involve no pecuniary loss.'
It is now settled that the aforesaid test applies not only to judicial proceedings but also to quasi-Judicial and administrative proceedings.
In AK Kraipak v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1970 SC 150 which has become a locus classicus, the rule of bias was applied in respect of an administrative proceeding by the Supreme Court.
In that case, a list of State Forest Officers of the State of Jammu and Kashmir prepared by the selection board for appointment to the posts in the senior and junior scales in the Indian Forest Service was set aside by the Supreme Court on the ground that the officiating Chief Conservator of Forests whose name was placed at the top of the list was a member of the selection board even though he was not present at the time his name was considered for selection and even though selection board was only a recommendatory body and the list prepared by it was to be considered first by the Home Ministry and then by the Union Public Service Commission by whom the final recommendations were to be made.
The Court held that at every stage of the officer's participation in the deliberation of the selection board there was conflict between his interest and duty and under these circumstances, it is difficult to believe that he could have been impartial.
The real question is not whether he was biased.
It is difficult to prove the state of mind of a person.
Therefore, what has to be seen is whether there is reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to have been biased.
The Court cautioned that a mere suspicion of bias is not sufficient and there must be reasonable likelihood of bias and in deciding the question of bias, the Court will have to take into consideration human probabilities and ordinary course of human conduct.
In Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1987 SC 454, the Supreme Court in paragraph 16 of the judgment observed as follows :  "We agree with the petitioners that it is one of the fundamental principles of our jurisprudence that no man can be a judge in his cause and that if there is a reasonable likelihood of bias it is in accordance with natural justice and commonsense that the justice likely to be so baised should be incarcerated from sitting'.
The question is not whether the judge is actually biased or in fact decides partially, but whether there is a real likelihood of bias.
What is objectionable in such a case is not that the decision is actually tainted with bias but that the circumstances are such as to create a reasonable apprehension in the mind of others that there is a likelihood of bias affecting the decision.
The basic principle underlying this rule is that justice must not only be done but must also appear to be done and this rule has received wide recognition in several decisions of this Court....." In Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1987 SC 2386, Venkatachaliah, J (as he then was) in paragraph 7 of the judgment stated the law as under:  "As to the tests of the likelihood of bias what is relevant is the reasonableness of the apprehension in that regard in the mind of the party.
The proper approach for the Judge is not to look at his own mind and ask himself, however, honestly "am I biased ?
", but to look at the mind of the party before him."
In the light of the observations of the Supreme Court mentioned above, let us look at the materials on record to find out the actual position.
8.
We have already come to hold that Opposite party No. 12 is the grand-son of Opposite party No. 5.
We have no hesitation to hold that the former is a near relation of the latter who had participated in the selection process which culminated in the appointment.
Opposite party No. 5's participation in the selection which resulted in the appointment of opposite party No. 12 is also hit by sub-rule (1) of Rule 31 of the 1991 Rules which prohibits participation of near relation in a meeting of the Managing Committee if such member or any of his relation is interested in the matter under discussion in such meeting.
Opposite party No. 5 was one of the members of the Selection Committee and was also one of the members of the Managing Committee of the school which was the appointing authority.
He admittedly participated in the process of selection.
The Managing Committee took the resolution on 661994 and decided to appoint opposite party No. 12 as a clerk in the school.
Within eight days thereafter the Headmaster of the school issued the appointment order No. 171 dated 1561994.
On the facts and circumstances of the case, it is difficult for us to believe that Opposite party No. 5 could have been impartial.
The real question is not whether he was biased as it is difficult to know the state of mind of a person.
What has therefore to be seen is whether there is reasonable ground for believing that he was likely to be biased.
In view of the relationship, the reasonable ground for believing that Opposite party No. 5 was likely to be biased cannot be ruled out.
The appointment of Opposite party No. 5 has thus become vulnerable.
9.
Question No. 4  What is the effect of petitioner's participation in the interview conducted by the selection committee ?
In Dr. G Sarana v. University of Lucknow, AIR 1976 SC 2428, the Supreme Court observed as follows :  "....... the appellant knew all the relevant facts, he did not before appearing for the interview or at the time of interview raise when his little finger against the constitution of the Selection Committee.
He seems to have voluntarily appeared before the Committee and taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation from it.
Having done so, it is not now open to him to turn round and question the constitution of the Committee....." Wade in his well-known book "Administrative Law (7th Edition) writes (at page 481) as follows: "The right to object to a disqualified adjudicator may be waived and this may be so even where the disqualification is statutory.
The Court normally insists that the objection shall be taken as soon as the party prejudiced knows the facts which entitle him to object.
If after he or his advisers know of the disqualification, they let the proceedings continue without protest, they are held to have waived their objection and the determination cannot be challenged.
In the past this rule has been strictly applied, so much so that the practice was to refuse certiorari to quash the decision unless it was specifically shown in the affidavits that the applicant had no knowledge of the disqualifying facts at the time of the proceedings.
But in one case, where the litigant had appeared in person before the justices, certiorari was granted even though he know the facts at the trial, since he did not know that he was entitled to raise his objection then and there can be no waiver of rights of which the person entitled is unaware."
Is the circumstances, the question is whether the decision of the committee with a disqualified person is void or voidable.
At pages 491, 492, the learned author observed as follows :  "........Judgments dealing with administrative decisions therefore proceed on the footing that the presence of bias means that the tribunal is improperly constituted, so that it has no power to determine the case; and accordingly its decision must be void and a nullity.
Thus the reviewing Court's jurisdiction firs correctly into the frame work of the ultra vires principle, whereas the notion of a voidable decision does not.
A long line of judges of high authority have agreed with Lord Esher's observation that the participation of a disqualified person certainly rendered the decision wholly void."
Be that as it may, even applying the tests in Dr. G Saran (supra), there is nothing on record to hold that the petitioner knew the relationship between the Opposite party No. 5 and the opposite party No. 12 and being aware of such facts he appeared before the Selection Committee.
This being the position, it cannot be held that the petitioner is estopped from challenging the appointment of Opposite party No. 12 on the ground that it was tainted by the rule against bias.
For the reasons aforementioned, the appointment of Opposite party No. 12 is vitiated which is liable to be quashed.
10.
In the result, the order of appointment of Opposite party No. 12 as LD Clerk dated 1561994 at Annexure 4 and the order of approval of the Inspector of Schools contained in office memo No. 5655 dated 2371994 at Annexure B/14 are hereby quashed.
Following the quashing of the appointment order of Opposite party No. 12, the vacancy in the post of LD Clerk in the school may be filled up by the educational authority in accordance with prescribed procedure as the school has now been taken ever by the State Government.
The writ application is allowed.
There would no order as to costs.
Application allowed.