Mohinder Pal, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, thereby quashing the order dated February 15, 2006 (Annexure P-7) passed by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Public Works Department, Public Health Branch (respondent No. 2) whereby representation of Gurmeet Singh alias Kuldeep Singh -I was accepted and he had been appointed in the Head Office of the respondent-Department with retrospective effect i.e from January 08, 1992.
The petitioner was working as Clerk on regular basis in the Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewell Corporation Limited (for short ` the HSMITC') since 1986.
In the year 1990.
2-3.
The was declared surplus along with other employees of the HSMITC, including respondent No. 4 and was transferred to the department of Public Works (Public Health) vide Office Order dated April 18, 1990 (Annexure P-1).
Thereafter, the petitioner being a Matriculate with First Division and Graduate, was absorbed in the Head Office Cadre of the Public Works Department (Public Health Branch), Haryana Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh (respondent No. 1) vide order dated January 08, 1992 (Annexure P-2).
Respondent No. 4, being a Matriculate with Second Division was, absorbed as Officiating Clerk in the Public Works Department (Public Health Branch) in the Circle Cadre (field cadre) vide order dated February 11, 1993 (Annexure P-3).
It was clearly mentioned in the order Annexure P-3 that seniority of respondent No. 4 would be reckoned with effect from the date of issue of this order for his permanent absorption in the respondent - Department and that he would be given the benefit of previous service rendered in the HSMITC in the matter of fixation of pay and leave only and would not be permitted any benefit towards seniority.
Thereafter, respondent No. 4 made a request that he should also be absorbed in the Head Office Cadre by giving relaxation in the educational qualification.
Vide order dated July 26, 1994 (Annexure P-4), request of respondent No. 4 was accepted and he was absorbed in the Head Office Cadre on the condition that his seniority amongst the Clerks of Head Office Cadre would be reckoned from the date of issue of the said order and that no credit whatsoever would be allowed to him for service rendered by him on the Circle Cadre for the purpose of seniority in the Head Office Cadre.
These terms and conditions were accepted by respondent No. 4 vide his letter dated July 28, 1994 (Annexure P-5).
In spite of acceptance of terms and conditions vide Annexure P-5, respondent No. 4 kept on making representations that since he was senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Clerks in the HSMITC, therefore, he should be assigned seniority over and above him.
One of his representations in this regard was rejected vide order dated July 26, 1999 (Annexure P-6).
This order was not challenged by respondent No. 4.
However, case of respondent No. 4 was again considered upon representation by him and the impugned order dated February 15, 2006 (Annexure P-7) was passed by respondent No. 2.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 to 3, it has been stated that the case of respondent No. 4 regarding his posting in the Head Office and assigning him seniority was decided after taking opinion from the Law Department.
It was further stated that it was only in the case of direct recruitment that there was the requirement of Matriculation with First Division/Higher Secondary with Second Division/Intermediate with Second Division/Graduate or its equivalent.
However, in the present case, as respondent No. 4 was a Matriculate and fulfilled the required qualification, he could have been absorbed in the Head Office with effect January 08, 1992, when his juniors were absorbed.
5.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 4, besides adopting the reply filed by respondents Nos. 1 to 3, he sought to justify the order dated February 15, 2006 (Annexure P-7) by stating that justice was done to him by absorbing him in the Head Office with effect from the date his juniors were absorbed.
6.
We have heard Mr. DS Patwalia, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, Mr. OP Sharma, Additional Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for respondents Nos. 1 to 3 and Mr. DS Rawat, Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 4 and have gone through the records of the case.
7.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was absorbed in the Head Office Cadre and respondent No. 4 was absorbed in the Circle Cadre of the respondent - Department.
Service conditions of the petitioner and respondent No. 4 are governed by the Haryana Public Works Department (Public Health) Branch Head Quarter Office Ministerial (Group C) Service Rules, 1982 (for short `the 1982 Rules).
The same were notified by the respondents on January 01, 1982.
Rule 11 of the 1982 Rules deals with seniority inter se of the members of the service and the same is reproduced below, so far as relevant for the present controversy :-  " 11.
Seniority, inter se of members of the Service, shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the Service.
Provided that where there are different cadres in the Service, seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre."
Appendix `B' of the 1982 Rules gives the description of the posts and qualifications and experience which is required for these posts.
Under Clause 7 of the Appendix 'B' for direct recruitment to the post of Clerk, besides knowing Hindi and English typewriting at a speed of 25 and 30 Words Per Minute, respectively, and having knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard, one should be possessing the academic qualification of Matric with First Division/ Higher Secondary with Second Division/Intermediate with Second Division/Graduate or its equivalent whereas for appointment otherwise than by direct recruitment, the conditions of typewriting and knowing Hindi being the same as in the case of direct recruitment, the academic qualification is Matric or its equivalent or five years' service as Restorer or Gesteiner Operator or Peon.
8.
A perusal of the above Rules reveals that seniority of the members of the Service was to be determined by the continuous length of service on any post provided that where the Service is of different cadres, the seniority would be determined separately for each cadre.
A perusal of Appendix `B' of the 1982 Rules further reveals that for direct recruitment to the post of Clerk, Matric with First Division, Higher Secondary with Second Division, Intermediate with Second Division or Graduate and its equivalent was the requisite qualification, besides knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard and knowledge of typing.
The petitioner fulfilled these qualifications and, therefore, vide order dated January 08, 1992 (Annexure P-2) he was permanently absorbed in the Head Office of the respondent-Department.
Since respondent No. 4 was a Matriculate with Second Division, his case for being appointed to the post of Clerk in the Head Office was not considered along with the petitioner and he was absorbed as Officiating Clerk in the Public Works Department (Public Health Branch) in the Circle Cadre (field cadre) vide order dated February 11, 1993 (Annexure P-3).
It was specifically mentioned in the said order that his seniority would be reckoned for his permanent absorption in the respondent - Department with effect from the date of issue of the order (Annexure P-3) and that the benefit of previous service rendered in the HSMITC would be given only in the matter of fixation of pay and leave and not towards seniority.
On the request of made by respondent No. 4 that he should also be absorbed in the Head Office Cadre by giving relaxation in the educational qualification, vide order dated July 26, 1994 (Annexure P-4), he was absorbed in the Head Office Cadre on the condition that his seniority amongst the Clerks of Head Office Cadre would be reckoned from the date of issue of the said order and that no credit whatsoever would be allowed to him for service rendered by him on the Circle Cadre for the purpose of seniority in the Head Office Cadre.
These terms and conditions were accepted by respondent No. 4 vide letter dated July 28, 1994 (Annexure P-5).
Representation of respondent No. 4 that since he was senior to the petitioner in the Cadre of Clerks in the HSMITC, he should be assigned seniority over and above the petitioner in the Head Office Cadre, was rejected vide order dated July 26, 1999 (Annexure P-6).
He did not challenge the same order.
9.
After perusing the above-referred provisions of Rule 11 and Clause 7 of Appendix `B' of the 1982 Rules and keeping in view the facts and circumstances, detailed above, it would be suffice to say that the impugned order dated February 15, 2006 (Annexure P-7) has not been passed keeping in view the relevant provisions of the Rules and, therefore, cannot be sustained.
Even otherwise, vide this order, respondent No. 4 has been granted seniority in the Head Office Cadre with effect from January 08, 1992, ie the date when he was not even born in the Head Office Cadre.
It is contrary not only to the settled position of law but also to the statutory rules.
The reason put forward by respondent No. 2 while passing the impugned order that for filling up of the post of Clerk by way of transfer, the requirement of Matric with First Division is not an essential qualification, is not tenable and cannot be said a valid ground especially when, in relaxation of the education qualifications, respondent No. 4 was absorbed in the Head Office Cadre vide order dated July 26, 1994 (Annexure P-4), it was made clear to him that no credit whatsoever would be allowed to him for service rendered by him on the Circle Cadre for the purpose of seniority in the Head Office Cadre and he accepted these terms and conditions vide Annexure P-5.
10.
In the case of State of Bihar and others v. Akhouri Sachindra Nath and others, 1991 Supp.
(1) Supreme Court Cases 334, it has been held by the Apex Court that no person can be promoted with retrospective effect from a date when he was not born in the cadre so as to adversely affect others.
Similar view was taken by the Apex Court in the case of Uttaranchal Forest Rangers Association (Direct Recruit) and others v. State of U.P and others, 2006(4) SCT 487 : (2006 (10) Supreme Court Cases 346.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated February 15, 2006 (Annexure P-7) passed by respondent No. 2 is quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.