Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - In my view, such a frivolous writ petition as the present one should be dismissed with exemplary costs so that the decision acts as a deterrent for litigants like the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a primary school teacher on April 7th, 1961.
On June 10th, 1968 he was promoted to the post of head teacher.
As head teacher he was working in Mendabari GMP School, which was within jurisdiction of then District School Board, Jalpaiguri.
On July 12th, 1970 he left the school without handing over charge, and without giving any intimation to any authority.
3.
In 2004 he moved this court by filing Writ Petition No. 3494 (W) of 2004.
Before that he had made a representation to the district inspector of schools dated November 24, 2003 praying for release of all retiral benefits, In that he contended that since the authority never suspended him or terminated his service, he was entitled to get all benefits upto January 31st, 2002, when he had reached the age of superannuation.
4.
By order dated April 2nd, 2004 Pratap Kumar Ray, J was pleased to dispose of that writ petition directing the district primary school council to give a decision in the matter.
This is how the decision dated July 19th, 2004, impugned in this writ petition dated August 30th, 2006, came to be given by the Chairman of the District Primary School Council, Jalpaiguri.
5.
The authority held that since of his own accord the petitioner had abandoned his service on July 12th, 1970, there was no scope to give him any retiral benefits except the amount which had accumulated in the contributory provident fund account upto April 1969.
The authority recorded findings that the petitioner failed to show anything that he had been restrained by anyone from discharging his duties in the school in the capacity of head teacher thereof.
6.
Counsel argues that without initiating any proceedings, and without giving opportunity of showing cause, the authorities were not empowered to deprive the petitioner of his retiral benefits.
His contention is that since the petitioner was restrained from discharging duties, the authorities were bound to treat him as a teacher continuing in employment till the date of reaching the age of superannuation.
7.
Sensing that the writ petition is going to be dismissed, counsel prays for leave to withdraw it.
In my view, in such a case as the present one, a litigant, if is permitted to withdraw the writ petition, will be shown an undue indulgence, and as a matter of policy, the petitioner should not be permitted to abuse the process of court by filing such writ petition as the present one, and then by seeking permission to withdraw it.
8.
I have absolutely no hesitation in saying that the petitioner has grossly abused the process of this court.
On the ground of delay alone this writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
The decision impugned was given as back as July 19th, 2004, and this writ petition was taken out only on August 30th, 2006.
There is absolutely nothing to show that he was prevented by sufficient cause from approaching the writ court with utmost expedition.
9.
On merits also I have no doubt that this is an utterly frivolous writ petition.
The petitioner abandoned his service as back as July 12th, 1970.
Till 2004 he remained silent in the sense that he never approached any court of law alleging that the respondents were not permitting him to work as head teacher in the school.
He wanted to take advantage of the situation that the authorities never suspended him or terminated his service.
10.
That was not needed, since the petitioner of his own accord had abandoned the service as back as July 12th, 1970.
Hence I do not find any reason to say that the authority was wrong in holding that he would not be entitled to any benefit except the amount accumulated in the provident fund account upto the month of April 1969.
There is therefore no reason at all to interfere with the impugned decision.
11.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition with costs assessed at rupees ten thousand to be paid by the petitioner to the district primary school council within three weeks.
Petition dismissed.