Rakesh Sharma, J - This writ petition has been heard and disposed of today in open Court for reasons to be recorded later.
My reasons for allowing the writ petition are as under.
2.
Heard Sri Sharad Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner and learned standing Counsel appearing for the opposite parties.
3.
The petitioner, a retired Marketing Inspector of Food and Civil Supplies Department, has assailed the order dated 24-1-2001.
The petitioner had retired from services on 30-6-1995 and the departmental enquiry had been concluded against him vide an order dated 24-1-2001 passed by the Commissioner, Food and Civil Supplies Department, UP  4.
It emerges from record that at the relevant time, the petitioner was posted as Marketing Inspector at FCI Godown in Bareilly Region.
The transporter/contractor who was engaged to transport wheat and other foodgrains had misappropriated certain stocks of foodgrains.
A department enquiry was initiated in the matter.
The petitioner was suspended on the ground of misappropriation of wheat on 4-5-1994.
He had challenged the order of suspension by filing the writ petition No. 1059 (S/S) of 1995 and this Court had quashed the order of suspension vide order dated 21-4-1995.
The said order is quoted below :  "Petitioner was working as Incharge, Purchase Centre at Banda I, District Shahjahanpur in March, 1993 under the respondents Food & Civil Supply Department.
As a part of his duty he arranged purchase of wheat and delivered the same to the Contractor for onward transportation to the Godowns located at Shahjahanpur city.
It appears that out of twenty two thousand quintals of wheat grains only about twenty thousand quintal was delivered by the Contractor.
On account of shortfall of two thousand quintals the petitioner lodged a report with the police and the latter are now investigating the crime case No. 232 of 1993 under Sections 409/420, I.P.C. with regard to F.I.R. No. 183 of 1993, obviously the Contractor responsible for the transportation of grains was the only suspect.
As the investigation was under progress the respondents passed the impugned order of suspension dated 4th May, 1994 Annexure No. 9 against the petitioner in view of a contemplated enquiry regarding the same very loss of wheat grains.
The petitioner's grouse is that no inquiry has yet started so much so that even chargesheet has not been issued to him despite the fact that the suspension is almost one year old.
The Second submission is that since the loss of wheat grains is already being investigated by the police and the transporter/contractor is the sole suspect thereof, therefore, any contemplated inquiry against him (i.e. the petitioner) is likely to prejudice the prosecution.
On being put to pointed question by the Court, the learned Standing Counsel was fair enough to concede that the police is empowered to associate the petitioner with the investigation both as a suspect as well as a witness if the need so requires.
This Court is of the considered opinion that when the petitioner's association can be sought by the Police during the investigation and the respondents themselves are feeling shy of putting him to the drill of a full- fledged departmental enquiry on issuing him a chargesheet, there is no propriety in keeping him under suspension for an indefinite period.
Resort to suspension may however, be sought in the light of ensuing police investigation.
It may not be out of context to mention here that it is common ground that the petitioner retires on 30th June, 1995.
Under these circumstances the petition is disposed of finally with a direction to revoke the impugned suspension order and further direction to the parties to associate the petitioner with the police investigation as and when required and in any capacity as permissible under the law."
5.
Accordingly, the orders of suspension was cancelled on 6-6-1995.
The petitioner had retired on attaining the age of superannuation on 30-6-1995.
6.
After the retirement of the petitioner on 30-6-1995, he had ceased to be a Government servant.
The charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on 12-4-1996 without the sanction of H.E.
the Governor of UP or State Government.
The opposite parties have treated the petitioner as an active Government servant on whom the provision of CCA Rules and the relevant enquiry and punishment rules were applicable.
The charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on 12-4- 1996, to which he submitted his reply on 7-1-1997 denying the charges levelled against him.
The petitioner received show cause notice along with enquiry report.
He filed his reply to the said show cause notice.
As per petitioner, in fact no enquiry was held and the impugned order of recovery was passed against him on 24-1-2001.
7.
I have considered the submission put forth by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8.
It is admitted by the parties that the petitioner had already retired from services on 30-6-1995 after attaining the ag of superannuation.
A perusal of the record reveals that the formal regular departmental enquiry was conducted against the petitioner after the date of retirement.
The charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on 12-4-1996, much after his retirement when he ceased to be a Government servant.
The opposite parties were empowered to proceed against the petitioner only in accordance with the provisions of Civil Service Regulation (C.S.R ).
The learned Standing Counsel has failed to demonstrate as to when and how a formal enquiry was conducted against the petitioner under the provision of Civil Services Regulations which were applicable on a retired Government servant.
The impugned order has been passed on 26-1-2001 i.e. after about four and a half years of the retirement of the petitioner, treating him to be as an active Government servant who was covered by the Classification Control and Appeal (CCA), Rules and the Enquiry and Punishment Rules, which were applicable on the Government servants who are in service (non-returned).
9.
This whole exercise was per se illegal.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and this Court have held in 1999(2) SCT 51 : (1993)3 SCC 666 : (AIR 1999 SC 1841), Bhagirathi Jena v. Board of Directors, OSFC, 1996(3) SCT 418 : 1996(9) SCC 395 : (1996 All LJ 754), State of UP v. Shri Krishna Pandey, 2001(4) SCT 282 : (2001)2 UPLBEC 1391 : (2001 All LJ 1470), Mahavir Prasad Sharma v. State of UP and (2004(22) LCD 65 : (2004 All LJ 1931), S.S.L.
Verma v. UP Co-operative Bank Ltd that the departmental enquiry under the CCA Rules cannot be conducted against a retired Government servant.
Action can be taken against a retired Government servant only in accordance with the relevant rules which are applicable.
In the present case petitioner has not been dealt with by the relevant rules i.e. Civil Service Regulations (CSR).
In this case, no departmental enquiry could have proceeded against the petitioner under the CCA Rules as he had already retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
The petitioner had ceased to be an active Government servant.
The whole exercise by the opposite parties in conducting the enquiry, as indicated above, was illegal, unjust and improper and the consequential order ought not have been passed.
10.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 24-1- 2001, contained in Annexure-19 to the writ petition is quashed.
The consequences shall follow.
However, it is open for the respondents to take appropriate action against the petitioner in accordance with relevant service rules and take into account the limitation prescribed under the Civil Service Regulations (CSR)  Petition allowed.