SN Aggarwal, J - Major Singh-petitioner served a demand notice on the respondents.
The Government of Punjab made a reference of the dispute and referred the same to the Labour Court, Patiala under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Statement of claim was also filed by the petitioner.
The respondent-management filed an application that it was a sick company registered with the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (in short, the BIFR).
Therefore, these proceedings were required to be stayed under Section 22 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (in short, the Act, 1985).
The learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala vide order dated 25.7.2005 accepted the said application and stayed further proceedings.
2.
Hence, the present revision petition.
3.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the proceedings can go on but the award, if and when passed in favour of the petitioner, will be executable only in accordance with the provision of Section 22 of the Act, 1985.
4.
On the other hand, the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents was that there is no legal infirmity in the impugned order dated 25.7.2005 passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala.
It was also submitted that if the petitioner is aggrieved against the impugned order dated 25.7.2005, he can initiate proceedings with the consent of the Board constituted under the Act, 1985.
5.
Before the submissions of the parties are considered, the provisions of Section 22(1) of the Act, 1985 may be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "22.
Suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, etc. - (1) Where in respect of an industrial company, an inquiry under Section 16 is pending or any scheme referred to under Section 17 is under preparation or consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an appeal under Section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association of the industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act or other law, no proceedings for the winding-up of the industrial company or for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof (and no suit for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any security against the industrial company or of any guarantee in respect of any loans, or advance granted to the industrial company) shall lie or be proceeded with further, except with the consent of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority."
6.
The perusal of Section 22 of the Act, 1985 reveals that even a suit for recovery is not maintainable against an industrial unit which has been declared sick and reference has been made to the BIFR.
In the recent judgment reported as Paramjeet Singh Patheja v. ICDS Ltd, 2006(6) Comp L.J.
425 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold that the expression, "suit" in Section 22 of the Act, 1985 has to be given its plain meaning, namely, any proceedings adopted for realization of a right vested in a party and would clearly include arbitration proceedings.
Obviously, it would cover proceedings under the Industrial Disputes Act as well as because these proceedings are initiated for realization of a right vested in the workman.
7.
There is no force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that after the award is passed, its execution is liable to be stayed under Section 22 of the Act, 1985.
If it had been so, it could be argued that the suit can proceed but the execution of decree is liable to be stayed but that is not the meaning of the language used in Section 22 of the Act, 1985.
It says that no suit for recovery of money shall lie or proceeded with.
On the same analogy the proceedings under the Industrial Disputes Act are liable to be stayed.
Accordingly, it is held that the impugned order does not suffer from any illegality.
No merits.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.