Nirmal Yadav, J - State of Punjab through the Collector, Gurdaspur and another have challenged the concurrent findings vide judgment and decree dated 9.5.1995 passed by Additional Senior Sub-Judge, Gurdaspur and vide judgment and decree dated 2.12.1999 passed by Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, whereby the suit for declaration filed by Balkar Singh respondent has been decreed with the consequential relief of arrears of pay and allowances from the date when his juniors had been given promotion.
2.
The facts, in brief, are that respondent Balkar Singh was appointed on 12.9.1969 as Tracer in the Soil Conservation Department and since then he is working as such.
However, vide order No. 27709-13/E-3 dated 391991 passed by Chief Soil Conservation Officer, Jaswinder Singh Randhawa and Gurdeep Singh, juniors to the plaintiff-respondent, were promoted as Draftsmen.
Aggrieved against the order of promotion, the plaintiff-respondent filed a civil suit pleading that in the seniority list circulated vide office letter No. 16416-55/E-3 dated 2381988 plaintiff was placed at serial No. 8, whereas Jaswinder Singh Randhawa and Gurdeep Singh were placed at serial Nos. 76 and 9 respectively.
The plaintiff claimed to be governed by Punjab Soil Conservation of Engineering (Non-Ministerial) Class-III Service Rules, 1988.
As per said Rules, 50% of posts of Draftsman were to be filled by Direct Recruitment and remaining 50% were to be filled by promotion from amongst the Tracers holding diploma in Draftsmanship.
3.
Suit was contested by the appellant-defendants being time barred.
It was further pleaded that vide Government Notification No. 10/2/90/FPI/3860 dated 951991 while raising the grade of Technical staff, direct recruitment of Draftsman had been stopped and it was decided to fill up the posts of Draftsman for amongst the Tracers (Junior Draftsman) having an experience of 12 years as Tracers.
It is stated that Gurdeep Singh was selected as Draftsman by the Departmental Selection Committee as he fulfilled the qualification prescribed for the post of Draftsman, whereas plaintiff was not a fresh Draftsman vide order dated 391991 and not promoted as alleged by the plaintiff.
Jaswinder Singh Randhawa had filed a suit on the basis of which a decree was passed in his favour for his appointment as draftsman.
The State Government having failed in first appeal, filed regular second appeal before this Court, which is stated to be pending adjudication.
It is stated that the plaintiff was not entitled to be promoted prior to the persons mentioned in the plaint.
It was, however, admitted that plaintiff is Matriculate with two years diploma of Draftsman (Mechanical).
4.
In his replication plaintiff controverted the pleas taken in the written statement and reiterated the averments made in the plaint.
It is stated that plaintiff as well as Jaswinder Singh Randhawa and Gurdeep Singh were governed by the same Rules.
Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was not appointed afresh.
He was promoted with effect from 12101983 after superseding his juniors.
5.
The learned trial Court, after taking into consideration the facts, circumstances and the record of the present case, decreed the suit holding that the suit of the plaintiff qua Gurdip Singh is barred by limitation because as per the seniority list Ex. P-1, Gurdip Singh was working as Draftsman since 6121972, therefore, the plaintiff could not have challenged the order of promotion after a lapse of 19 years.
However, plaintiff was held entitled to be promoted as a Draftsman with effect from the date his junior Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was promoted as such with all consequential benefits such as pay and allowances etc.
The First Appellate Court also confirmed the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records very carefully.
7.
Learned State counsel argued that Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was appointed as Draftsman as fresh candidate vide order dated 391991 and was not promoted as alleged by the plaintiff.
Since Jaswinder Singh Randhawa had filed a suit for declaration, which was decreed in his favour and on that basis first appeal filed against the said judgment was also dismissed and now regular second appeal is pending before this Court, his promotion was made subject to the outcome of the said regular second appeal.
He further argued that the plaintiff was not entitled to promotion from the date his juniors were promoted as he was not having the requisite qualification.
It is further argued that Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was promoted in view of the judgment and decree dated 24.10.1989 passed in his favour by the Civil Court.
8.
The arguments of the learned State counsel are without any force.
It has clearly been mentioned in the written statement that plaintiff is a Matriculate with diploma in Draftsman (Mechanical), therefore, he was eligible to be promoted as Draftsman from the post of Tracer.
As per the service Rules, 50% of the posts of Draftsman were to be filled up by promotion from amongst the Tracers.
It is not the case of the Department that there were no posts available for the promotees quota.
Moreover, as per the written statement filed by the Appellate-State direct recruitment had been stopped by the Government vide notification No. 10/2/90/FPI/3860 dated 951991.
Admittedly, Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was placed at serial No. 76 in the seniority list, whereas plaintiff was at serial No. 8.
Even DW-1 Raghbir Singh, Senior Assistant, has admitted the plaintiff's case in the cross- examination to the effect that plaintiff was at serial No. 8 in the seniority list, whereas Jaswinder Singh Randhawa was at serial No. 76.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any ground to interfere with the concurrent findings of both the Courts below.
Consequently, finding no merit in the present appeal, it is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.