PS Patwalia, J - There is a delay of 6 days in re-filing this appeal.
For the reasons mentioned in the CM No. 5970-C of 2005, the delay in re- filing the present appeal is condoned.
2.
A perusal of the judgment rendered by the lower appellate court would show that three grounds have weighed with the courts in denying the benefit of military service to the appellant.
The relevant observations of the court are as hereunder :  "I have considered the contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the file.
After having considered the contentions of the Ld.
Counsel for the parties, and having gone through the file as well as the impugned Judgment and decree, I do not find any substance ad force in the agreements advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant, whereas, I fully agree with the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondent for the reasons given below firstly (1) the plaintiff has no, brought any record on the file of the learned trial court that he was employed in the military service during the Emergency rather admittedly he was recruited in the military services in the year 1963 when Emergency was not enforced (2) that he was not recruited against the reserve vacancy meant for Ex-serviceman in the Mandi Boardkaran; (3) he had applied for the benefits of military services rendered by him to the Mandi Karan Board and his case was duly considered by the Mandikaran Board after seeking legal opinion from the legal advisor which was declined vide letter dated 1451981, Ex. D 2 in the year 1981.
So the right to file a civil suit accrued to him in the year 1981 and he could file a civil suit within three years from the date of letter dated 1451981 Ex. D.2 under article 58 of the Limitation Act.
More-over, he could file the civil suit within six months under Section 31 of the Mandikaran Board after giving notice to the Mandikaran Board but he has filed the suit on 17122003 after the lapse of more than twenty years from the date of rejection of his claim for grant of benefits of military services on 14581 vide letter Ex. D 2 So, his case is hopelessly time barred and the learned trial court has rightly dismissed the suit.
There is no infirmity and illegality in the impugned Judgment and decree."
3.
A perusal of the extract of the judgment of the learned Additional District Judge would show that the plaintiff had failed to bring on record any evidence that he had joined the military service during the emergency.
Still further he had also not shown that he was recruited against a reserve vacancy meant for ex-serviceman.
Above all, his claim for military service was declined in the year 1981.
The suit was however filed by him in the year 2003 after a lapse of more than two decades.
While dealing with the claim for the grant of military service Hon'ble Supreme Court in BS Bajwa v. State of Haryana, reported as 1998(1) SCT 670 (SC) has held that the claim for military service which is made after a number of years is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches alone.
The relevant observations of the Court are as hereunder :  "Having heard both sides we are satisfied that the writ petition was wrongly entertained and allowed by the Single Judge and, therefore, the judgments of the Single Judge and the Division Bench have both to be set aside.
The undisputed facts appearing from the record are alone sufficient to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of laches because the grievance was made by BS Bajwa and BD Gupta only in 1984 which was long after they had entered the department in 1971-72.
During this entire period of more than a decade they were all along treated as junior to the other aforesaid persons and the rights inter se had crystallised which ought not to have been re- opened after the lapse of such a long period."
4.
I thus do not find any ground to interfere in the judgment and decree of the courts below.
No substantial question of law arises for consideration in this Regular Second Appeal.
The same is therefore dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.