MM Kumar, J (Oral) - The husband of the petitioner was appointed as Conductor by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Panipat, vide order dated 1751995 on contractual basis.
His services were regularised on 1651997.
A copy of the order of appointment and a copy of the order of regularisation have been placed on record as Annexures P-1 and P-2.
On 1441999, when he was on duty and travelling in the bus of the respondent Roadways, some dacoits, who were also travelling in the bus, threatened the passengers to hand over their valuable, cash and ornaments to them.
The husband of the petitioner resisted the onslaught unleashed by the dacoits and challenged the dacoits when they started robbing the passengers.
As a consequence he was shot dead by the robbers.
The recommendations which were made by the General Manager in his letter dated 2961999 (P-3), certifying the aforementioned facts and recommending the case of the petitioner for appointment as a Clerk, deserve pointed attention and the same reads as under :-  "It is also clarified that a widow cannot be appointed against the post of clerk under the Govt. instructions but Late Sh. Rakesh Kumar conduct No. 177 laid his life on 1441999.
When the robbers begin robbing the passengers, then he challenged them and resultantly the robbers shot him.
In this way Late Sh. Rakesh Kumar, Conductor No. 177 had not bothered about his life and scuffled with them and laid his life in that scuffling.
Thus, keeping in view the above situation, you are hereby request (requested ?)
to give appointment to Smt. Santosh Kumari in any of the department of Haryana Government by giving relaxation in the rules at the earliest possible."
2.
The respondents, however, declined the request made by the petitioner even for grant of ex gratia financial assistance of Rs. 2,50,000/- vide order dated 1462004 passed by General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Panipat and the same reads as under :-  "In this connection, you are informed that regular service of your husband Sh. Rakesh Kumar was less than three years, so under rules you cannot be given Rs. 25 lac as financial assistance."
The respondents have also declined her request for appointment under the ex gratia scheme on 1092003 (P-5) and the order is as under :  "In reference to the subject cited above, you are informed that State Government has framed new Rules of ex gratia scheme on 3132003.
Under these rules, it is stipulated that all the pending cases are to be decided under these rules.
Under the new rules, the waiting list shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of the death of the employee.
If the dependent of the deceased is not appointed within 3 years according to the waiting list, then the validity of the list shall lapse after three years.
Your name is in the waiting list and three years has lapsed.
Thus your name from the waiting list has been struck off automatically.
Under the new rules, if the dependent has not offered the job because of non-availability of the post, then financial assistance of Rs. 25 lacs is to be paid to the dependant.
In this regard you submit your option as post cannot be offered to you because non-availability of the post.
Thus if, you are willing to take Rs. 25 lacs, then send your option within one month so that financial assistance may be released.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents the stand taken is that the service rendered by the husband of the petitioner was less than three years which dis-entitles her to claim compassionate appointment by virtue of Rule 3(d) of the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of Deceased Employees Rules, 2003 (for brevity `the 2003 Rules').
It is, however, admitted that husband of the petitioner.
It is appropriate to mention that the husband of the petitioner was appointed on 1751995 on contract basis and his services were regularised vide order dated 25.4.1998 w.e.f.
1651997 when he had completed two years of service.
A copy of the order has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
It is also admitted in para 6 of the written statement that the General Manager has recommended the case of the petitioner under the 2003 Rules by relaxation of any rules, if necessary or in the alternative her case was recommended for granting her ex gratia financial assistance.
Referring to Rule 8 of 2003 Rules, the respondents have asserted that no relaxation in the case of the petitioner would be permissible.
The further stand taken is that the waiting list was valid for a period of three years as is revealed after reading the order dated 1092003 (Annexure P-5).
4.
When the case came up for consideration on 24.8.2006, we had passed the following order :  "In the impugned order dated September 10, 2003 (P-5), the respondents have asserted that the waiting list was valid for a period of three years from the date of death of husband of the petitioner.
It is appropriate to mention that the husband of the petitioner died on April 14, 1999.
It has not been specified at what number the name of the petitioner had figured for appointment and how many posts on compassionate grounds were filled up from the aforementioned list per year.
Let the record concerning the years 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002 be produced, leading to the deletion of the name of the petitioner from the waiting list after a period of three years.
List again on September 1, 2006.
Copy of the order be given dasti to the learned State counsel for onward transmission to the respondents, under the signatures of the Court Secretary."
5.
On 1.9.2006 the seniority list was placed on record but no details were forthcoming.
After referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) S.C.T.
174 : 1994(3) SCC 138 we had asked the learned State counsel to place on record the seniority list of beneficiaries under ex gratia scheme and the aforementioned order reads as under :  "Learned State counsel has placed on record a seniority list of beneficiary/applicants under ex gratia scheme for Class IV appointments.
The list does not disclose as to how ex gratia appointments are being made and how percentage of posts after the judgment of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) SCT 174 : 1994(4) SCC 138., in restricting such like appointments only to 5% of the total posts in a particular year, has been worked out.
The list also does not disclose the scheme for Class III appointments and as to whether any names have been deleted from the list on the basis of 2003 rules, which stipulate deletion after 3 years.
Learned State counsel requests for some more time to file a detailed comprehensive affidavit regarding the whole scheme of compassionate appointment with the supporting documents.
Let the needful be done within two weeks and the record be also kept ready for the perusal of the Court.
The list produced is taken on record as Mark A Adjourned to 22.9.2006.
Copy of the order be given to the learned State counsel under the signatures of the Bench Secretary."
6.
In pursuance to our order dated 1.9.2006 the learned State counsel has filed an affidavit of Shri M Ram Shekhar, Transport Commissioner, Haryana.
In para 2 of the affidavit it has been pointed out that after the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal (supra), the Chief Secretary, Haryana, issued a Memo No. 16/5/95-6GSII dated 851995 (Annexure R-1).
The instructions were further clarified when another letter was issued by the Chief Secretary on 3181995 (Annexure R-2).
It has been asserted that as per instructions, seniority list for Class III and IV categories was prepared on the basis of date of death.
The appointments were to be made on compassionate grounds keeping in view the educational qualifications and seniority as the basis.
The widow of Class IV employee could be considered for the post of Peon only as she could not be given appointment on the post of Chowkidar, Washing Boy etc. where only the male persons were to be given appointment by keeping in view the nature of the job.
It was further clarified vide instructions dated 722001 that the dependents of drivers, clerks and constables were to be given class IV posts only and the names of the dependents of these categories were also included in the waiting list.
A copy of the aforementioned instructions dated 722001 has been placed on record as Annexure R-3.
It is categorically stated that there was no reservation of 5 per cent out of the total posts in a particular year in the instructions issued on 722001.
However, these instructions were replaced by the 2003 Rules (Annexure R-4).
The aforementioned rules have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution.
The rules have been made applicable to all pending cases.
According to the averments made in para 4 of the additional affidavit the entire position with regard to grant of compassionate appointment was reviewed and it was found that the department had earlier given appointment over and above 5 per cent quota stipulated in the 2003 rules.
A comparative chart showing the details of vacancies which have occurred and filled by making compassionate appointment has been placed on record without mentioning the year-wise break up.
The names of 42 applicants are stated to have been deleted and sent back to the concerned General Manager of the Haryana Roadways for making the payment of financial assistance under the 2003 Rules.
Referring to the case of the petitioner it has been accepted that her name was kept on the waiting list at serial No. 248 it was down below as 145 more persons figured over and above the name of the petitioner.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that despite granting time to the respondents on three occasions namely 24.8.2006, 1.9.2006 and 22.9.2006 no details have been furnished as to how 5 per cent of the total posts in a particular year have been allocated for compassionate appointment.
It appears to us that the ceiling of 5 per cent has not been followed by the respondent-State till the 2003 rules were made applicable.
It is for this reason that in para 2 of the affidavit it has been categorically conceded "that there was no restriction in such like appointments upto 5 per cent of the total posts in a particular year in the said instructions, the condition stipulated in the subsequent amended instructions".
Therefore, no restriction of making appointment on compassionate basis was imposed till the Rules in the year 2003 were framed.
It is further evident that for that reason no break up of vacancies year-wise could be placed on record by the respondents and only a comparative chart (Annexure R-5) has been furnished.
A reference to the averments made in para 4 of the additional affidavit to this chart does not disclose any definite stand showing that any exercise has been undertaken for allocation of 5 per cent of posts year-wise in the respondent department.
We are further of the view that a widow has been waiting for the compassionate appointment who has been suddenly pushed to grave financial crises since 1999 and her claim has been tossed around for unwarranted reasons.
Apart from the fact that husband of the petitioner had died in harness he had shown exemplary courage demonstrating highest regard to his duties.
He died while scuffling with robbers in order to safeguard the travelling public and the public property which is one of the fundamental duties as envisaged by Article 51(A)(i) of the Constitution.
He could have like others allowed the robbers to continue their nefarious activities and could have saved his life by keeping quiet like many others.
However, he challenged the robbers and met his death at their hands.
We are of the view that the case of the petitioner should have been considered in the light of the earlier instructions which were prevalent and applicable on 1441999 when the husband of the petitioner had died.
Accordingly, the instructions dated 851995 as clarified on 3151995 (Annexures R-1 and R-2) are held applicable to her case.
According to the instructions ex gratia appointment is to be offered only on Class III and IV posts and should be atleast one step lower than the post held by the deceased employee.
If the income of the applicant is Rs. 2,500/- pm or more from all sources then such a candidate was not to be eligible.
If the spouse of the deceased employee was in government employment it was not to be a bar to the dependent of the deceased from seeking employment if other conditions of eligibility are fulfilled.
The dependent was required to apply within a period of three years from the date of death.
The expression `dependent' has also been defined to include his or her spouse and unmarried children.
The cases of ex gratia employment are required to be processed within three months and in cases of Class IV posts provision of relaxation in qualification has also been made provided it does not impinge upon the performance of the duties.
However, on 3181995 some further conditions were imposed by issuing instructions (Annexure R-2).
An undertaking is required to be obtained from the married dependents which is further required to be attested by two respectable members of the society.
If no Class III or IV post is available within the department for offering appointment under the ex gratia scheme then the head of the department was to take up the matter of such an applicant for appointment with other department.
A quarterly report and seniority list was required to be maintained by every head of the department.
It was categorically laid down that no subsequent case of ex gratia appointment was to be considered in preference to earlier case.
8.
When the case of the petitioner is examined in the light of the policy/instructions dated 851995 as clarified on 3181995 it becomes evident that the petitioner is eligible because after examining all the aspects the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Panipat had recommended her case on 2961999 which was immediately after the death of her husband Rakesh Kumar who had died on 1441999.
He was the only bread earner of the family and there is no other source of income with the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner deserved to be given Class III and IV post according to her qualification.
9.
The argument of the learned State counsel based on Rule 9(b) of the 2003 Rules does not require any detailed consideration because firstly the 2003 Rules as such would not apply to the case of the petitioner.
Moreover, this case presents extra-ordinary facts where the husband of the petitioner has died while braving the onslaught of robbers and dacoits.
On the excuse that the petitioner did not render three years regular service, her case cannot be rejected by invoking 2003 Rules.
Even otherwise, we have interpreted Rule 3(d)(ii) of the 2003 Rules to mean that the deceased employee should have served the government atleast for a period of three years.
In Kumari Bandana Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 2006(3) SCT 619 (DB) (P&H) : CWP No. 13465 of 2005, decided on 152006, the argument sought to be raised now that three years period should be spent on regular post was rejected by adopting liberal construction keeping in view the socio-economic nature of the 2003 Rules.
In the present case, the petitioner was appointed on 1751995 and his services were regularised on 1651997.
He died on 1441999.
It is thus obvious that he has rendered more than three years service as per the requirements of Rule 9(d)(ii) of the rules.
Therefore, the argument in any case is liable to be rejected.
For the reasons aforementioned this petition succeeds and the respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner on a suitable post within a period of one month from the date a certified copy of this order is served on respondents.
The case be listed again on 28.11.2006.
A copy of the order be given dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.