The petitioner, through the instant petition, has invoked the extra ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution seeking quashment of order dated 16.5.2001 (Annexure P-5) vide which his services were terminated so also the order dated 212002 (Annexure P-10) passed by respondent No. 1, refusing reference of industrial dispute raised by him to the Labour Court with a further prayer of his re-instatment with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The facts, as emerged out from the petition, are that the petitioner joined the respondent No. 2 at its Branch Office i.e. respondent No. 3, as Chemist and was accordingly issued appointment letter dated 25.11.1981 (Annexure P-1), which was subsequently renewed vide letter dated 2221982 (Annexure P-2).
The services of the petitioner were confirmed on 471982 vide Annexure P-3 and thereafter he was promoted from time to time to the posts of Senior Chemist, Asstt.
Technical Officer and Technical Officer.
The petitioner was lastly promoted as Assistant Manager in the year 1997 but, as alleged by him, he did not perform any work in Supervisory, Managerial or Administrative capacity.
It has been further asserted that on 412001 the petitioner proceeded on leave and when he reported back, he was not allowed to join his duties, without assigning any reason.
The petitioner was issued letter dated 1042001 with regard to his absence, which he replied vide Annexure P-4.
The services of the petitioner were terminated vide order dated 16.5.2001.
At that time he was drawing a salary of Rs. 7,703/- per month.
Thereafter he served a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for brevity, the Act) on 962001, upon the respondents.
Reconciliation proceedings between the petitioner and respondents No. 2 and 3 were carried out by the Labour Commissioner-cum-Conciliation Officer, Hoshiarpur, but yielded no result.
It has further been asserted that the Labour Commissioner instead of referring the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication, rejected the demand notice of the petitioner vide order dated 212002 (Annexure P-10) on the ground that the petitioner does not fall within the definition of "workman" as specified in Section 2(s) of the Act.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner has preferred the instant writ petition.
3.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 filed joint reply.
The stand taken is that the petitioner absented himself from duty from 412001, without prior permission or sanction of the competent authority and when the petitioner failed to comply with the letters written by answering respondents to him to resume his work, finding no other alternative, his services were terminated vide order dated 16.5.2001, as per clause 6-A of his appointment letter, after complying with all the necessary requirements.
The petitioner had also received Rs. 92,996/- from the respondents on account of full and settlement of all his dues including gratuity.
Since the petitioner was drawing wages in excess of Rs. 1,600/- and was performing his duties, as a managerial staff and not as a technically skilled worker, at the time of his termination, his demand notice was rightly rejected by the Government.
Thus, dismissal of the petition has been sought.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner was an Assistant Manager at the time of termination of his service, but he had never preformed the duties which were Supervisory, Managerial or Administrative in nature and that respondent No. 1 has erred in considering that the petitioner does not fall with the definition of "workman", as provided in Section 2(s) of the Act and to decline to make a reference of dispute to the Labour Court.
It has also been contended that respondent No. 1 is not to delve into the merits of the case and it was obligatory on its part to refer the dispute to the Labour Court.
5.
On the contrary, the argument is that the said orders dated 16.5.2001 and 212002 have been rightly passed.
6.
The question involved is whether the petitioner falls within the definition of workman as contained in Section 2(s) of the Act ?
No doubt in deciding about the status of an employee, his designation alone cannot be said to be decisive and what really should go into consideration is the nature of his duties and the powers conferred upon as well as functions assigned to him.
It is the predominant nature of the services that will be the true and proper test.
The onus is on the petitioner to establish that he was not performing the duties which were Supervisory, Managerial or Administrative in nature.
In the instant case, the petitioner was to work in chemical lab when he was initially appointed as a Chemist.
The petitioner gained promotions i.e. from Chemist to Senior Chemist, then to Assistant Technical Officer, Technical Officer and than as Assistant Manager in the year 1997.
It cannot be accepted that the petitioner after attaining the responsible post like of Assistant Manager and admittedly drawing salary of Rs. 7,703/- supposed to work on the post of Chemist, on which he was initially appointed.
The petitioner, in his petition, has also not taken any plea of having worked in the chemical lab after having promoted as Assistant Manager.
Thus, there is nothing to suggest that the duties discharged by him were not of Supervisory, Managerial or Administrative in nature.
The petitioner, being Assistant Manager and drawing salary exceeding Rs. 1,600/- per month, in our view, does not fall within the definition of the workman, as contained in Section 2(s) of the Act.
There is also no dispute that the appropriate government is not to delve deep into the merits of the case at the time of making reference to the Labour Court, but at the same time it cannot act as a post office and certainly prima facie go into the merits of the dispute for the purpose to find out whether the government should make the reference or not ?
In the backdrop of the facts, the petitioner since was an Assistant Manager, drawing salary of Rs. 7,703/- which exceeds Rs. 1,600/- per month, we are of the view that respondent No. 1 has acted in a right perspective and it cannot be said that the order dated 212002 was passed without application of mind or the same is perverse.
In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.