TS Doabia, J - Disability pension has been declined to the petitioners in the two petitions which are being adjudicated upon.
It is this action of the Union of India through the Ministry of Defence, which is being challenged by prefering the writ petitions.
Respondents have taken stand that disability pension has been declined as the disability said to suffered by the petitioner, was not on account of any exceptional circumstances or on account of stress and strain or factors related to Army service.
Facts in brief are as under:  OWP-704 of 1992, Amrik Singh versus Union of India and others.
2.
The petitioner came to be enrolled in the Indian Army as Gunner on 23rd of May 1975.
He was allocated 31 Medium Artillery Regiment.
In the course of performance of his duties he was injured.
This injury was suffered when he was loading petroleum and lubricants in the field area on 15th of Februry, 1981.
Second Metatarcal Hoderately was fractured.
This factor stands mentioned in Annexure-P/1.
The petitioner was thereafter boarded out of service.
The date of discharge is 16th of August 1983.
He was not paid any pension in terms of Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations.
Petitioner has filed this petition claiming pension.
He submits :  (a) He has suffered permanent disability on account of an injury suffered during the course of active military duty.
The injury was on account of the fact that a drum full of petroleum products fell on him.
He sustained injuries stipulated in Annexure P-1.
(b) The injuries were suffered in field area.
(c) The pensioning authority could not reject the claim without hearing the petitioner.
3.
The respondents have filed the objections.
It is stated that the petitioner was invalidated out of service due to a malady described as "Neurosis 300".
The Board constituted for the purpose came to the conclusion that the disability did aggravate due to stress and strain of military service.
This disablement was assessed at 20% for the duration of two years.
The pension was declined as the Pension Sanctioning Authority negatived the recommendation made by army unit to which the petitioner was attached.
What was stated in paras 3, 5 and 10 of objections are relevant.
These read as under :-  "That in reply to para 3, of the petition, it is submitted that the decision of CCDA (Pensions), Allahabad was communicated to the individual vide.
Arty.
Records Registered Letter No: 1266461/DP-23602/NE dated 231283, copy of which is enclosed herewith as Annexure `B' at this present address with an advice that if he was not satisfied with the decision of CCDA (Pensions) Allahabad, he may prefer against the rejection of his disability pension claim to Government of India, Ministry of Defence (Pension-A) within 6 months from 2.12.83.
But the individual did not prefer any appeal against the rejection of his disability pension within the stipulated period to Government of India, Ministry of Defence (Pension-A)."
"That in reply to para 5 of the petition, it is submitted that the petitioner had sustained injuries during his military service is not disputed; but later on he was also upgraded to Medical Category AYE which goes to prove that the affect of the injury was no more existing and he was fit to perform all types of duties being in medical category `AYE'.
He was actually invalided out of service on account of invaliding disability `Neurosis 300,."
"That no comments are offered to para 10 of the petition.
It is, however, submitted that as per regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army (1961) Part-I, disability pension is granted to an individual provided his invaliding disability is viewed as attributable to or aggravated by military service and the % age of disablement is accepted at 20% or above by the competent Pension Sanctioning authority i.e. CCDA (Pensions), Allahabad in consultation with their medical advisers on pension and who is also the competent authority on behalf of Goverenment of India, Ministry of Defence (Pension-A).
In the instant case, the invaliding disability viz "Neurosis 300" (not on account of injuries as mentioned in the writ petition) from which the individual had suffered during his military service and on which his disability pension claim was based, was viewed as neither attributable to nor aggravated by the military service and has no relevance with the performance of military duties.
Therefore, the petitioner is not eligible for disability pension.
Invalid and death-cum-retirement gratuities admissible to the petitioner under the provisions of Special Army Instruction 12/S/64 and 8/S/70 have already been paid to him.
4.
This the claim of the petitioner though forwarded by the Unit stands negatived by the Controller of Defence Account.
This is being challenged in this petition.
OWP 1073 of 1993, Col. ML sethi versus Union of India and others.
5.
Petitioner joined the Armed forces as an emergency commissioned Officer in the year 1963.
He was granted permanent Commission in the year 1965.
This officer saw action in a war against Pakistan in the year 1965.
For his act of bravery during the Indo-Pak war of 1971, the petitioner is said to have received gallantry award also.
The petitioner submits that at the time of enrolment he was physically fit, but on account of stress and strains of army service he suffered heart problem necessitating by-pass surgery at Jaslok Hospital Bombay.
The petitioner came to be placed in Low Medical category.
In the year 1987, the petitioner was placed in the category "P3 temporary".
Because disability was attributed to "aggravated stress and strain of service conditions" the petitioner was awarded medical category as "EEE Permanent".
The specialists and Senior Advisor in Medicine granted disability to the extent of 50%.
This was however, was later on reduced to 40% by a Board constituted by the respondent authorities.
It is this aspect of the matter and ultimate denial of disability pension which is being challenged in this writ petition.
In nut-shell the petitioner states :  (i) That on account of stress and strains of service, the petitioner suffered disability and disability was found to be 50% by the Senior Advisor in Medicine.
Reliance is being placed on Annexures P-3, P-4, P-5 and P-6 in this regard.
(ii) That later on disability was reduced from 50% to 40%.
The board constituted for the purpose gave no reason as to how this disability is being reduced.
(iii) This disability was suffered on account of Commanding Units in the operational areas in the state of Jammu and Kashmir from 1983 to 1986.
(iv) That the President of the Board who assessed a lower disability never examined the petitioner and did not examine the relevant record.
6.
The respondents have taken a stand that dis-ability on which reliance is being placed by the petitioner is a constitutional disease un-connected with stress and strains of military service.
It is further submitted that disability of 40% for two years was not acceptable to the pensioning authority and disability pension was rightly declined by the Ministry of Defence.
A letter dated 14th June, 1993 was issued.
It is further stated that the petitioner was posted in peace area in the year 1987.
It is accordingly sought to be contended that the stand taken by the petitioner that he suffered disability on account of stress, strains and hazards of army service is incorrect.
7.
The relevant regulation under which disability pension is allowed is Regulation 173.
This Regulation reads as under :-  "Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributed to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or above.
The question whether a disability is attributed to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rule in Appendix II.
As per Appendix `2' individual who at the time of his release under the release Regulations is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalided from service.
JCOs/ORs/NCs(E) who are placed permanently in a medical category other than (A) and are discharged because no alternative employment suitable to their low medical category can be provided as well as those who having been retained in alternative employment but are discharged before the completion of their engagement will be deemed to have invalided out of service.
(2) Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to military service provided it is certified that -  (a) the disablement is due to wound, injury of disease which:-  (i) is attributable to military service; or  (ii) existed before or arose during military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby;  (b) the death was due to or hastened by-  (i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributed to military service, or  (ii) the aggravation by military service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during military service.
Note:- The rule also covers cases of death, discharge/invaliding from service.
(3) There must be a casual connection between disablement or death and military service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
(4) In deciding on the issue of entitlement all the evidence both direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt will be given to the claimant.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
8.
The question as to whether the case of the petitioners is covered by Regulation 173 or not be now examined.
9.
Judicial precedents on the subject are clear.
If disability is attributable to service hazards, then petitioner would be entitled to pension in terms of Regulation referred to above.
As a matter of fact, the argument raised is that if as the disability which led to the officer concerned being discharged from service is attributable to service hazards, the benefit of disabity pension has to be given to him.
For this as per the petitioners the service record has to be examined.
If at the time of enrolment or initial induction there is no mention made of the fact that the concerned officer was suffering from any disability then, it can be presumed that disability occurred on account of stress and strains of the army service.
It is only when there was some disability in existance at the time of joining service, a ground can be made to decline pension.
10.
Some of the judicial precedents in this regard be noticed :  11.
In Union of India v. Bodan Lal Yadav, 1994(1) SCT 369.
A sepoy of the Indian Army was recommended category "EEE".
The exact report which was given, is as under :-  "This is a case of personality disorder.
This variant of personality shows a blending of aggression and inadequacy.
He is ambitious, competitive, demands special attention and has grandiose fantasies.
On the other hand he gets easily frustrated and has a proclivity towards depression.
He has failed in emotional, social and occupational adjustment.
He is a mentally sick soldier and has lost adequate military value.
Recommended Category 'EEE'."
12.
The disability was assessed at 20%.
The Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court came to the conclusion that the disability which led to the person concerned being discharged from service was clearly attributable to service hazards.
The observations made in this regard are as under :-  "A plain reading of this provision would show that the case of disability which led to the person concerned being discharged from service will be deemed to have arisen in service, if no note of it was made at the time of his entry in the armed forces that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined service."
13.
In Gurdas Singh v. Union of India, 1994(2) SCT 298, the opinion expressed was to the same effect.
It was observed that as the Union of India was not in a position to show that the disease alleged to have acquired by the petitioner in the above case was not attributable to army service and as the writ petitioner was able to show that he was hale and hearty at the time he joined the army service and remained as such during the said service when he was periodically checked up, it was held that he would be entitled to disability pension.
The disability in the above case was assessed at 50%.
In the above case reference was made to another unreported Division Bench Judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in case CWP No. 162 of 1991 titled Sardara Singh v. Union of India.
The relevant observations made by the Division Bench in the above case are being reproduced below:-  "Since the petitioner had admittedly suffered disability during the service career, the rejection of his claim on the ground that disability is not attributable to military service or that it did not fulfil the requisite condition that if had remained aggravated by military service cannot be sustained.
The disability being attributable to military service, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of disability pension as contemplated under the rules.
His claim was, therefore, wrongly rejected by the respondent."
14.
Wing Comdr.
RL Sharma v. Union of India, 1994(4) SCT 268 is another decision where disability was 20%.
The decision taken by the Controller of the Defence (Pension) refusing disability pension was found not to be not sustainable.
It was observed that if opinion of Board was to be overruled then cogent reasons were required to be given and the procedure in these circumstances should have been to refer the person concerned for examination by a fresh medical board for his assessment in terms of relevant instructions which were referred to in the judgment.
15.
In Anil Kumar Mishra v. Union of India, 1996(3) SCT 778, the writ petitioner was medically fit at the time of recruitment.
Later in the course of service he developed some physical problems.
Disability so indicated was held to be suffered on account of stress and strains of military service and during the course of service.
View expressed was that in case no mention is made regarding disability at the time of enrolement in service, then it can safely be presumed that the disability occurred on account of stress and strains of army service.
To the same effect is another Division Bench Judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court, reported as Ashwani Kumar v. Union of India, 1996(4) SCT 154.
It was observed that disability due to which the petitioner has been boarded out from service, would be deemed to have suffered during the course of service and would be attributable to military service.
This would be more so if no mention of disease is indicated in the record prepared at the time of initial induction in service.
16.
In the decision of Punjab and Haryana High Court reported in 1997(3) SCT 414 in case titled Gurdip Singh v. Union of India, the writ petitioner was held entitled to disability pension.
The plea taken by Union of India that there was inordinate delay in filing the writ petition was rejected, by making following observation :-  "..........It would be grossly unfair if the Government is permitted to take advantage of the situation in which the employee is placed and his claim for pension was to be rejected only on the ground of delay.
In fact, this court has already taken that view.
Reference in this behalf may be made in Sardara Singh v. Union of India, 1992(6) SLR 683.
It was held as under :- "It is no doubt correct that the petitioner has filed the writ petition after a lapse of almost 40 years.
A perusal of the order, quoted above, however, shows that the petitioner had been regularly representing to the authorities and his claim was declined only on the ground that the disability was not attributable to or aggravated by military service.
This being factually incorrect, we have no alternative but to quash the order.
Furthermore in the circumstances of the case and more particularly the continuing disability (sic) delay in approaching the court even in the matter of pension cannot completely defeat his claim.
We consider it to be in the interest of justice to allow his claim for the payment of pension.
However, on account of delay, we decline the petitioner's prayer for the payment of interest."
The above view has the imprimatur of their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
In SR Bhanrale v Union of India and others.
AIR 1997 SC 27 : 1996(4) SCT 573, it was held that when the department itself had defaulted in making payments in spite of demands made by the employee, it could not plead the bar of limitation.
Consequently, the plea of delay raised on behalf of the respondents cannot be sustained.
It is rejected."
17.
In Ex. Sub.
Baljor Singh v. Union of India, 1997(4) SCT 599, the Army Personnel was placed in low medical category (permanent).
His leg was amputated.
He was not given disability pension but was retained in service in public interest.
The army personnel faced difficulty in performance of his duties on account of amputation.
He made a request that he be discharged on medical ground.
It was held by the Division Bench that the writ petitioner would be entitled to disability pension and the mere fact that he had made requests to the authorities for discharge would not be sufficient to deny his claim.
18.
Allahabad High Court has expressed similar opinion in the case reported as Ram Niwas v. Union of India, 1997(4) SCT 47.
The Court took note of the decision reported as Gurdas Singh v. Union of India (supra) and came to the conclusion as the respondents were not in a position to show that the disease alleged to have been acquired by the writ petitioner, was not attributable to army service, the writ petition was held entitled to disability pension.
19.
In N/k Sandu Singh v Union of India, 1995(3) SCT 242, the writ petitioner was a heavy weight boxer.
He had represented services at different levels in the sports events.
During the course of strenuous training he complained pain in his chest.
This according to the petitioner was on account of blows which he had received during his sports career in army as boxer.
There was no suggestion in the written statements filed by the respondents that the disability was caused by any factor other than injury during practice session.
In these circumstances the petitioner was held entitled to disability pension.
20.
An army officer while undergoing recruitment training was granted 15 days causal leave to proceed to his home town at public expense.
While travelling in train he sustained crush injury in the train accident.
He was found to be not fit for service and was invalidated out of service.
The Madhya Pradesh High Court came to the conclusion that such an officer would be entitled to disability pension as he would be deemed to have been injured while on duty.
See Shashi Kumar Mishra v. Union of India, 1996(3) SCT 441.
Reliance was placed on the decision reported as Harbans Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1971 Delhi 227 and a Division Bench Judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Chhatru Ram v.
Secy., Defence, 1991(1) SCT 316.
21.
A sepoy was invalidated out of service on the ground that he was suffering from neurosis and epilepsy.
No finding was recorded by the Medical Board that this disease existed at the time of entry into service.
The army personnel was held entitled to disability pension which was assessed at 20% in the case of Ex-Sepoy Hoshiar Singh v. Union of India, 1996(2) SCT 87.
22.
Reference was also made to the decision reported as RL Sharma v. Union of India, 1994(4) SCT 268 and Munshi Ram v. Union of India, 1996(2) R.S.J 705 : 1994(2) SCT 693.
Relying upon the aforementioned decision the petitioner Harbhajan Singh was held entitled to disability pension.
23.
In Ashwani Kumar Ex-Havaldar v. Union of India, 1996(4) SCT 154 the concerned army personnel was held to be entitled to disability pension when there was nothing in the record prepared at the time of enrolment that he was suffering from any ailment.
In this case the disability has arisen on account of disease indicated as Hypertension.
24.
In Ex-Capt.
Harbhajan Singh v. Secy.
Ministry of Defence, 1996(4) SCT 222, the disability was due to exposure to blasts during field firing.
This was held attributable to military service.
In the aforementioned case reference was made to an unreported judgment of Supreme Court of India in Ex-Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, CA 164/1993 decided on 1411993.
25.
The relevant para in which reference is made to the above judgment and other judgments is as under :-  "In support of his contention learned counsel relied upon Wing Commander RL Sharma (Retd.)
v. Union of India through Secretary Ministry of Defence, Govt of India, New Delhi and Ors, 1994(4) SCT 268 (P&H) : 1994(4) R.S.J.
107 and Munshi Ram v. Union of India and others, 1996(2) RSJ 705 a Division Bench Judgment of Himachal Pradesh High Court as also a judgment of the Apex Court in Ex. Sapper Mohiner Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 rendered on January 14, 1993."
After noting the above judgments it was held:  "For the foregoing reasons I allow this writ petition and quash the decision of the respondents whereby the disability of the petitioner was reduced from 20%.
He is held entitled to disability pension from the date of his release on the basis of 20% disability.
The respondents shall make the payment of the arrears of pension to the petitioner within a period of four months from the receipt of copy of this order from this court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner whichever is earlier.
If the payment is not made as aforesaid the petitioner would be entitled to interest 12% per annum on the arrears from the date they became due till the date of payment.
The current pension be paid to the petitioner as per Disbility Pension Rules."
26.
The view of this Court is also the same effect.
See Manjit Singh v. Union of India, 1997 KLJ 179.
In the above case it was observed:  "In the circumstances it is not difficult to gather that petitioner's disease, whatever name was given to it, was not noticed at the time of his enrolement in the service, nor was the disease such as was incapable of being noticed by the medical experts."
27.
A decision where disability pension was disallowed because the concerned employee was suffering from disease at the time of induction and that as that as this fact was noticed in the service record, is reported in 1992(2) SCT 196, Darshan Singh v. Union of India.
28.
From the judicial precedents referred to above it can safely be concluded:-  (i) That in case no mention is made regarding the disease or disablement at the time of entry in service, then it is to be presumed that the disability occurred during the course of service.
(ii) The disability was on account of stress and strains of army service.
(iii) If competent authority is to disagree with the finding recorded by the medical board vis-a-vis the disability or the percentage thereof, the matter should be referred to the Medical Board.
(iv) Delay in approaching the Court is irrelevant.
29.
In the M.L Sethi's case, the petitioner has been able to prove that he was hale and hearty at the time, he was granted commission.
He has also been able to show that he suffered disability to the extent of 50%.
This was so recorded by the medical board which was constituted for the purpose.
He has also been able to show that no plausible reason was given for reducing the disability from 50% to 40%.
He has also been able to demonstrate that the President of the Board never examined him.
The factual assertion made in the writ petition in this regard have not been denied.
In Amrik Singh's case also the position is no different.
The decision given by the Controller of Defence Accounts is wholly un-understandable.
The petitioner was not suffering from any ailment.
There is no trace of this physical disablement in his service record.
As a matter of fact the army unit to which the petitioner was attached had recommended the case of the petitioner and what led to the denial is as indicated remains unexplained.
Amrik Singh petitioner is, therefore, entitled to the pension.
The net result is:  30.
The petitioner ML Sethi is found to be right in his submission that disability alleged to have occurred in his case was on account of stress and strains attributable to army service.
The petition is accordingly allowed.
The disability pension to the petitioner be allowed by assessing the disability at 50%.
31.
Amrik Singh petitioner is also held entitled to disability pension calculated at 20%.
32.
The petitioners are also held entitled to interest.
The rate of interest would be 12%.
Let the requisite claim be settled within a period of three months.
The period of three months would commence from the date, copy of the order passed by this court is made available to the respondent.
If for any reason it is not possible to settle the claim of the petitioners within stipulated period, then the respondents would be at liberty to seek extension of time but in that eventuality the respondents would have to explain each and every day's delay and the rate of interest would be 15%.
Petition allowed.