MM Kumar, J - The prayer made in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is for issuance of direction to the respondents to release proportionate pension to the petitioner from 121997 till date alongwith interest @ 12 percent pa.  2.
The petitioner was enrolled as a Washerman in the Border Security Force and was allotted regimental No. 794440002.
He is asserted to have resigned in pursuance to the instructions dated 2761997 (Annexure P.1).
The afore- mentioned instructions contemplate grant of pensionary benefits under Rule 19 of Border Security Force Rules, 1969 (for brevity 'the Rules') even in cases where an employee has resigned under specified conditions.
A copy of the resignation letter dated 2.12.1996 has been placed on record as Annexure P2.
However, on 20101998, the petitioner was asked to report back for duty because no pensionary benefits were admissible for the personnel who have resigned under the 1969 Rules.
The petitioner was communicated that for reinstatement he has to refund all payments made by the Government to him such as GPF, Gratuity, CGEGIS after he tendered the resignation.
The petitioner expressed his inability to repay the amount which was released to him after his resignation in the form of G.P.F., Gratuity, CGEGIS etc.
He requested vide his letter dated 1111998 (Annexure P.4) that he may be permitted to join without insisting on the afore-mentioned payments.
His request for relaxation from making re-payment of financial dues was rejected and he was reminded by various letters to report back for duty if he was keen.
A copy of the letter dated 661999 (Annexure P.5) shows various letters sent to the petitioner.
3.
Shri Ravi Badyal, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the right of the petitioner to earn pension has been defeated on account of change in provisions and their resiling from the promise given to the petitioner for grant of pension.
According to the learned counsel in such like cases principle of equitable estoppel would be attracted as the petitioner has changed his position to his detriment after resigning and the financial benefits paid to him have been exhausted which could not be repaid to the respondents in accordance with the directions issued vide letter dated 20101998 (Annexure P.3) and subsequent letters.
He has also placed reliance on a judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar v. Union of India, 2006(1) SCT 456 : JT 2006(1) SC 49 (Annexure P.7) and has asserted that his case is covered by category (B)(ii) as per the judgement.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel we are of the view that the right of the petitioner to earn pension has been decided against him by the Supreme Court in Raj Kumar's case (supra).
A perusal of the conclusion in respect of category (B)(ii) of the judgement of the Supreme Court would show that persons who had retired subsequent to 1996 and have not been granted pension they would necessarily forfeit their pension if they have not reported for service in pursuance to the circular dated 17101998.
The observations of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in this regard read as under :  "The personnel falling in category (B)(ii) i.e. those persons who had retired subsequent to 1996 pursuant to the circular dated 27.10.1995 and had not been sanctioned pension, but who have been directed to report for re- induction in service shall necessarily have to forfeit their pension, if they have not reported for service by virtue of the circular dated17101998.
If however, they have reported for service then there is no question of any relief in their case."
We are further of the view that refunding the financial benefits to the respondents, which were received by the petitioner, was sine qua non for earning the right to re-induction into service.
The afore-mentioned condition has not been fulfilled.
Therefore, no question of arbitrariness would arise.
In any case, there cannot be any estoppel against a statute or statutory instructions.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has finally opined about the right of the parties as is evident from the extracted para of the judgement and inability of the officer to report back for duty has not been made dependent on any personal reasons.
The general principle has been laid down that if an officer has failed to report back for duty then he would not be entitled to earn pension.
Therefore, we are of the view that the matter is covered against the petitioner by virtue of the judgement in Raj Kumar's case (supra).
For the reasons afore-mentioned this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.