Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of a bunch of the following writ petitions since the common questions of law and facts are involved :  Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15332-CAT, 15872-CAT of 2003, 673-CAT, 1012-CAT of 2004, 19715-CAT, 19973-CAT, 19974-CAT, 19975-CAT, 19976-CAT of 2003, 5646-CAT, 5653-CAT, 5676-CAT of 2004, 20404-CAT of 2003, 343-CAT, 1734- CAT, 3261-CAT of 2004, 741-CAT of 2004, 19278-CAT of 2003, 1280-CAT, 1921-CAT 765-CAT, 243-CAT of 2004, 19277-CAT, 20372-CAT, 19473-CAT of 2003.
2.
The primary relief claimed by the petitioners is for regularisation of their services :  3.
The services of the school teachers in the education department of Chandigarh Administration are governed by Chandigarh Education Service (School Cadre) (Group `C') Recruitment Rules, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules").
Chandigarh Administration appointed School Teachers on contract basis for a specific period.
The aforesaid contract teachers appointed by the Chandigarh Administration were allowed to continue in service by the Chandigarh Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal") through various decisions till such time they are replaced by duly selected and appointed candidates in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
The District Education Officer issued an advertisement dated August 9102002.
Fresh applications were invited for appointment of school teachers on contract basis.
Since the existing contract employees were sought to be replaced with fresh contract employees, the aforesaid advertisement was challenged by a number of contract teachers, the leading case being Krishan Kumar v. Union of India, OA No. 126-CH of 2002.
The Tribunal issued the following directions :  (i) "The teachers appointed on contract basis could not be replaced or substituted by another set of contract appointees and consequently the advertisement dated 9th/10th August, 2002 issued in the name of the District Education Officer inviting applications for contractual appointment obviously to replace the earlier contractual appointees was bad in law.
(ii) All the school teachers appointed on contract basis were directed not to be replaced or substituted by new incumbents appointed on contract basis or by transferring regularly recruited teachers from one institution to another or by posting outsiders on deputation.
(iii) All the contract appointees are to continue in service till they are relieved by duly selected regular teachers appointed in accordance with the rules.
Liberty was granted to the respondents to dispense with the services of contract appointees on ground of inefficiency, delinquency, misconduct i.e. as a measure of disciplinary action or in the event of the abolition of the post.
(iv) The contract appointees were held entitled to minimum of the pay scale as admissible to the regular teachers without any deductions for the period covered by the artificial breaks or vacations.
4.
The learned Tribunal, however, made clear that the Administration would be at liberty to dispense with the service of the contract school teachers on the grounds of inefficiency, delinquency, misconduct or on the abolition of post.
The aforesaid school teachers were, however, further held entitled to minimum of the pay scales as admissible to regular teachers and no deductions were to be made for the period of artificial breaks or vacations.
5.
After the decision of the petitioner in Krishan Kumar's case (supra), the Chandigarh Administration initiated a vigorous exercise to recruit the teachers on regular basis in accordance with the Rules.
On the aforesaid exercise being undertaken by the Administration, some of the contract appointees, including the present petitioners became apprehensive that their services would be dispensed with or terminated.
Accordingly, they approached the Central Administrative Tribunal claiming regularisation of their services and for issuance of further directions that they should not be substituted by recruiting regular teachers.
6.
The claim of the aforesaid applicants was contested by the Chandigarh Administration by filing a written-statement before the Tribunal.
It was maintained that the teachers on contract basis had not been appointed by the competent authority, as per the provisions of the recruitment rules and the Chandigarh Administration has a right to recruit the teachers in the school cadre as per the aforesaid Rules, as amended from time to time.
It was further maintained by the Administration that, as held in Krishan Kumar's case (supra), the existing contract appointees would continue to work till they are relieved by duly selected teachers appointed in accordance with the Rules.
With regard to the claim made by the contract teachers that they were entitled to the minimum of the pay scale, as admissible to the regular teachers, the Administration stated that the aforesaid relief had already been granted.
7.
During the pendency of the aforesaid bunch of original applications before the Tribunal, an interim order dated March 28, 2003 was passed issuing the following directions :  "(i) The directions as given in the case of Krishan Kumar and others (supra), be complied with fully which are that already working contractual appointees, prior to advertisement, Annexure A-1, are not to be replaced by fresh contractual appointees on the basis of advertisement, Annexure A-1 (ii) Once that part, as contained in (i) above, is taken care of, and the respondents find that they are still in need of services of contractual teachers till regular appointments are made, they shall continue the teachers selected and appointed on the basis of Annexure A-1, purely on provisional and ad hoc basis, till regularly selected candidates become available on the basis of last come, first go principle strictly; and (iii) While implementing the directions given in (ii) above, we clarify that in implementation of the directions and the mandate of judgment in Krishan Kumar's case (supra) persons who were contractual teachers prior to the advertisement, Annexure A-1, shall not be thrown out merely because they have been appointed on the basis of this advertisement also.
They shall continue to get protection under the judgment in the case of Krishan Kumar and others (supra)."
8.
During the pendency of the original applications before the Tribunal, the Chandigarh Administration took another decision which was circulated through memo dated May 27, 2003 to the effect that various cadres of teachers i.e. teachers, masters/mistresses, CER teachers, PTIs, JBT Teachers and Nursery Teachers would be allowed to continue during the vacations commencing on June 1, 2003 till the posts are regularly filled up as per the relevant recruitment rules.
However, this decision was made subject to the condition that their work and conduct is satisfactory and they have efficiently performed their duties.
It was further ordered that the aforesaid policy decision would be implemented by all the institutions, where appointments on contract basis had been made.
9.
After the redressal of the main grievance of the contract teachers, only question which remained alive for determination before the Tribunal was as to whether the Chandigarh Administration could be directed to consider regularisation of the services of the contract appointees.
10.
The learned Tribunal on consideration of the facts and various circumstances of the case held that the school teachers are required to be appointed in accordance with the Rules of 1991.
However, on account of the fact that regular recruitments could not take place, there arose a necessity to appoint teachers on contract basis so that the education of the students should not suffer.
It was held that such an appointment of the contract appointees obviously was de hors the Rules of 1991.
The aforesaid appointments on contract basis had been made by way of stop-gap arrangement, which was to last in any case, till the appointment of duly selected regular teachers under the statutory rules are made.
It was also noticed that the contract teachers had not been appointed by any competent authority under the Rules; neither the procedure prescribed for selection and recruitment rules had been followed.
Accordingly, it was held that the contract appointees had not acquired any vested or indefeasible right to seek regularisation of their services.
In addition, the learned Tribunal also considered the admissibility of certain other benefits like maternity leave etc. to the contract appointees.
The aforesaid issue is not relevant to be noticed in these petitions.
11.
As a result of the consideration of the entire matter, the directions issued by the Tribunal in Krishan Kumar's case (supra) were reiterated and the matter was disposed of with certain more directions.
The direction issued by the Tribunal may be noticed as follows :  "1.
The order and the directions dated 2122002 rendered in OA No. 128-CH- 2002 (Krishan Kumar v. Union Territory and others) shall be followed and complied with by the respondents in letter and spirit.
All the contract appointees who possess the requisite minimum qualifications for the post at the time of their initial appointment shall not be replaced by any contract appointee.
Their appointment on contract basis shall, however, stand terminated or come to an end on their replacement and substitution by the teachers recruited and appointed in accordance with School Cadre Rules, 1991 as amended upto date.
The expression "duly selected teachers" shall take within its sweep these recruited by either of the three methods prescribed in the rules such as direct recruitment, promotion or by transfer on deputation within the ceiling of percentage prescribed for each category.
2.
The services of the teachers appointed on contract basis who fulfil the requisite qualifications at the time of their appointment, shall not be dispensed with merely on the ground that they fall short of the subsequently amended prescription of the educational qualifications.
3.
The respondent-administration shall have the liberty to dispense with the services of the contract appointees as a measure of disciplinary action, or for not possession the requisite qualifications as applicable at the time of selection for contract appointment, or in the event of the abolition of the post.
In the latter case i.e. abolition of the post, the services of the junior most contract appointee appearing in the consolidated seniority list (as explained hereinafter) shall be dispensed with.
4.
Each one of the contract employees appointed before or after the advertisement dated 9th/10th August, 2002 shall be entitled to minimum of the pay scale as admissible to the regular teachers and no deductions shall be made for the period of artificial breaks or vacations.
The instructions issued by the Director Public Instruction (Schools), contained in letter No. DPI-UT-S-11(186)/2002 dated 1432003 allowing a minimum pay scale as admissible to the regularly appointed teachers shall continue to be followed and implemented from the date of last continuous appointment (ignoring the artificial breaks and vacation period) after adjusting the amount already paid.
The claim for arrears etc. shall, however, be restricted to a period of eighteen months to be reckoned from the date of the filing of the OA or the date of last continuous appointment, whichever is later.
5.
Since there is one integrated cadre of the school teachers at the State level, the Director Public Instructions (Schools) shall cause to be prepared a composite list of the sanctioned posts of School teachers, subject or discipline-wise, spread over the schools under his control and administration showing the vacancies, if any, subjectwise, in each one of the schools.
Consolidated seniority list of the contract appointees manning the specified posts in different schools, shall be prepared with reference to the date of their appointment.
If there are more than one or many teachers appointed on the same date, in that event the date of birth shall determine seniority, meaning thereby who is older in age would rank senior to the younger one appointed on the same date.
These lists shall be circulated amongst all the principles of the schools for being displayed on the notice board for the information and inception of by all concerned.
This exercise must be completed within a period of two months from the date of this order.
6.
The contract appointees have no right to be regularized in service and their appointment/engagement has to come to an end no sooner they are replaced/substituted by the regularly selected teachers.
The regularly selected teachers shall be posted in the first instance against the vacancy posts.
If at all, it is necessary to relieve a contractual appointee, in that event the principle of "last come first go" or say "first come last go" shall be followed.
To clarify it further the junior-most contract appointee, regardless of the fact in which school he/she is working shall be relieved.
7.
Transfer of the school teachers as a matter of administrative expediency and exigencies of services, from one school to another, is permissible and the teacher who has been transferred or shifted from one school to another, obviously locally, has to join duties at the place of new posting soon after he/she is relieved from the earlier place of posting.
The need based transfer orders shall be passed by the competent authority only after ascertaining the vacancies and, in no case, the transferred teachers should be left in lurch.
In case he/she is not able to join the duties for any reason, which is not attributable to him/her, the period spent in between relieving and joining shall be treated as "on duty".
8.
Those contract teachers who fulfil the requisite qualifications as prescribed in the School Cadre Rules, 1991, as amended upto date, may be permitted to apply for being considered for appointment on regular basis and if they are otherwise eligible in all respects but have crossed the prescribed age limit, their cases be considered sympathetically by the competent authority for relaxation.
9.
The female teachers appointed on contract basis shall be entitled to maternity leave with pay in accordance with the rules as are applicable to the regular teachers.
10.
For the reasons stated above, the prayer of the contract teachers for regularization of the services and for restraining the respondents from continuing with the process of selection and appointment of regular teachers in accordance with the School Cadre Rules, 1991 is rejected."
The aforesaid original applicants have now approached this Court through the present bunch of writ petitions, claiming regularisation of their services.
12.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length and have also gone through the record of the case.
13.
It has also been brought on the record that the Chandigarh Administration has already undertaken the exercise for regular recruitment and some regular selections had already taken place in the months of October/November, 2003.
However, because of the interim orders passed by the Tribunal, or by this Court, staying termination of the contract employees, the aforesaid regular selectees have not been able to join their posts.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have already vehemently argued that the petitioners have already remained in service for a sufficiently long period and in that process have already gained experience.
It has also been argued that there have been no complaint of misconduct or inefficiency against the petitioners.
On that account it has been contended that since the petitioners have been working on an appointment, having been offered to them, and have dutifully performed their job, therefore, it would be wholly inequitable to throw them out at this stage, more so when they have gained sufficient experience of teaching.
15.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the Chandigarh Administration, and also the learned counsel appearing for the regular selected candidates, have opposed the payer of the petitioners.
It has been contended by the aforesaid learned counsel that the petitioners were merely appointed on contract basis, as a stop-gap arrangement.
They have merely continued on the contract employment on the strength of Krishan Kumar's case (supra) and other decisions rendered on that basis by the Tribunal or by this Court.
However, even in Krishan Kumar's case and all other similar cases it had been stipulated by the Tribunal and this Court that contract employees would not acquire any vested right to continue on the post but would always make a place for the regular selected candidates, although it was mandated that one set of contract employees would not be replaced by another set of contract employees.
16.
On that basis, learned counsel for the Chandigarh Administration has vehemently argued that the Administration is well within its rights to recruit the regular teachers in accordance with the Rules and the petitioners have neither any right to continue on the post nor there is any policy of regularisation ever framed by the Administration.
It has further been urged that the selection of the contract employees, was neither in accordance with the Rules nor by any competent authority under the Rules.
17.
We have given our thoughtful and due consideration to the rival contentions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
We have also gone through the various documents upon which the reliance has been placed by the learned counsel.
18.
At the outset, we may notice that it is the admitted position between the parties that all the petitioners had been appointed at various points of time merely on contract basis.
It was specifically provided in the appointment letters that the aforesaid arrangement on contract basis was to last for a period of six months or till the regular appointees join.
It was specifically provided in the appointment letters that such a contract employee would have no claim for ad hoc/regular appointment.
It is, thus, obvious that the services of the petitioners are governed by the terms of their appointments.
The petitioners cannot be heard to make any claim beyond the aforesaid appointment orders.
19.
We have also noticed above that the learned Tribunal had issued detailed directions Krishan Kumar's case (supra).
The interest of various contract employees has already been protected to the effect that a contract employee shall not be replaced by another contract employee.
Further a contract employee shall be allowed to continue in service till such time, a regular selected appointee joins in accordance with the Rules or till the post is abolished or declared surplus.
The aforesaid directions have been reiterated by the Tribunal while disposing of the bunch of present original applications.
However, the learned Tribunal has rightly held that the contract employees, having not been appointed through any regular process of selection or by the competent authority under the Rules, could not claim any right of regularisation.
We may also notice that primarily it was for the employer to fill up a particular post or not and the Court cannot direct an employer to fill up a particular post, simply because the post is lying vacant.
Similarly, it is the right of the employer to fill up a vacancy in accordance with Rules.
No grievance can be made against a regular selectee.
Of course in the process of regular selection, all the contract employees, who are otherwise eligible in accordance with Rules, also have a right to participate.
20.
At this stage, another grievance raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners may also be noticed.
It has been argued that with a view to deny and defeat the claim of the contract employees, the Union Territory Administration is employing a circuitious method by appointing fresh persons terming them as "guest faculty members".
Accordingly, it has been argued that on the one hand the services of the contract employees are not continued, on the pretext that the vacancies are not to be filled up on regular basis, but on the other hand fresh appointments are being made on contract basis terming the aforesaid appointees as "guest faculty members".
Some of the learned counsel for the petitioners have also contended that the abolition of a post or declaration of a said post as surplus by the Chandigarh Administration was not bona fide but was resorted to only with a view to dispense with the services of the contract employees.
21.
We have already dealt with almost identical controversy in Civil Writ Petition No. 10456/CAT/2004, decided on March 21, 2005 (Sangeeta Sharma v. Union Territory of Chandigarh and others, 2005(3) SCT 274 (P&H)).
Some of the observations made by us in the aforesaid case may be extracted as follows :  "It is not in dispute that the claim made by the petitioner through her original application was allowed by the learned Tribunal vide order dated September 26, 2003.
It is also apparent from the perusal of the aforesaid order that the petitioner, and all such persons similarly situated, would be entitled to continue on their posts till such time as duly selected lecturers join the said posts.
However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that primarily, it is for an employer to fill up a particular post or not.
The Court cannot direct an employer to fill up a particular post simply because the post is lying vacant.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the administration has taken a decision not to fill up three posts lying vacant with them.
Accordingly, the petitioner cannot be heard to make any grievance against the non-filling up the aforesaid posts and if in those circumstances she is not allowed to continue any further.
The direction contained in order dated September 26, 2003, passed by the learned Tribunal, can only operate in a situation where the vacancies are lying vacant with the department and where the department chooses to fill up the aforesaid vacancies.
It is in those circumstances that the department shall be under an obligation to continue the petitioner, and all such similarly situated persons, till the regular selectees joint their posts.
However, in a situation where the department decides not to fill up certain vacancies, the persons working on the aforesaid vacancies on contract basis cannot be heard to claim the right to continue till regular selectees join."
It was further observed by us as follows :  "We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
In our considered view, the grievance made by the petitioner against the appointment of persons as guest faculty membership basis is well founded.
The respondents cannot be permitted to substitute one set of persons by another set of persons on contractual basis alone, by terming the aforesaid appointments as "guest faculty appointments".
The aforesaid appointments may be permissible in a situation where a particular vacancy has arisen on account of a permanent employee proceeding on leave during the middle of session or in some similar situation during the course of the academic session.
However, a guest faculty appointment cannot be permitted by way of an engagement at the commencement of the session and with a view to have a lecturer for teaching students for the whole academic session.
To this extent the grievance made by the petitioner is absolutely justified.
Even otherwise from the order dated September 26, 2003 we find that the learned Tribunal had itself directed that one set of contract employees could not be substituted by another set of contract employees.
The aforesaid order has not been challenged by the Union Territory Administration at all and has attained finality.
Accordingly, we dispose of the present writ petitions with a direction to the respondents to continue the contract employees till such time, persons selected on regular basis join and in a situation where a decision has been taken not to fill up the vacancies on regular basis, it would be open for the administration not to continue the contractual employees any further.
However, in such a situation it would not be open to the Union Territory, Administration to appoint persons on guest faculty membership basis.
However, in a situation where a vacancy suddenly arises during the course of the academic session, then in such a situation the administration will be well within its rights to make a temporary arrangement of guest faculty membership by inviting applications from all eligible persons and in such a situation the petitioner shall also be considered for such appointments.
Since the current academic session is about to end, therefore, if any guest faculty members have been engaged for the current session, then they would be allowed to continue keeping in view the interest of students.
However, these directions shall be strictly followed for the ensuing session."
The aforesaid observations made in Sangeeta Sharma's case (supra) fully answer the controversy raised by the petitioners in the present cases as well.
The apprehension with regard to "guest faculty membership", should also stand rested.
The aforesaid observations fully bind the Chandigarh Administration with regard to the contract employees in the present writ petitions as well.
Thus, while declining the prayer made by the petitioners claiming regularisation of their services, we dispose of the writ petitions in the same terms as Sangeeta Sharma's case (supra).
Order accordingly.