Nirmal Yadav, J - Petitioners are working on different posts of Junior Engineers, Supervisors, Electricians, Helpers, Chowkidars and Khalasis etc. in Class-III and Class-IV service since 1981 to 1989 in the Construction and Engineering Wing of the Punjab Mandi Board at various places in the State of Punjab.
The other staff working in the office of Punjab Mandi Board enjoy holidays on Saturdays, whereas the field staff such as the petitioners are supposed to work even on Saturdays.
The very nature of the duties performed by the petitioners would show that once any project of construction and engineering wing commences, the work continues on daily basis till such project is completed.
The petitioners have, therefore, pleaded that respondent-Board may be directed to calculate the emoluments of the work performed by the petitioners on Saturdays, and be paid extra emoluments for the same.
It is pleaded that their case is squarely covered by the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case Municipal Employees Union (Regd.
), Sirhind and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Appeal No. 8434 of 1997.
Decided on 1532000, wherein it is held that the employees of the Municipal Committees were entitled to extra wages on account of the work rendered by them on Saturdays.
2.
Petitioners claimed the above relief by submitting a representation dated 392002 on the basis of the judgment rendered in Municipal Employees Union, Sirhind's case (supra).
Since no action was taken, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petitions No. 18643 and 18644 of 2003 in this Court claiming the same relief.
The above writ petitions were disposed of vide order dated 23112002.
The operative part of the order is reproduced hereunder:  "Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to dispose of the representation of the petitioners within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order of this Court alongwith a copy of the writ petition, which shall be treated as a part of the representation.
The respondents shall pass a speaking order while disposing of the claim of the petitioners."
In pursuance of the above order, the respondents passed impugned order Annexure P/5 dated 1162003 denying the claim of the petitioners on the ground that the nature of duties and responsibilities of the field staff is qualitatively different from those working in the administrative office of the Mandi Board and two categories cannot be similarly situated.
All Saturdays were declared to be observed as holidays in Government offices throughout the State of Punjab vide gazette Notification dated 741980.
However, the said Notification cannot be made applicable to the Punjab Mandi Board on account of the various projects having been carried out by the Mandi Board.
It involves intensive labour and construction operations which required to be continuously supervised by the field staff employed by the Mandi Board.
It has further been observed that the Hon'ble Apex Court while deciding Municipal Employees Union, Sirhind's case (supra) did not examine the matter in the background of nature of duties and responsibilities to be performed by the field staff.
While deciding the representation, reference to Rule 310 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-1 has also been made.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing the impugned order dated 1162003 (Annexure P/5).
3.
The respondent-Punjab Mandi Board, in its reply submitted that whole time of the Board's employees is at its disposal.
The services of the employee may be utilised by the Board in any manner without claim of additional remuneration and petitioners are not entitled to any additional wages for Saturdays.
The ratio of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Employees Union, Sirhind (supra) is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records carefully.
5.
The question raised in the present writ petition against the action of the Punjab Mandi Board is for non-payment of wages for discharging duty on Saturdays while their colleagues in the office of the Mandi Board were permitted to enjoy all Saturdays in a year as holidays.
The Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Employees Union (Regd.
), Sirhind (supra) while considering this very issue in respect of employees of the Municipal Committees constituted and functioning under the Punjab Municipal Act, observed as under :-  "In our view, in the facts of the present case and in the light of the order which we propose to pass in the present proceedings, it is strictly not necessary to examine this question finally.
We may assume for the present discussion that Rule 3 of general rules may not cover this question ...... the moot question remains as to whether the employees belonging to Class-III and Class-IV service of the respondent Municipal Committees who have common employer and who have common seniority list and has common Pay Scales, when required to work either at the Octroi check-post or in the offices of the Municipal Committees, as the case may be depending upon the exigencies of service in committees, can have an equal right to enjoy Saturdays as holidays and whether the right available to entire cadre as such to enjoy such weekly holidays be denied only to a limited category of Octroi staff, who, due to exigencies of service may, at a given.
Point of time, be required to work not only in the offices but by rotation in the Octroi check posts or barriers.
6.
So far as this question is concerned, unless there is any express provision in the Municipal Bye Laws requiring all the staff members to have six days working per week, in our view, it would not be open to the Respondent-Municipal Committees to deny the benefit of non-working Saturdays only to those staff members who have because of the exigencies of service to discharge their duties at Octroi check-posts or barriers rather than in the offices.
But that would require a further question as to whether at the relevant time at which the concerned employees like the appellants have actually worked on Saturdays, their colleagues in the offices had enjoyed such holidays and further whether the bye-laws of the concerned Municipal Committees required the employees, by way of their service conditions, to discharge their duties for six days in week and, therefore, it was open to the Municipal authorities, looking to the exigencies and pressure of work, to give some additional concession to only those office staff members who would have been permitted not to come for work on any Saturdays.
Therefore, all that we can lay down in the present proceedings is to the effect that if the appellants, at the relevant time at which they claim to have earned the right to enjoy holidays falling on Saturdays were made to work while their colleagues of the Municipal Committees, were given the benefit of such holidays and when there were no bye-laws requiring the employees to work for 6 days in a week, then they would be entitled to be given monetary compensation for the working Saturdays by grant of extra wages for each of the working Saturdays on which they are shown to have discharged their duties."
7.
As per the written statement and the reasoning given by the Secretary, Punjab Mandi Board while rejecting the representation of the petitioners, it is evident that the petitioners have to work even on Saturdays on various projects undertaken by the Board.
Punjab Mandi Board carries out various projects throughout the State, which include construction and repair of link roads, building for official and residential purposes of the staff etc. through contractors.
It involves intensive labour and construction operations which are required to be continuously supervised by the field staff employed in the Mandi Board.
These projects are required to be completed in a time bound schedule.
The nature of duties and responsibilities of field staff is qualitatively different from those working in the administrative offices of the Mandi Board.
Indisputably, all the petitioners are working in the construction and engineering wing of the Mandi Board.
They are working on Saturdays, whereas the other employees who are employed in the offices of the Mandi Board are not working on Saturdays and are enjoying holidays.
8.
In view of above, we are of the opinion that the impugned order Annexure P/5, denying this benefit to the petitioners is certainly arbitrary in nature and deserves to be quashed.
All the employees of Punjab Mandi Board, like the petitioners, who are working for six days in a week would be entitled to monetary compensation for the working Saturdays by grant of extra wages for each Saturday they have discharged their duties.
9.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order Annexure P/5 is hereby quashed.
Petition allowed.