SP Talukdar, J - The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 30th July, 2004 passed by the Learned Single Bench of this Hon'ble Court in WP No. 377 of 2002.
2.
Grievances of the appellant as ventilated before this Court, may briefly be stated as follows :  Respondents No. 1, 2, 3 and 4 by filing a writ application alleged that though they opted for voluntary retirement, the pension benefits were not given to them as per their legal entitlement.
They were employees of United Bank of India.
In response to a Notification dated 23rd December, 2000, the said writ petitioners opted for voluntary retirement in terms of the scheme dated 23122000.
They submitted necessary applications on 01.01.2001 and the bank accepted their offers.
They were released on 22092001.
United Bank of India (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995 was introduced in 1995.
Regulation 29 provided for pension on voluntary retirement.
Subregulation (5) of Regulation 29 provided that the qualifying service of an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Regulations would be increased by a period not exceeding five years, subject to the condition that the total qualifying service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed thirty-three years and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation.
The writ petitioners had residual service for a period of ten years four months nine days; two years four months nine days; three years four months nine days and four years eleven months nine days respectively before attaining the age of superannuation wen they had opted for voluntary retirement.
They received their respective Pension Payment Orders.
The net period of qualifying service of the writ petitioners as per Pension Payment Orders was shown as thirty years, thirty-two years, thirty-one years and twenty-three years respectively.
They submitted separate representations in November, 2001 contending therein that the notional service for maximum period of five years as per Regulation 29(5) of the said Regulations of 1995 had not been considered in calculating of the qualifying service for the basic pension of the writ petitioners.
They sought for review of the pension entitlement.
The writ petitioners thus raised objection against the Bank's granting them benefits of pension only for their actual lengths of service.
They claimed benefit of appropriate increase in their length of service in terms of paragraph 6(ii) of the scheme, read with Regulation 29(5) of the Pension Regulations, 1995.
Denial of such benefit compelled them to file the writ application.
3.
It was contested by the Bank authorities by filing objection to which the petitioners gave a reply.
4.
Learned Judge after taking into consideration all relevant facts and materials allowed the writ application and directed the Bank authorities to give benefit of pension to the petitioners after increasing their qualifying service in terms of Regulation 29(5) of the Pension Regulation, 1995.
5.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment dated 30th July, 2004, the Bank authorities, as appellants, preferred the instant appeal.
6.
The appellants alleged that there has been failure on the part of the Learned Court to appreciate the matter in the proper perspective.
7.
After due consideration of relevant facts and materials it seems that this Court is now required to adjudicate upon the claim of the respondents/writ petitioners who admittedly voluntary retired.
Learned counsel for the appellants invited attention of the Court to the United Bank of India (Employees') Pension Regulations 1995 and Regulations 28 and 29 of the same.
8.
Regulation 29 of the Pension Regulations, 1995 deals with pension on Voluntary Retirement.
Sub-regulation (5) of the sae may be reproduced as follows :  "(5) The qualifying service of an employee retiring voluntarily under this regulation shall be increased by a period not exceeding five years subject to the condition that the total qualifying service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed thirty-three years and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation."
Subsequently, the Scheme of Voluntary Retirement was notified on 23rd December, 2000.
It appears that by letter dated 1092001 all the four writ petitioners were duly intimated that their applications seeking voluntary retirement under the UBI Employees' Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 were accepted by the competent authority.
The Voluntary Retirement Scheme dated 23rd December, 2000 was introduced with the following object :  " 1.
OBJECT : In the context of increasing market competition and arising customer expectations along with appropriate business strategies, it is urgently necessary to streamline the human resources of the Bank for ensuring optimum productivity and profitability.
Besides measures of upgradation of knowledge and skills and greater mobility for lateral and vertical career progression, for meetings these objectives, a Voluntary Retirement Scheme has been formulated for the employees of the Bank."
9.
Clause (6) of the said Scheme mentions that an employee seeking Voluntary Retirement under the Scheme will be eligible for the following benefits in addition to the Ex-Gratia amount mentioned in para No. 5 of the Scheme  (i) Gratuity as per Gratuity Act/Service Gratuity as the case may be, (ii) (a) Pension including commuted value of pension) as per United Bank of India (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995, or  (b) Bank's contribution towards Staff Provident Fund as per existing rules, as the case may be.
(iii) Leave encashment as per rules.
Thus, the Scheme also refers to benefit of pension as per United Bank of India (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995.
10.
General conditions as mentions in Clause 10 of the Scheme include sub-clause (k), which reads as follows:  "(k) The benefits payable under this Scheme shall be in full and final settlement of all claims of whatsoever nature whether arising under the Scheme or otherwise to the employee (or to his nominee in case of death).
An employee who has voluntarily retired under this scheme will not have any claim against the Bank of whatsoever nature and no demand or dispute or difference will be raised by him or on his behalf whether for re-employment or compensation or back wages including employment of any of his relative on compassionate grounds in the service of the Bank or for any other benefit whatsoever."
11.
It is not disputed that those applying for voluntary retirement under the said Scheme of 2000 accepted the terms and conditions stipulated in such Scheme unconditionally and irrevocably.
12.
The materials on record revealed that the writ petitioners approached the authority concerned for non-consideration of the notional service while calculating the qualifying service for basic pension.
13.
At the time of hearing of the case our attention was drawn to a correspondence made by the Personnel Adviser to the Designated Officers of all Public Sector Banks dated December 11, 2000.
Referring to the same, it was submitted that employees applying for voluntary retirement after rendering a minimum of 15 years of service under a special/ad hoc scheme formulated with the specific approval of the Government and the Board of Directors, will be eligible for prorata pension for the period of service rendered as if they are to retire on attaining the age of superannuation on that date.
It appears from the letter dated 18th January, 2001 that the authority concerned of the Department of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division) Ministry of Finance, Government of India clarified that "benefit of increased qualifying service as provided under Regulation 29 of the Pension Regulations will not be applicable to those who seek voluntary retirement under the New Voluntary Retirement Scheme."
14.
According to learned Counsel appearing for the appellant the eligibility criteria and the benefits flowing out of the provisions in the Pension Regulations are distinct and separate from that envisaged under Voluntary Retirement Scheme circulated on 31082000.
In this context the United Bank of India (Employees') Pension (Amendment) Regulations, 2001 dated 12012002 was brought to the notice of this Court.
15.
It appears that the present appellant urged before the Learned Single Bench that the employees seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme would be entitled to Superannuation Pension specified in Regulation 28 of the 1995 Regulations.
Learned Judge in this context observed that Superannuation Pension is available to those employees who retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
16.
The question, however, remains as to whether the Pension Regulation of 1995 could be extended to those, who opted for voluntary retirement under a subsequent scheme.
The 1995 Regulations specfically mentioned about them who retired voluntarily under the said Regulations (emphasis added).
Admittedly the Voluntary Retirement Scheme was not in existence at that point of time.
17.
By the relevant Amendment, as referred to earlier, of the United Bank of India (Employees') Regulations, 1995, for Regulation 28, the following Regulation was substituted:  "28.
Superannuation Pension  Superannuation Pension shall be granted to an employee who has retired on his attaining the age of superannuation specified in the Service Regulations or Settlements.
Provided that, with effect from 1st September, 2000 pension shall also be granted to an employee who opts to retire before attaining the age of superannuation, but after rendering service for a minimum period of 15 years in terms of any Scheme that may be framed for such purpose by the Board with the approval of the Government."
Learned Counsel appearing for the appellant while referring to the status of the scheme relied upon the decision in the case of Bank of India & Ors., v. OP Swaranakar etc., with other cases, reported in AIR 2003 SC 858.
18.
Learned Counsel for the respondent seems to be quite justified in mentioning that the facts and circumstances of the said case are entirely different.
19.
Reference was also made to the decision in the case of The Central Bank of India & Ors. v. Their Workmen, etc., reported in AIR 1960 SC 12, while dealing with retrospectivity of the amended provision.
20.
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant, referring to the aforesaid decision, that a remedial Act is not necessarily retrospective; it may be either enlarging or restraining and it takes effect prospectively, unless it has retrospective effect by express terms or necessary intendment.
It cannot be denid that the amendment was mentioned earlier appears to have been given retrospective effect.
Learned Judge while deciding the writ petition was of the view that the claim of the writ petitioner could never be decided in terms of Regulation 28, of the Pension Regulations.
21.
After due consideration of all the relevant facts and materials and having regard to the amendment of the Regulation 28 with retrospective effect, we find it difficult to agree with the stand taken by the Learned Single Judge.
22.
In our opinion, the writ petitioners took voluntary retirement under a specific scheme being the Voluntary Retirement Scheme, 2000 and though in regard to settlement of pension, the Regulation of 1995 was referred to in the said Scheme, the benefit of Regulation 29(5) could not be extended to them and the materials on record clearly indicate that they constitute a distinct and separate class by themselves and are required to be regulated according to the spirit of the Scheme of 2000.
23.
In such view of the matter, we accept the contention made on behalf of the appellant.
Accordingly, the impugned judgment dated 30th July, 2004 passed in connection with WP No. 377 of 2002 be set aside and the present appeal being APOT No. 43 of 2004 be allowed on contest.
The writ application filed by the respondents being WP No. 377 of 2002 stands accordingly dismissed.
24.
No order as to costs.
Xerox certified copy of the judgment, if applied for, be supplied to the parties after due compliance with the formalities.
Aloke Chakrabarti, J - I agree.
Petition allowed.