JS Narang, J - The petitioner had superannuated on March 31, 2002, as Superintendent Grade-II from the Government service.
The final retiral benefits of the petitioner had not been passed on to him till February 23, 2004.
On that date, the petitioner submitted a representation for the payment of the retiral benefits along with interest and also the interest upon the delayed payments.
No response was received, a detailed representation in this regard was again made on 22.1.2005.
Aggrieved of the inaction on the part of the respondents, the petitioner filed CWP No. 3924 of 2005, which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated March 11, 2005, with a direction that a final decision upon the aforestated representation of the petitioner be taken within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order with a further direction that in case the petitioner is found entitled to any monetary benefits the same shall be paid to him within a period of one month.
A decision was taken and a detailed speaking order was passed vide order dated 1362005.
This order has been made the subject-matter of challenge in the present petition for a direction to the respondents to release the interest on delayed payments on the retiral benefits, death-cum-retirement gratuity, leave encashment and monthly pension etc.  2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondents are duty bound to pay interest upon the delayed payments in view of the dicta of this Court rendered in the Full Bench in re : AS Randhawa v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) SCT 468 (P&H) : 1997(4) SLR 617.
It has also been argued that the respondents are duty bound to give interest upon the delayed payment payable pursuant to the provisions of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
Reliance has been placed upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in re : H Gangahanume Gowda v. Karnataka Agro Industries Corpn Ltd., 2003(2) SLR 326 : 2003(1) SCT 937 (SC).
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have also perused the paper book as also the order dated June 13, 2005 impugned before us.
4.
The representation of the petitioner has been dealt with threadbare and a detailed speaking order has been passed.
It was been categorically observed that as per the Government instructions every retiree is entitled to get pensionary benefits but in cases where the employee has caused administrative/financial loss to the government, the government has been vested with the powers to withhold the pensionary benefits till the decision of the administrative/financial loss, as envisaged under Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II, which read as under :-  "22.
(a) xxx xxx xxx xxx (b) The Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if, in a departmental or judicial proceeding, the pensioner is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his service, including service rendered upon re-employement after retirement : Provided that - (1) Such departmental proceedings, if instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall after the final retirement of the officer, be deemed to be a proceeding under this article and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer had continued in service; (2) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re- employment - (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government; (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution; and  (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the officer during his service.
(3) No such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re- employment shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution; and The Public Service Commission should be consulted before final orders are passed.
Explanation - For the purpose of this rule - (a) a departmental proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which the statement of charges is issued to the officer or pensioner, or if the officer has been placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such date; and  (b) a judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted - (i) in the case of a criminal proceeding, on the date on which the complaint or report of the police officer on which the Magistrate takes cognizance is made; and (ii) in the case of a civil proceeding, on the date of presentation of the plaint in the Court.
Note : As soon as proceedings of the nature referred to in the above rule are instituted, the authority which institutes such proceedings should without delay intimate the fact to the Accountant General.
The amount of the pension withheld under clause (b) should not ordinarily exceed one-third of pension originally sanctioned, including any amount of pension to be so withheld, regard should be had to the consideration whether the amount of the pension left to the pensioner in any case would be adequate for his maintenance".
5.
It has been observed that administrative case was pending against the petitioner in regard to which the petitioner had been served with the charge- sheet under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, vide memo No. A-5(2)-2002/1117 dated 3152002.
The charge-sheet reads as : "When he was posted in Quality Branch as Assistant/Superintendent from 16112000 to 3132002, he had not taken further necessary action in issuance of recovery show-cause notice for Rs. 4,51,069/- against S/Shri Harbans Singh, Kundan Lal Grover and Gurmail Singh Inspectors."
6.
In view of the aforesaited, the leave encashment and gratuity of the petitioner had been withheld till the decision of the case.
The petitioner has been exonerated from all the allegations levelled against him by virtue of an order dated April 10, 2003 and that the department has released his payments in lieu of leave encashment and gratuity vide sanctions issued on 752003, 882003 and 3112004.
However, the gratuity payable as permitted by Accountant General Punjab vide communication dated April 9, 2002, could not be paid as the validity period of one year had expired.
The matter with regard to re-validation was taken up vide communication dated 21/25 April 2003, and that the extension was duly granted vide communication dated April 17, 2003 and that the sanction for payment of gratuity was issued vide communication dated August 8, 2003.
The Accountant General, Punjab, was requested vide memo dated 2882003, for extending the validity which followed the reminders dated 29102003, 8.1.2004, 932004 and 2772004.
The last reminder was sent on September 17, 2004.
The validity was extended by the Accountant General, Punjab, vide letter dated September 21, 2004 and that the payment of enhanced gratuity of Rs. 6,973/- was issued vide communication dated November 3, 2004.
The delay has been duly explained by the learned Director, Food and Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Department, Punjab, Chandigarh.
The part payment had been withheld on account of the enquiry, which had been initiated, of which the petitioner has been exonerated.
7.
No case has been made out for granting any interest upon the delayed payments.
The judgments which have been referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioner do not apply to the case of the petitioner.
The case before the Full Bench of this Court was decided pursuant to the facts of that case and it has been categorically held that in the case before their Lordships, no satisfactory explanation for the delay in disbursing the retiral benefits to the petitioner was made out and, therefore, the interest at the rate of 12% per annum for the period of delay on the amounts was directed to be paid.
According to us, the judgment rendered is per incuriam/in personam which is applicable to the facts of those cases which were decided by the Hon'ble Full Bench.
In the case at hand, we do not find any such deficiency.
The petitioner had been served the charge-sheet and later on was exonerated after due consideration.
So far as gratuity is concerned, the interest is payable as per the statute itself.
No case in this regard has been set up by the petitioner as no such indication has been given that interest payable under the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, has not been paid.
Thus, the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court is also not applicable to the facts of this case.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.