GS Singhvi, J - In all these petitions prayer has been made by the petitioners for issue of a direction to the respondents to regularise their services and, therefore, it will be appropriate to decide them by a common order.
2.
Before adverting to the facts of each case, it is necessary to mention that these petitions had been disposed of by the High Court in the year 1990 by passing an order that the representations made by the petitioners for regularisation of their services be decided by the competent authority within a period of six months.
In some cases the court directed that the petitioners may make representations which shall be decided within six months.
Directions were also issued by this court that status-quo regarding services of the petitioners be maintained.
Instead of deciding the representations of the petitioners, the State of Punjab and its functionaries filed Special Leave Petitions before the Supreme Court on an assumption that the High Court had passed an order directing the regularisation of the services of the petitioners on the basis of the decision of Division Bench in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) SLR 739.
Counsel appearing in the Supreme Court on behalf of the State of Punjab did not bring it to the notice of the Supreme Court that the only direction given by the High Court was for the decision of the representations made by the petitioners.
When the case came up before the Supreme Court for hearing, their Lordships disposed of the same by passing separate orders dated 2111991 and 431991.
It appears, thereafter, that some applications were filed before the Supreme Court and on the basis of such applications following order dated 13th September, 1993 came to be passed by the Apex Court:-  ``Delay condoned.
These bunch-matters have been pending to await the judgment in Piara Singh's case.
This Court in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(4) SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC), has reversed the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court on the basis of which the respondents in these matters were granted relief by the High Court.
This Court has now authoritatively laid down the law regarding regularisation of the services of the ad hoc employees.
We, therefore, set aside the impugned orders/judgments of the High Court in all these matters and remand these cases to the High Court for fresh decision after hearing the parties in the light of law laid down by this Court in Piara Singh's case.
All the bunch-matters are disposed of.''
In compliance of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the petitions have now been placed before the court for fresh hearing.
No one appeared on behalf of the petitioners.
I have, therefore, heard learned Deputy Advocate General and perused the records of the writ petitions.
3.
Civil Writ Petition No. 1618 of 1990 has been filed by Nissan Singh and Dial Singh, both of whom are servicing as Conductors in Punjab Roadways Depot-II, Amritsar.
They joined service in Punjab Roadways from 471983 and served upto December, 1985.
They were re-appointed on 1851987 and were working as such till the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. 721990.
Petitioners have stated that they were initially appointed on the basis of selection made by the Divisional Manager after calling their names from the Employment Exchange.
Petitioners have alleged that during the course of service, they have received training and they fulfil all the conditions on the basis of which they are entitled to be regularised in service.
The petitioners have relied on the decision of the Division Bench in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana (supra) and prayed that the respondents be directed to regularise their services as per the judgment in Piara Singh's case.
4.
Civil Writ Petition No. 1720 of 1990 has been filed by Harbans Singh, who joined the services as Conductor on 1711984 under the General Manager, Punjab Roadways Depot-II, Amritsar and he was in the service of the respondents on 12.2.1990 i.e. the date on which the petition was filed.
He also claimed regularisation of services in accordance with the decision of the Division Bench in Piara Singh's case.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 3066 of 1990, Kashmir Singh and Balkar Singh, who are serving as Conductors in Punjab Roadways, Amritsar-I Depot have prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to regularise their services by stating that they were appointed in the year 1986 and since then they have been continuously holding the posts of Conductors.
6.
Civil Writ Petition No. 3146 of 1990 has been filed by Baldev Singh and 40 others, all of whom are working as Conductors at `Patti Depot' of Punjab Roadways.
From the statement made in para 3 of the writ petition it is borne out that the petitioners joined service as Conductors between 8.2.1980 and 13121986.
All of them have been continuously serving in Punjab Roadways.
Petitioners have alleged that persons junior to them have been regularised in service but their cases have not been considered despite the fact that total service rendered by them ranges between 7 to 24 years.
These petitioners have also relied on the judgment of the Division Bench in Piara Singh's case in support of their claim for regularisation of service.
7.
Civil Writ Petition No. 3183 of 1990 has been filed by Hardev Singh and three others, who are working as Conductors in Punjab Roadways Depot-I and Depot-II, Amritsar, They joined service between the year 1983 and 1984 and have been in service with some breaks.
Claim of these petitioners is for regularisation of service on the basis of the judgment of the Division Bench in Piara Singh's case.
8.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 3292 of 1990, Dhian Singh and Sukhdev Singh have stated that they joined service as Conductors in the year 1983.
Their services were terminated on 18121989 and they have been re-appointed on 14.2.1990.
They too have claimed relief of regularisation of service on the basis of the judgment in Piara Singh's case.
9.
Civil Writ Petition No. 9741 of 1990 has been filed by Gurcharan Singh and four others, who are serving as Conductors at Moga Depot of Punjab Roadways.
From para 4 of the writ petition, it is revealed that the petitioners joined service between 4.8.1981 to 23.9.1982 and they have been in continuous service without any break.
Relief claimed by the petitioners is founded on the decision of this court in Piara Singh's case.
10.
From the records of these petitions, it is revealed that this court had given more than one opportunity to the respondents to file reply but in none of these cases reply has been filed.
In the absence of any reply by the respondents, the averments made in the petitions will have to be treated as correct and on the basis of the uncontroverted averments, it can be said that the petitioners have rendered services for different durations but their services have not been regularised.
As on date all the petitioners have completed more than five years of service.
Some of them have completed 13 to 29 years of service.
Those who have completed 29 years of service will retire after four to five years and it is not clear as to why their services have not been regularised so far.
11.
In State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh (supra), their Lordships examined the correctness of the decision of this court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana and held that the directions given by the High Court for regularisation of services of all ad hoc and daily wages employees were unsustainable.
Nevertheless the apex Court recognised the right of the government to issue policy instructions for regularisation of services of temporary/ad hoc/daily wages/work charge employees after they have served for a particular length of time.
Perusal of paragraph 3 of the decision of the Supreme Court shows that their Lordships have taken cognizance of the various orders issued by the Government of Punjab for regularisation of the services of ad hoc employees.
These circulars have not been struck down by the Supreme Court.
It can, therefore, be said that their Lordships did not find any inherent defect in the policy of the government to regularise the services of temporary and ad hoc employees who had served for a fairly long spell.
12.
In my opinion, after having issued general orders for regularisation of the services of ad hoc and other categories of employees, there can be no reason or justification on the part of respondents to deny consideration to the petitioners for regularisation of their services as per the policy decisions.
If the respondents had filed reply and disclosed the reasons for not regularising the services of the petitioner, it may have been possible for the court to analyse those reasons and judge their correctness.
In the absence of reply the court is left to grope in the dark about the reasons on the basis of which the petitioners have not been considered for regularisation of services.
However, the learned Deputy Advocate General fairly submitted that the petitioners can be considered for regularisation of services subject to their fulfilling conditions enumerated in the circulars/orders issued by the government.
13.
Keeping in view the law laid down in State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and taking into consideration the fact that the Government of Punjab has issued orders dated 331964, 29.1.1973, 20101980, 351977, 20.10.1982, 29.3.1985, 981985, 191986 and other circulars which have been issued after the decision of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra), it will be appropriate to direct that the cases of the petitioners should be considered in accordance with the aforementioned policy decisions of the government and if it is found that petitioners fulfil the conditions of eligibility enumerated in these orders, they shall be regularised in service.
14.
Accordingly the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to undertake exercise for considering the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their services in accordance with the policy decisions of the government which have been incorporated in the orders issued from time to time.
The competent authorities shall examine the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of services under the orders dated 29.1.1973 etc. and if the petitioners are found entitled to be regularised in service under any one of these orders, then their services be regularised w.e.f.
the dates mentioned in the orders issued by the government.
If the petitioners are not found entitled to be regularised in service on the basis of the orders issued prior to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case, then their cases be considered for regularisation under the subsequent policy instructions.
If the competent authority ultimately comes to the conclusion that the petitioners are entitled to be regularised in service from a particular date, then appropriate orders be passed for grant of consequential benefits to such of the petitioners.
This entire exercise should be undertaken and completed within a period of four months of the receipt of certified copy by the Secretary, Government of Punjab, Transport Department.
Petitions allowed.