SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioners were duly selected and appointed on the posts of Safai Sewaks by order dated 26122001, Annexure P-3.
In the order of appointment, it has been categorically mentioned in condition Nos. 8 and 9 as follows :-  "8.
The candidate shall be bound by the orders in respect of his appointment by the Punjab Govt. or of Courts.
9.
In case of stay by the Punjab Govt. this appointment shall be deemed as cancelled and the candidate shall not be entitled to any kind of damages of salary.
Sd/- Health Officer For Commissioner  Municipal Corporation, Patiala.
Endst.
No. 1814 to 1819 Dated : 261201."
3.
The petitioners accepted the aforesaid conditions without demur.
The matter was referred to the State of Punjab which by order dated 1532002 stayed the operation of the aforesaid order of appointment.
The petitioners challenged the stay order of the State Government by filing a Civil suit.
Initially, termination of the services of the petitioners was stayed by the Civil Court.
However, subsequently, the interim order of stay was vacated.
Consequently, the petitioners were relieved from service on 392002.
Thereafter, the petitioners filed CWP No. 16156 of 2002, challenging the order of termination dated 392002 as well as the order of State Government staying the resolution by which the petitioners had been appointed.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by this Court on 4.8.2003 with a direction to the State Government to take a final decision in the matter within a period of two months.
Consequently, the State Government has taken a final decision and passed an order dated 30102003.
The aforesaid order has been passed after issuing Show Cause Notice to the Municipal Corporation.
4.
In the reply to the Show Cause Notice, the Municipal Corporation had taken a plea that since the petitioners had been appointed against 11 posts of Baildars on old vacancies, prior approval of the Government was not required.
This plea of the Corporation was rejected by the Government.
It has been pointed out that 11 posts of Sweepers/Baildars had been filled in by the Corporation in contravention of the State Policy which envisages that sweeping work should be given on contract and the vacant posts may not be filled up.
It is also pointed out that the Government had imposed a complete ban on direct recruitment by instructions dated 13.5.2002 and it was further declared that all the vacant posts shall be deemed to be abolished.
The State of Punjab took note of the Provisions of Section 71(7) of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976, in which prior approval of the Government is required to make appointment on a post which has scale of pay over and above Rs. 500/-.
The Municipal Corporation also cannot create any posts without the prior approval of the State Government which have a scale over and above Rs. 1,000/-.
Admittedly, all the petitioners have been appointed in a scale of Rs. 2,520- 4140/-.
Their initial pay was fixed at Rs. 2,620/-.
Keeping these provisions in view, the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation while issuing the appointment orders dated 26122001, took care to provide that the candidates shall be bound by the orders passed in respect of these appointments by the Punjab Government or of Courts.
It was also provided that in case of stay by the Punjab Government, the appointments shall be deemed as cancelled.
5.
Mr. TP Singh, has vehemently argued that the appointment of the petitioners could not have been cancelled on the basis of the instructions dated 13.5.2002, as a ban had only been imposed on recruitment to the posts which were lying vacant on that date.
Since the petitioners had already been appointed by order dated 26122001, the appointment of the petitioners could not have been cancelled.
Learned counsel also argued that even the order of stay passed by the State Government would not have the effect of declaring the posts held by the petitioners as vacant as the resolution was not cancelled till 30102003.
The order of stay was interim in nature and could not have any adverse effect on the rights of the petitioners.
6.
We are of the considered opinion that in normal circumstances the order of stay would not have, in any manner, affected the legal rights of the petitioners.
However, in the present case, the very order of appointment laid down the consequences of an order of stay which may be granted by the Government or Court.
It had been categorically laid down in condition No. 9 of Annexure P-3, that in case of stay by the Punjab Government, the appointments shall be deemed to be cancelled.
The effect of a deeming clause has been very succinctly defined by Lord Asquith in the case of East End Dwellings Co Ltd v. Finsbury Borough Council, (1952) A.C. 109(B), as follows :-  "If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the consequences and incidents which, if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it.
One of these in this case is emancipation from the 1939 level of rents.
The statute says that you must imagine a certain state of affairs; it does not say that having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs".
7.
The aforesaid definition of a deeming clause has been quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in the Case of M. Venugopal v. The Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnam, Andhra Pradesh and another, 1994(1) SCT 858 (SC) : 1994(1) S.L.R.
855.
The same view has been reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Mohamed Iqbal Madar Sheikh and others v. The State of Maharashtra, JT 1966(1) SC 114.
In view of the aforesaid ratio of law, the appointment of the petitioners would be deemed to be cancelled from the very inception.
This would render the posts vacant which would be deemed to have been abolished on the basis of the instructions dated 3052002.
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that no relief can be granted to the petitioners.
Petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.