SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dtd.
28.10.2002 (P/11) to the extent that the petitioner has been given deemed dtd.
of promotion as Assistant Engineer (Civil) w.e.f.
14.12.2001 instead of 20.3.1990.
The petitioner belongs to reserved category of Scheduled Caste.
He was appointed as Junior Engineer on 2531985 in the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the `respondent-Board').
He was due for promotion as Assistant Engineer in the year 1989.
However, the respondents passed an order on 1811989 that the petitioner could not be promoted as he had not passed the departmental examination.
Instead one Sumesh Bansal belonging to general category was promoted as Assistant Engineer.
In the order of promotion of Sumesh Bansal, condition No. 9 provided as follows :-  "9.
Further the promotion of Sh. Sumesh Bansal is purely on ad hoc basis against quota of SC category as no SC candidate belonging to SC category is eligible for promotion.
He is liable to be reverted without notice as soon as a candidate belonging to SC category attains eligibility".
2.
The petitioner passed the necessary departmental examination on 20.3.1990.
In view of condition No. 9 in the promotion order, Sumesh Bansal had to be reverted to make room for the petitioner on 20.3.1990.
Petitioner brought these facts to the notice of the respondent-Board, which seemed to have fallen on deaf ears.
Ultimately, Sumesh Bansal filed a civil suit for injunction on 1951994 restraining the respondent-Board from reverting him to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil).
The respondents filed a written statement in the civil suit and pleaded that the petitioner was entitled to be promoted.
It was stated as under :-  "In reply to para No. 5 of the plaint it is submitted that the plaintiff was promoted as AE/Civil purely on ad hoc basis against the vacancy reserved for promotion to JE/Civil belonging to SC category against 14% reservation available in promoting to class I and II services due to non- passing of DAE by JE/Civil belonging to SC category at that time with the specific condition incorporated in his promotion orders that he will be reverted as soon as candidate belonging to scheduled caste category attains eligibility for promotion as JE/Civil.
Now Shri Kuldeep Singh seniormost JE/Civil belonging to scheduled caste category and possessing the qualification of BE/Civil has claimed promotion as Assistant Engineer/Civil after qualifying DAE and acquiring eligibility for promotion policy.
Therefore, the defendant board has initiated a proposal for promoting the scheduled caste JE/Civil as AE/Civil by reverting the plaintiff.
This proposal is based on natural justice and is in line with the reservation policy and also in accordance with the conditions attached in the promotion orders of the plaintiff."
3.
The civil suit filed by Sumesh Bansal was dismissed on 21102000.
Still the petitioner was not given promotion compelling him to move this Court by way of C.W.P.
No. 6891 of 2002.
The writ petition was disposed of on 352002 by directing the respondents to take a decision on the grievance of the petitioner.
Consequently the respondents have now passed an order dtd.
26.9.2002 (P/10) promoting the petitioner w.e.f.
14.12.2001 instead of 20.3.1990.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
It has been stated that Sumesh Bansal could not be reverted due to changed circumstances.
It is submitted that during the year 1989 there were 104 cadre posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) available with the Board.
On the basis of the prevalent regulations, 9% of the posts were to be filled from graduate Junior Engineers (Civil).
As such 9 posts came to the share of graduate Junior Engineers and 7 posts were already held by graduate Junior Engineers.
Therefore, 2 more promotions were required to be made.
Out of these two posts, one post was to be filled by promotion from Engineering Subordinates belonging to Scheduled Caste category.
There was 14% reservation in favour of the Scheduled Caste at the relevant time.
Since the petitioner was not available, the post was offered to Sumesh Bansal.
4.
The respondents have, however, categorically admitted that Sumesh Bansal was promoted purely on ad hoc basis against the post reserved for the Scheduled Caste category with clear stipulation that he will be reverted without any notice as soon as a candidate belonging to the Scheduled Caste category attains eligibility.
But to justify denial of promotion to the petitioner, it is stated that before the bio-data of graduate Junior Engineers (Civil) could be called on 2731990, some posts in the Cadre of Assistant Engineers (Civil) were rendered surplus, therefore, there was no necessity for considering any-body further for promotion.
Also on 2571991, the Board issued a policy decision whereby the promotion share of the category of graduate Junior Engineers (Civil) was reduced from 9% to 5%.
Direct recruits share was also reduced by 6%.
Consequently, no post was available against which the petitioner could have been promoted.
5.
Replication has been filed by the petitioner.
The plea taken by the respondents has been controverted.
6.
Mr. RS Bajaj, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the plea taken by the respondents is only one of convenience and an effort has been made to protect the wholly illegal promotion of Sumesh Bansal.
He further submitted that even if there has been amendment in the Rules, the same could not have affected the right of the petitioner which had accrued on 20.3.1990.
In support of his submissions, learned counsel relied upon judgment of the Supreme Court in case of YV Rangaiah and another v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others and State of AP and another v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852.
7.
Mr. RL Sharma submits that the petitioner became eligible to be considered for promotion on 20.3.1990.
There was no post available to promote the petitioner, as a number of posts had been rendered surplus on 2731990.
So the petitioner could not have been considered for promotion.
8.
Having considered the entire matter, we are of the considered opinion that in view of condition 9 imposed in the promotion order of Sumesh Bansal, the petitioner had to be considered for promotion with effect from 20.3.1990.
The respondents have admitted in the written statement that the petitioner attained eligibility for promotion on 20.3.1990.
He was not promoted, as there was non-compliance with condition No. 9 contained in the promotion order of Sumesh Bansal.
The respondents have not pleaded any other impediment for denying the promotion.
9.
Even otherwise a perusal of relevant part of para 5 of the written statement (reproduced above) filed in the civil suit by the respondent-Board in response to the plaint of Sumesh Bansal would clearly show that claim of the petitioner was fully supported by the respondent-Board.
It was categorically stated that Sumesh Bansal had been promoted purely on ad hoc basis as Assistant Engineer (Civil) against the vacancy specifically meant for Scheduled Caste Junior Engineer (Civil).
This vacancy was filled by promotion of Sumesh Bansal due to non-availability of eligible Junior Engineer belonging to SC category with specific condition for his reversion as soon as Scheduled Caste employee attains eligibility for promotion.
The plea taken by the respondent-Board was accepted by the Civil Court as follows :-  "After going through the evidence and the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the case of the plaintiff.
As stated above, the plaintiff was promoted to the post of AE Civil purely on ad hoc basis against the quota of scheduled caste category because no scheduled caste candidate was eligible to that post at that time with the order that the plaintiff will be reverted without notice as soon as candidate belonging to scheduled caste category attains eligibility.
The plaintiff after admitting all the terms and conditions of this promotion order joined as AE (Civil) vide letter Ex. D-1.
As such now the plaintiff cannot claim this post as a matter of right.
The defendant No. 2 who belongs to scheduled caste category has already cleared his departmental accounts examination in March, 1990.
As such, it is he who is entitled to the post on which the plaintiff is working as per clause 9 of order Ex. D-1.
The granting of injunction to the plaintiff would defeat the right of defendant No. 2 for promotion for ever.
As such, to my mind no injunction as prayed for can be granted to the plaintiff."
10.
Even the appeal filed by Sumesh Bansal against the judgment of Civil Court has been dismissed.
We are of the opinion that the respondent-Board has acted unfairly and unreasonably by denying the due benefit of reservation to the petitioner.
Having defended the right of the petitioner in the civil suit, the respondent-Board cannot now be permitted to take a contrary stand.
11.
Further, any subsequent amendment in the Rules cannot take away the accrued right of the petitioner on 20.3.1990.
The ratio of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of YV Rangaiah (supra) is fully applicable to the facts of the present case.
The petitioner has to be given the promotion w.e.f.
20.3.1990, the date when he became eligible for promotion, and Sumesh Bansal was permitted to continue on the post clearly reserved for the Scheduled Caste category.
The plea of subsequent reduction in posts is wholly irrelevant so far as the claim of the petitioner is concerned.
We are conscious that it may not now be possible to revert Sumesh Bansal, after lapse of such a long period.
In that event a supernumerary post can be created for him.
But this cannot be used as an excuse to deny the deserved relief to the petitioner.
12.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition and modify the order (P/11) and direct that the petitioner shall be treated to have been promoted w.e.f.
20.3.1990 on the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil).
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits such as seniority and further promotions.
The arrears of salary with 9% interest shall be released to him within two months on receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.