JS Narang, J - Learned Assistant Advocate General states that the operation of the impugned order Annexure P-13 has been stayed subject to Section 17(B) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
Upon query, he has stated that the said provision will not come into the way of the petitioner-State as the workman had been re-instated w.e.f.
24.3.1987 and that he is working since then.
He further states that as per his information, no complaint has been received against his work and conduct.
2.
The services of the workman were terminated on 1061986.
The said order was questioned by way of seeking reference by the Government of Punjab.
The reference was made pursuant to Section 10 of the Act.
The workman took the plea that the services of the workman had not been correctly terminated and that the order suffered from the rigour of the provisions of the Act.
It has been claimed that the workman had already completed more than 240 days within the meaning of Section 25B of the Act.
Resultantly, the workman was entitled to the benefit under Section 25F of the Act.
Admittedly, no retrenchment compensation, as envisaged under the aforestated provision, was granted to the workman.
The parties led documentary as well as ocular evidence before the Labour Court.
A finding has been returned by the Labour Court specifically observing that the claim of the workman has not been contested in the written statement filed before the Labour Court.
The reference has been answered in favour of the workman and against the employer.
The order of termination has virtually been interpreted as order of retrenchment and that the re- instatement has been granted with continuity of service and full back wages from the date of the demand notice dated 1291986.
The award dated 1241988 has been made the subject matter of challenge in the present petition.
3.
Learned Assistant Advocate General has argued that the award of the Labour Court is not sustainable as the workman had been appointed on probation and intermittently his services had been terminated and every time a fresh appointment was granted to the workman.
The appointment was given on temporary basis and that his services could be terminated without any notice and without assigning any reason.
It has further been provided that the Department shall not be bound to regularise his services.
The workman, being the junior-most, his services have been terminated/discontinued.
He has placed reliance upon Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act, therefore, the workman is not entitled to any relief and that the award is not sustainable.
4.
I have heard the learned Assistant Advocate General and have gone through the paper book, the impugned award and also the Annexures appended with the petition.
I am of the considered opinion that there is no legal and/or factual infirmity in the award dated 1241988.
Admittedly, the workman had been given the appointment in the first instance on 1591982 and, thereafter, his services are shown to have been dis-continued being the junior-most person in service.
There is nothing on the record to show that any seniority list vis-a-vis such employees was maintained by the petitioner, as has been claimed, nor any has been placed on record.
The approach of the petitioner does not look to be straight and honest and is definitely hit by the principle of unfair trade practice being adopted by it.
The principle of retrenchment in that context would be applicable which has not been adhered to as has been found as a matter of fact by the Labour Court.
Apart from this, the argument of the learned Assistant Advocate General that the award is hit by Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act is not at all sustainable as no such plea has been taken in the present petition.
Thus, it was never the case of the petitioner that any contractual employment was given to the workman.
In this view of the matter, the petition is not maintainable and the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.