RC Gandhi, J - Petitioner, by means of this petition, seeks to quash Government order No. 130-HME of 2004 dated 13-2-2004 whereby Government order No. 102-HME of 2004 dated 10-2-2004 has been rescinded and respondent No. 5 posted as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla was attached with Directorate of Family Welfare and petitioner Dr. Manzoor Ahmad, Asstt.
Surgeon, District Hospital, Baramulla, posted as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla.
2.
Respondent No. 5 while working as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla, in stopgap arrangement in his own pay and grade, was transferred and attached vide Government Order No. 102-HME of 2004 dated 10-2-2004 with the Directorate of Family Welfare, pending enquiry in embezzlement case against him as Ex-BMO, Ganderbal/Lar and in his place petitioner Dr. Manzoor Ahmad, Assistant Surgeon, District Hospital, Baramulla was posted as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla, in his own pay and grade, pending clearance by the DPC and without prejudice to the seniority of others.
3.
Respondent No. 5 while working as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla, filed petition SWP No. 1295/03 which came to be disposed of on 4-8-2003 directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to hold the charge of the post of Chief Medical Officer till the DPC is constituted and his case is considered along with other eligible persons.
On consensus of the parties, this petition was finally disposed of on 4-8-2003.
4.
The petitioner has challenged impugned order dated 13-2-2004 on the ground that respondent No. 5 being involved in an embezzlement case could not have been promoted and permitted to work as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla, and once the petitioner was posted as Chief Medical Officer, Barramulla, in his own pay and grade, pending clearance by DPC should not have been withdrawn therefrom.
It is averred that the order of transfer of respondent No 5 has been issued with a design to frustrate the enquiry ordered to be instituted against him vide order dated 10-2-2004 and that he has wrongly used the order of Court dated 4-8-2003 and mislead the respondent No. 2 to believe that order dated 100204 could not have been issued.
5.
Respondent No. 5 and other respondents have filed their reply separately controverting the averments of the petition.
Respondent No. 5 has submitted that there was no enquiry pending against him, on the date of issuance of the order dated 10-2-2004.
Respondent No. 2 would not have passed the order in presence of the direction of the Court dated 4-8-2003, directing the respondents to take steps to complete the process of filling up of the post and till the process is complete, the present status of respondent No. 5 shall not be disturbed.
6.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 have submitted that at the time of issuance of order dated 10-2-2004, the fact of judgment dated 4-8-2004 was not placed before the Hon'ble Minister who is the approving authority for transfer and posting of the Chief Medical Officers.
Respondent No. 5 represented to the Government and his case was examined afresh.
It was found that according to the direction of the Court, respondent was required to be continued as Chief Medical Officer till the post is filled up on substantive basis.
It is also stated that by rescinding order dated 10-2-2004, it has not caused any prejudice to the rights and interests of the petitioner who is only an Assistant Surgeon and yet to become Block Medical Officer which is the next promotional post for the Assistant Surgeon.
The Assistant Surgeon cannot be promoted as Chief Medical Officer under rules.
Respondent No. 5 is holding the post of Block Medical Officer since nine years.
It is also submitted in para 6 of the reply that pendency of an enquiry or departmental proceedings is no ground for attachment of the respondent No. 5.
The order dated 10-2-2004 was rescinded on the ground being inconsistent with rules.
7.
The petition is admitted to hearing.
Objections filed by the respondents are treated as Counter Affidavit.
With the consensus of learned counsel for the patties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
8.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
9.
Mr. RA Jan, learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that impugned order dated 13022004, rescinding order dated 100204 whereby the petitioner was posted as Chief Medical officer, Baramulla, is illegal on the face of it and is designedly issued to frustrate the enquiry directed to be conducted against Respondent No. 5.
He could not have been permitted to function as Chief Medical Officer, Baramulla, being involved in embezzlement and not having clean record of service.
10.
Mr. AM Magray, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that at the time of framing order dated 10-2-2004, order dated 4-8-2003 passed in SWP No. 1295/03 could not be brought to the notice of Minister, the authority for effecting transfers and postings against the post of Chief Medical Officer.
Respondent No. 5 represented to the Government and brought to its notice the order of the Court and in implementation of the said order, impugned order has been issued.
The relevant portion of the order dated 4-8-2003 for appreciation is extracted below :-  ".........respondents will take steps to complete the process of filing the post of Chief Medical Officer, in accordance with rules and also consider the case of the petitioner along with other eligible persons for promotion.
Till the process is complete, the present status of the petitioner shall not be disturbed."
11.
Mr. Magray has further submitted that there is no substance in the plea of learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned order has been framed to frustrate the enquiry ordered against respondent No. 5.
The enquiry has been instituted and he shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
His further submission is that adjustment of the petitioner Assistant Surgeon as Chief Medical Officer is in violation of rules governing the services known as The Jammu and Kashmir Medical (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1970.
The petitioner could have been adjusted/promoted to the post of Block Medical Officer and not to the post of Chief Medical Officer.
The relevant rule is extracted below :-  Class Category Designation of the Post Minimum Qualification Method of Recruitment 1 2 3 4 5 II (a) District Medical Officers [By promotion from category (b) of Class II, subject to suitability & satisfactory record of service] Superintendents of Hospitals Dy.
Superintendents of Hospitals (b) Medical Officer Incharge 7 yrs.
experience in By promotion from Primary Health Centre (Block Medical Officers) Class II category (c) Class II category (c) (c) Assistant Surgeons including Unit Medical Officers, Medical Officers, District Family Planning Officers, Supervising Medical Officers, Medical Lecturers-cum-Demonstrator, Epidomologist, Dermatologist, Veneriologist, Blood Bank Officer, Anaesthesist and Radiologists.
By direct recruitment 12.
The aforesaid proposition of law envisages that an Assistant Surgeon can be promoted to the post of Block Medical Officer provided he has an experience of seven years as Assistant Surgeon.
Under rules an Assistant Surgeon cannot be promoted to the post of Chief Medical Officer (earlier designated as District Medical Officer) being not the promotional post for Assistant Surgeon.
The respondents are under legal obligation to fill up the post from out of the eligible Block Medical Officers.
There is a purpose to prescribe eligibility qualification to the post and the purpose is that the officer becomes equipped with the experience to make the post functional.
Respondents have posted the petitioner against the post of Chief Medical Officer in blatant violation of the rules.
Not only this Mr. Magray, learned counsel for the respondents has admitted also that while framing the order dated 10-2- 2004, respondents have not taken into consideration, another relevant provision of law, contained in Regulation 85 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations which provides manner and method of appointment of an officer as in charge of a higher post independent of his own duties.
Regulation 85 reads as under :  "(1) A Government servant may be : (a) assigned the charge of another post in addition to his own duties; or (b) appointed to be in charge of a higher post independent of his own duties.
(2) (i) where for administrative reasons or non-completion of formalities for appointment to the higher post, a person cannot be appointed to that post formally and is appointed in his own pay and grade to be in charge of the higher post and required to discharge full duties and responsibilities of the post either in the same office or in a different office, in the same cadre/line of promotion or in a different cadre/line of promotion."
Government Instruction.
(a) It is wrong in principle to appoint a Government servant to a higher post in his own cadre/line of promotion without observing the required formalities of clearance from Departmental Promotion Committee etc, where, however, for reasons to be recorded, the Administrative authorities cannot without detriment to public interests wait for formal appointments temporary stop-gap arrangements may be made by them against such posts.
In making such arrangements the competent authorities will ensure that only such officers are appointed who satisfy all the requirements for higher appointments and can stand the scrutiny of the Departmental Promotion Committee etc." 13.
The aforesaid regulation also stipulates that while making stop-gap adjustment it must be ensured that the officer so appointed must satisfy the requirement for higher appointment and should be eligible to stand the scrutiny by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The petitioner herein cannot be considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee for the post of Chief Medical Officer, being holding the post of Assistant Surgeon which is not the source for promotion to the post of Chief Medical Officer.
On this ground also the adjustment of the petitioner against the post of Chief Medical Officer cannot be maintained.
The stop-gap arrangement as here in this case, does not confer any right to continue against the posts.
This proposition of law has been settled by the Apex Court in case titled Ramakant Shripad Sinal Advalpalkar v. Union of India, 1993(3) SCT 586 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1145 as under (Para 4) :  "......Asking an officer who substantively holds a lower post merely to discharge duties of a higher post cannot be treated as a promotion.
In such a case he does not get the salary of the higher post, but gets only that in service parlance is called a "Charge allowance".
Such situations are contemplated where exigencies of public service necessitate such arrangements and even consideration of seniority does not enter into it.
The person continues to hold his substantive lower post and only discharges the duties of the higher post essentially as a stop-gap arrangement."
14.
Petitioner in terms of rules governing the services is in-eligible and unless he possesses his eligibility according to rules, he has no right to seek mandamus for his continuation against the post.
This proposition of law also has been settled by Apex Court in case titled Umakant Saran v. State of Bihar, AIR 1973 SC 964 holding that -  ".....While respondents were eligible for appointment as lecturers and the petitioner-appellant was not, therefore, he could not be regarded as aggrieved for the purpose of issue of mandamus for setting aside the appointments of the respondents."
15.
The petitioner being in-eligible is not found entitled for his continuation against the post of Chief Medical Officer.
16.
It is also urged by learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. RA Jan, that respondent No. 5 is substantively holding the post of Assistant Surgeon and has not been promoted as Block Medical Officer though he was adjusted as Block Medical Officer and thereafter as Chief Medical Officer but not cleared by DPC, thus, is not entitled to hold the post of Chief Medical Officer.
This ground has not been pleaded in the petition giving opportunity to the respondents to meet it, therefore, is not entertained.
17.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition having found without merit is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.