Shiv Kumar Sharma, J - Since all these writ petitions relate to Advertisement dated October 1, 2001 notified by Rajasthan Public Service Commission (for short 'RPSC') for the direct recruitment to the post of Motor Vehicle Sub- Inspector, they are taken up together for the disposal.
2.
Contextual facts depict that as many as 71 vacancies for male and 31 for female were advertised by the RPSC on October 1, 2001 for the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inpector.
Pursuant to the advertisement all the petitioners submitted applications and were allowed to appear in the written examination that was qualified by all the petitioners.
The candidature of the petitioners was rejected by the RPSC on the ground that on the last date of submission of application form i.e. November 19, 2001 the petitioners did not possess eligibility requirement incorporated in the advertisement.
This act of respondent RPSC in rejecting the candidature of the petitioners has been assailed in these writ petitions.
3.
The petitioners Vikram Singh Rathore and Devendra Kumar Indra joined 3 years Diploma Course in the year 1998 and qualified the same in June, 2001 from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (India) Mumbai.
At the time when the petitioners joined Diploma course was recognised by the State of Rajasthan and also by the Central Government.
Both the petitioners were permitted to appear in the written examination and after they were declared successful, they were permitted to appear in the interview.
At the stage of declaration of final result their selection had been cancelled.
The candidature of petitioners was rejected on the premise that they have failed to possess the diploma from the recognised institution and the licence for driving heavy vehicle.
The State of Rajasthan derecognised the qualification of the Mechanical Engineers (India), Mumbai vide order dated October 30, 2000.
The Central Government further withdrew the equivalence granted vide notification dated June 10, 2002.
The case of the petitioners is that they were eligible for employment.
In support of their contentions, learned counsel for the petitioners placed reliance on Suresh Pal Singh v. State of Haryana, (1987)2 SCC 445 : AIR 1987 SC 2027.
4.
The petitioner Yashwant Singh is by caste Jatsikh and Jatsikh has been notified in the category of OBC in terms of the notification dated November 3, 1999.
On December 19, 2001 the State of Rajasthan clarified that Jatsikhs were also considered in the category of Jat and Jats were in the category of OBC.
The petitioner Yashwant Singh filed the application in the General category for the reason that no specification was available for Jatsikh.
After declaration of the result of written examination the petitioner submitted representation on May 5, 2002 and stated that in view of the clarification made by the State of Rajasthan vide notification dated December 19, 2001 the caste Jatsikh was also in the category of Jat, which is in the category of OBC.
The petitioner was declared successful in the written examination and was called for interview, but still he was considered in the General Category and not in OBC, accordingly the petitioner was declared unsuccessful.
5.
The petitioner Harkesh Meena was also declared successful in the written examination on June 3, 2002.
The respondent RPSC informed the petitioner that he was not having requisite experience since he did not attach the experience certificate along with the application form.
The petitioner submitted experience certificate much before holding the interview but his candidature was rejected and he was not permitted to appear in the interview.
6.
The candidature of petitioners Gunjan, Rajesh, Navneet Bansal, Pooran Mal Raiger and Teekam Chand Meena was rejected on the ground that they do not possess the licence for driving heavy motor vehicles.
7.
The respondents submitted return to the writ petitions stating therein that the petitioners were ineligible for appointment on the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector because they do not possess the requisite qualification as incorporated in the advertisement.
8.
Mr. Ajay Rastogi, learned counsel for the parties canvassed that the word 'and' used in the advertisement is normally conjunctive and it ought to have been read as 'or'.
Reliance is placed on Fakir Mohd.
v. Sita Ram, 2002(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 91 : (2002)1 SCC 741 : AIR 2002 SC 433, Sameer Khan v. Bindu Khan, (1998)7 SCC 59, Municipal Council, Raipur v. Bishandas Nathumal, AIR 1969 MP 147 and Devidayal Nanakchand v. State Industrial Court, Nagpur, AIR 1959 Bombay 65.
9.
Having closely scrutinised the pleadings as well as the documents appended with the writ petitions.
I find myself unable to agree with the submissions, advanced on behalf of the petitioners.
It was incumbent on the petitioners to properly read the conditions incorporated in the advertisement before submitting the application form.
Since they failed to properly scan column No. 13 in regard to 'Educational Qualification' it is not for this Court to give interpretation to word 'and' or read between the lines of the conditions narrated in the advertisement.
10.
Rajasthan Transport Subordinate Service Rules, 1963 stood amended vide notification dated January 6, 1998 laying down requirement of holding driving license authorising to drive motor cycle, Heavy Goods vehicles and Heavy Passenger Vehicles.
As per amended Rules, 1963 for holding the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector the person must hold a driving license to drive Motor Cycle, Heavy Goods Vehicles and Heavy Passenger Vehicles.
There is nothing on record to establish that the petitioners were having the requisite qualification for the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector, since none of the petitioners have placed on record the document showing that till the date of interview they possessed the required license to drive Motor Cycle, Heavy Goods Vehicle and Heavy Passenger Vehicle.
None of the petitioners have placed on record the copy of driving license.
11.
In Kumari Nikita v. Centralised Admission Coordination Committee, 2000(4) Raj LW 660, this Court indicated that after showing himself in the General Category if the candidate failed, he/she cannot be allowed to change his/her status by producing a certificate that he/she was member of OBC.
12.
This Court in Banshidhar Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1998(2) SCT 772 (Rajasthan), (SCWP No. 1210/95 decided on November 26, 1997 indicated that possession of driving license of heavy vehicle/transport vehicle is an essential qualification for direct recruitment to the post of Motor Vehicle Sub-Inspector mainly for the purpose that the Sub-Inspectors are required to check the vehicles and they should know the driving and mechanism of the vehicles.
13.
Since the petitioners have not produced material that they were possessing license to drive heavy vehicles/transport vehicles prior to start of the interview, they are not entitled to seek relief sought in the writ petitions.
14.
For these reasons the writ petitions being devoid of merit stand dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.