Surya Kant, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 5964 of 1989 and 20630 of 2002 as common questions of law and facts are involved in both the cases.
2.
The petitioners, who are working as Village Watchmen (Chowkidars) in the State of Punjab have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court envisaged under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to declare them "government servants" and equate with Class IV employees, employed as chowkidars in different departments of the State Govt. and consequently, to grant them the same pay and allowances from the date of their appointments.
3.
For the sake of brevity, the facts are being taken from CWP No. 20630 of 2003 in which petitioner No. 1, namely, Pendu Chowkidara Union Punjab (Regd.
), a union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 vide registration certificate dated 28101994 (Annexure P-1) claims to be representing the interest of over 10 thousand chowkidars serving in different villages of the State of Punjab.
4.
The facts giving rise to the filing of the present writ petition are that the petitioners have been employed to work as village watchmen (chowkidars); conditions of their employment as such are governed by the rules known as Punjab Chowkidara Rules, 1965 which have been notified by the Govt. of Punjab vide notification dated May 29, 1965 and have been placed on record by the State Govt. along with its written statement as Annexure R-1.
According to Rule 2 of these Rules, in each village one or more village watchmen shall be appointed and the Deputy Commissioner is competent to create more than one post of watchman for a village.
The "nomination" to the post of village watchman shall be made by the village headman and the person so nominated shall, after holding due inquiry into his age, character and ability, be appointed or rejected at the discretion of the Deputy Commissioner (reference Rules 6 and 8); in the absence of any nomination by the village headman, the Deputy Commissioner or the officer duly authorised by him is competent to appoint a village watchman (Rule 9); Rule 11 empowers the Deputy Commissioner or the officer authorised by him to dismiss the village watchman for any misconduct or negligence of duty or physical inability in the performance of the duty, whereas Rule 12 prescribes the uniforms which a village watchman is required to wear along with the prescribed arms, the expenditure to be incurred upon which shall be collected by the revenue authorities from the village community (Rule 12); village watchman is not permitted to withdraw from the duty of his office unless he receives permission to resign from the Deputy Commissioner or from other person authorised by the Deputy Commissioner and/or till the expiry of two months after he gives notice intending to resign (Rule 13); the village watchman is the servant of the village community and is required to obey the village headman; the Deputy Commissioner is competent to prohibit a village watchman, whose monthly remuneration is less than Rs. 400/- in cash or grain or part cash and part grain, from engaging in occupation other than the discharge of his duties under these Rules.
5.
These Rules require a village watchman to perform multiple duties that vary in nature as is apparent from some of the provisions of the Rules reproduced hereinafter :-  "15.
It is the duty of every village watchman to keep watch and ward in his village.
16.
Every village watchman shall, except where it is otherwise provided by these rules, report in person on the state of his beat once a fortnight to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which such beat is situated.
Where there are more than one village watchman in a beat such report shall be made by one village watchman only, and the duty shall be taken by rotation.
The Deputy Commissioner may, should he deem fit, order more frequent reports, at such intervals and for so long as he considers proper, from any beat in his district.
18.
Every village headman and village watchman shall observe and from time to time report to such officer, the movement of all bad characters in his village or beat and shall give timely information of his associating with individuals of bad repute or ceasing to labour or to obtain a livelihood by honest means.
19.
Every village headman and village watchman shall forthwith make a report to such officer in the event of any notorious bad character residing in his village or being absent at night without having given notice of his departure, and shall give timely information of his associating with individuals of bad repute or ceasing to labour or to obtain a livelihood by honest means.
20.
Every village headman and village watchman shall keep such officer informed of all disputes which are likely to lead to any riot or serious affray, and of all intelligence he receives affecting the public peace within or near his village or beat.
22.
It shall be the duty of the village headman and village watchman to maintain a death register and a birth register to report to the officer in- charge of the Police Station within the limits of which his village or beat is situate, all deaths and births which occur in such village or beat, and to furnish such other information in connection with vital statistics as may be required of him by the Deputy Commissioner from time to time.
He shall also obtain the signature of the patwari of the Circle on the Death Register within one week of his making the entry of a death in the said register in token of the patwaris having received information of the occurrence.
23.
Every village headman and village watchman shall in like manner report to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which his village or beat is situate, the appearance of any epidemic disease among people or animals in his village or beat, and shall report to the patwari on demand the total number of deaths caused thereby, and shall also supply to the best of his ability any local information which the Deputy Commissioner may require.
24.
Every village headman and village watchman shall prevent, and may interpose for the purpose of preventing the commission of any cognizable offence as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
25.
Every village headman or village watchman receiving information of the commission of, or of a design to commit, any such offence, shall communicate such information to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which his village or beat is situate.
26.
Every village headman and village watchman knowing of a design to commit any such offence, may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so designing, if the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented.
28.
Every village headman and village watchman may, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant arrest - 1st, - any person who in the sight of such headman or watchman commits a cognizable offence as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure; 2nd, - any person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been concerned in any such offence; 3rd, - any person against whom a hue and cry has been raised of his having been concerned in any such offence; 4th, - any person who has been proclaimed either under the Code of Criminal Procedure or in a Police Gazette or Notification; 5th, - any person found with property in his possession which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen property; 6th, - any person who obstructs a police officer or village headman or village watchman acting under these rules in the execution of his duty, or who escapes from lawful custody; 7th, - any person reasonably suspected of being a deserter from the Indian Army, Navy or Air Force.
6.
At this stage, reference to some more provisions of the Rules, in relation to the service conditions of a village watchman may also be made.
For the "appointment" of village watchman, Rules 6 and 8 being relevant, are reproduced below :-  "6.
The notification to the post of village watchman or of Daffadar shall be made by the village headman, and where there are more village headmen than one, the opinion of the majority in number (unless there is some special provision to the contrary in the village administration paper) shall prevail.
Where a village watchman or daffadar is to be appointed for a beat comprising more than one village, the opinion of the majority in number of the village headmen in such beat shall prevail.
8.
The person nominated shall, after due enquiry into his age, character and ability, be appointed or rejected at discretion of such Deputy Commissioner, or by some officer authorised by him in that behalf."
The "dismissal" of a village watchman or when can be resign from the post, is mentioned in Rules 11 and 13 which are reproduced below :-  "11.
The Deputy Commissioner, or the officer duly authorised by him in that behalf, may dismiss any village watchmen or daffadar for any misconduct or neglect of duty or physical unfitness for the performance of his duties.
13.
No village watchman or daffadar shall withdraw from the duties of his office unless :- 1st, - he has received permission to resign from the Deputy Commissioner or from some other person authorised by the Deputy Commissioner to accept his resignation, or 2nd, - two months have elapsed since he gave notice of his intention to resign to the Deputy Commissioner or to the officer duly authorised by him in that behalf."
What a village watchman shall be "paid as remuneration" for discharging the duties, finds incorporated in Rule 33 read with Rule 34 of the Rules which too are reproduced below :- "33.
Subject to the provision hereinafter contained, every village watchman shall receive remuneration in cash at the rate of not less than five rupees per mensem or remuneration in grain not less than equivalent to five rupees per mensem or remuneration partly in grain and partly in cash not less than equivalent to five rupees per mensem in all to be paid half yearly or at each harvest.
An extra remuneration to be fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, not exceeding five rupees per mensem, shall be paid to each daffadar.
34.
Provided that, with the sanction of the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner may enhance the remuneration of any village watchman upto a maximum of Rupees twenty per mensem in cash or its equivalent in grain : Provided also that whenever the remuneration has been fixed in whole or in part in cash, whether at the time of settlement or otherwise, it shall, at any time, be competent to the village community and the village watchman by mutual agreement, subject to the approval of the Deputy Commissioner, to commute such cash remuneration into remuneration in grain; but where such commutation has taken place, the Deputy Commissioner may, for any sufficient reason, direct that remuneration in cash shall be reverted to."
Prohibition against the transfer of a village watchman from one village to another is incorporated in Rule 41-A which reads as under :-  "41-A.
No village watchman shall be liable to transfer from one village to another."
It may also be mentioned here that if a village watchman is found guilty of any wilful misconduct in his office or of negligence of duty, he can be punished with a fine not exceeding three months pay with imprisonment with or without hard labour for a period not exceeding three months, or with both, as provided in Rule 43.
7.
The gravamen of the allegations is that despite such onerous duties, referred to above, which the village watchmen are/were required to perform, they were being paid Rs. 100/- per month till November, 1989, which remuneration was enhanced to Rs. 200/- per month from November, 1989 and to Rs. 300/- per month from April, 1993.
Their monthly remuneration has been further revised to Rs. 400/- per month from April, 1997 which is being paid to them till now.
On the other hand, a watchman (chowkidar) employed in any other government department receives more than Rs. 4100/- per month as salary apart from house rent, dearness allowance etc., and thus, the total emoluments comes out to be more than Rs. 8,000/- per month.
Not only this, even a daily wage chowkidar is paid Rs. 7695 per day as per the rates prescribed by the Deputy Commissioner under the Minimum Wages Act.
The petitioners, therefore, contend that the action of the State Govt. in paying them a meagre amount of Rs. 400/- per month is not only violative of Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India, it violates Article 21 as well, which provides protective umbrella to lead a dignified and meaningful life.
Further assertion of the petitioners is that the payment of Rs. 400/- per month as remuneration which the very nature of their duties demands them to work 24 hours in the village, is a glaring example of their sheer exploitation by none else than the State, who in terms of the Preamble of our Constitution is committed to provide social and economic justice to every citizen of India.
8.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of Respondents No. 2 and 3.
The defence taken by the State Govt. is spelt out in paragraphs 2 and 6 of the written statement, which read as under :-  "2.
That contents in para No. 2 of the writ petition are admitted to the extent that Punjab Chokidara Rules, 1965 hereinafter called the `Rules' have been formulated by the State Government but the village watchman is a servant of village community in terms of Rule 14 of the said rules ibid.
Further, in terms of rule 3 of the rules ibid, one or more watchman can be appointed in a village.
The remuneration payable to them is levied and collected from the residents of the village.
6.
That contents in para No. 6 of the writ petition are denied.
It is submitted that the village chowkidar cannot be equated with the watchman working in the Government Departments as their duties and functions are altogether different.
The chowkidars of Government Departments are governed under service rules made by the State Government under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The village chowkidars are not government employees as specifically stated in Rule 14 of the Punjab Chowkidara Rules, 1965 and on the other hand they are servants of village community.
Their appointment is made by the concerned Deputy Commissioner or authorised officer on the recommendation of the village Lambardar.
Their remuneration, which at present is Rs. 400/- per month is paid from the budgetary provisions of the State Government in the first instance and the amount is then recovered from the occupants/owners of house in the village with the exception of widows, sweepers, inform (infirm ?)
persons, Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
They are also not full time workers and their duties are only incidental and occasional in nature.
They had represented to enhance their remuneration from Rs. 400/- per month to Rs. 600/- per month and the matter is under consideration of the State Government.
It is also stated that the village chowkidars are not prohibited from any other occupation whereas the Government Watchmen are prohibited from any occupation as per the provisions of the Punjab Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966.
Hence, the village chowkidar cannot claim the scales of pay and benefits to which government employees are entitled to.
As stated in para 4 and 5 above, the village watchman is paid remuneration on account of his service rendered in terms of the provisions of the rules.
The comparison of duties of the chowkidars in Government Department as made in the Civil Writ Petition is imaginary."
(emphasis applied).
9.
During the course of hearing, additional opportunity was given to the parties to place on record government instructions prescribing minimum rates of wages payable to part-time employees working in different departments of the State Govt. Pursuant thereto, certain instructions of the State Govt. have been placed on record by the petitioners.
Similarly, an affidavit dated 2152004 has been filed by the State Govt., paragraph 3 whereof being relevant, is reproduced below :-  "3.
That as per the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala, the wages of part-time chowkidars who worked for an hour a day is fixed at Rs. 273/- per month and for whole time chowkidars, the wages have been fixed as Rs. 2,185/- per month (Annexure R-IV)."
10.
An order dated September 10, 2003 passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala (Annexure R-IV) which contains the same averments as are made in the aforementioned affidavit in relation to the rates of wages payable to daily wage employees, part-time employees and whole-time employees has also been placed on record, according to which part-time chowkidars are paid Rs. 273/- per hour and the relevant extract of which reads as follows :-  S.No.
Designation Daily wages Wages for the month part time per hour (Rs.) Whole time (Rs.) (Rs.) General Category xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 7.
Chowkidar 8398 273.00 2185.00 xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 11.
I have heard Dr. Balram Gupta, learned Senior Counsel, along with Shri Sanjiv Bansal, learned counsel, in support of these Writ petitions, and Smt. Rupinder Wasu, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, representing the official respondents and have also perused the record.
12.
True it is that the village chowkidars in stricto-sensu are not government servants.
The posts held by them are not "civil posts" nor their emoluments are drawn from the consolidated fund of the State.
The conditions of their service are also not governed under any Legislative enactment and/or the Service Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Similarly, the mode and manner of their recruitment is also not consistent with the philosophy of Article 16 of the Constitution of India In view of this, it is not possible for this Court to declare them "government servants/employees".
13.
However, the stand taken by the State Government that the village chowkidars are not "full time workers" and their duties are only "incidental" and "occasional" in nature, appears to be without any basis.
The stand taken by the State Government that the village chowkidars are not "prohibited" from taking up any other occupation, is equally misconceived.
The afore-mentioned stand of the State Government needs to be scrutinized keeping in view the nature of duties prescribed for the village chowkidars under the 1965 Rules.
Expecting a village chowkidar to assist the police to prevent and detect crime and apprehension of offenders, to report the arrival of suspicious characters in village, to act as a watch-dog to see that any riot or crime is not committed, maintaining the death and birth registers in relation to the habitants of the village, reporting to the police station about appearance of an epidemic diseases amongst people or animals, and/or to apprehend a person found involved in the committal of some crime, are such multi-farious, arduous and onerous duties assigned to a village chowkidar that in honest and faithful performance thereof, he is bound to keep himself involved day in and day out, which necessarily prevents him from engaging himself in any other occupation.
The village chowkidar along with his family, therefore, has no option but to survive on a meagre amount of Rs. 400/- per month.
Unfortunately, even the afore-mentioned monthly remuneration also does not flow from the consolidated fund of the State and is to be paid to him by the revenue authorities after collecting it from the village inhabitants.
Thus, the uncertainty regarding timely payment of this paltry amount also cannot be ruled out.
14.
It appears that while panchayati raj institutions have been established and more so after the 73rd amendment of the Constitution, several powers have been conferred upon them to function as the institutions of self-governance, yet the plight of the village chowkidar has been completely overlooked.
Adding insult to injury is the stand taken by the State Government in its written statement that the increase in the monthly remuneration of village chowkidars from Rs. 400/- per month to Rs. 600/- per month is under its "active consideration".
15.
The petitioners though cannot assert that they are at par with Class IV employees who are working as chowkidars in government departments and/or non- payment of same emoluments to them is an arbitrary action of the State which does not stand on the touch-stone of Article 16 of the Constitution of India However, the right to live with human dignity and respect, enshrined in Article 21 of our Constitution, cannot be permitted to be violated merely because a person having been subjected to the brink of poverty and unemployment, is forced to accept "begar" which has been expressly prohibited by Article 23 of the Constitution.
Keeping these parameters in view and the fact that the buying capacity of the Indian Rupee has shrunken considerably over a period of time, it cannot be said with any stretch of imagination, that an amount of Rs. 400/- or for that matter even a sum of Rs. 600/- per month is sufficient enough to cater to the bare minimum needs of a poor family living in the rural areas.
While this is neither the function of the Court to embark upon an inquiry as to what should be the ideal wages sufficient to provide bare needs to a family, nor the Court is an expert to assume itself the role of a recommendatory body in relation to the pay scales etc.
Such things squarely fall within the domain of the executive only.
The Court, however, cannot overlook and approve an indifferent action of the State which forces a person to live in miserable conditions.
Needless to say that the State cannot ignore its basic character of "a welfare State" imbibed in our Constitution and has to endeavour to achieve economic and social justice in consonance with Article 43 of our Constitution for one and all.
16.
Adverting to the facts of the case, the petitioners, though, are not entitled to claim the pay scale and/or emoluments at par with Class IV employees including the chowkidars working in government departments and they can also not be permitted to claim parity with other set of Govt. employees, yet it is imperative upon the State Govt. to objectively consider the apparently genuine demand of the village chowkidars for enhancement of their remuneration in a reasonable and respectable manner so that the bare minimum needs of a family inhabited in rural areas are taken care of.
It will also be in the larger public interest to provide such reasonable remunerations to the village chowkidars so that they are not forced to fend for some other additional occupation for livelihood and are able to devote full time to the duties which they are expected to perform under the 1965 Rules.
17.
What should be, however, a "reasonable" and "respectable" remuneration for the village chowkidars, is an issue to be considered and determined by the executive only.
I, therefore, direct the respondents to objectively consider the matter of enhancement of the monthly remuneration payable to a village chowkidar in the light of the observations made and the parameters laid down in this judgment.
Needful shall be done within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order and the revised remunerations shall be payable to the village chowkidars with effect from January, 2005.
18.
The Writ Petitions are disposed of with the directions, afore-mentioned.
Petition partly allowed.