Mehtab S Gill, J - Petitioner has prayed for issuing a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing orders (Annexures P-7, P-8 and P-12).
2.
Petitioner has averred that he joined the respondents-department on September 3, 1965.
He had completed his pensionable qualifying service on November 27, 1992.
Respondent No. 2, ie., Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh, passed the impugned order (Annexure P-12) on a very minor allegation, which was not proved.
Petitioner has earned more than 25 Commendation Certificates/Awards/Prizes on various occasions during the course of his service.
3.
Petitioner was dismissed from service on the ground that while posted at Police Post No. 37, Sector 37, Faridabad on May 22, 1988, when he was asked to write down a message by the Incharge of Police Post to undertake punishment drill in the Police Lines on May 23, 1988, petitioner had a quarrel with the Incharge Shri Keshav Dev.
Departure report was written.
Petitioner refused to sign it.
It was further alleged by the Incharge of the Police Post that the petitioner abused him, mishandled him, misbehaved him and gave beatings to Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev.
On May 15, 1988, the petitioner had, previously, used filthy language when he was asked to join the general parade.
This complaint was recorded by Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev in the Daily Diary Report on May 22, 1988 (Annexure P-1).
Respondent No. 3, Deputy Inspector General of Police, initiated departmental enquiry proceedings against the petitioner under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules Sanction of the District Magistrate was not taken.
On the basis of the complaint of Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev (Annexure P-1), the Deputy Superintendent of Police issued a charge-sheet dated May 28, 1988 (Annexure P-2).
Charge- sheet was endorsed by the Superintendent of Police on June 9, 1988 (Annexure P-3).
4.
Petitioner was put under suspension with effect from May 23, 1988 vide order dated May 24, 1988 (Annexure P-3A).
The departmental enquiry was conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police Shri Khushi Ram.
He submitted his report on July 27, 1988 (Annexure P-4).
5.
On the basis of this enquiry report, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner by respondent No. 4 vide his order dated August 11, 1988 (Annexure P-5).
6.
Reply was submitted by the petitioner to the Show Cause Notice (Annexure P-6), wherein he challenged the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
Respondent No. 4, ie., Superintendent of Police, Faridabad, ordered the stoppage of four future increments with cumulative effect vide his order dated October 4, 1988 (Annexure P-7).
7.
Aggrieved by this order, petitioner filed an appeal before respondent No. 3, stating therein that he had not been granted an opportunity of personal hearing, though it was specifically asked by the Punishing Authority, ie., Superintendent of Police, Faridabad (respondent No. 4).
All the contentions of the petitioner were rejected by respondent No. 3 vide order dated February 1, 1991 (Annexure P-8).
It was wrongly recorded in the order that the petitioner was given an opportunity of personal hearing by the Punishing Authority.
8.
Petitioner filed a mercy petition (Annexure P-9) before respondent No. 2, ie., the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh for a sympathetic consideration.
Mercy petition of the petitioner was rejected by respondent No. 2.
Instead, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner under Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules for the enhancement of punishment of dismissal from service.
9.
Petitioner filed a detailed reply to the Show Cause Notice.
Respondent No. 2, ie., the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh, vide his order dated November 27, 1992 (Annexure P-12) dismissed the petitioner from service, without taking into consideration 25 years of service or past service record of the petitioner.
10.
Notice of motion was issued.
11.
Respondent-State filed a detailed written statement.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the provisions of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, have not been followed.
As per these rules, only the Senior Superintendent of Police can charge-sheet the petitioner.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police does not have any authority.
The petitioner had filed a mercy petition before the Director General of Police (respondent No. 2) to reduce the quantum of punishment, but instead of reducing the quantum of sentence, petitioner was served with a Show Cause Notice and dismissed from service.
He has further stated that all the witnesses, as per the enquiry report, had resiled and did not support the case of the complainant, but still the petitioner was punished for no fault of his.
He was discriminated against by the Enquiry Officer.
13.
Learned counsel for the State has stated that as per Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules, the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2) can take a suo motu cognizance and issue a charge-sheet.
Petitioner was rightly charge-sheeted and punished for gross indiscipline on his part.
14.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State.
15.
The final report dated July 27, 1988 (Annexure P-4) submitted by the Enquiry Officer Deputy Superintendent of Police, Faridabad, speaks a lot for itself.
The relevant witnesses are - Witness No. 4 Keshav Dev, Assistant Sub- Inspector, Police Check Post, Sector-37, Faridabad.
He has reiterated his version that the petitioner misbehaved with him.
He physically assaulted him and abused him in the name of his mother, sister and daughters.
Daily Dairy Report to this effect was registered by this witness, but no FIR was registered.
16.
Defence Witness No. 1 Constable Charan Singh, who was on duty in the same Police Post on May 22, 1988, has stated that he does not know about the quarrel.
Nothing happened before him.
Whereas witness No. 2 Constable Shilak Ram has stated that on May 22, 1988, he was posted in Sector 37 Police Check Post, Faridabad and he has no knowledge of any quarrel taking place between Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev and the petitioner.
17.
Witness No. 3 Raj Singh, Station House Officer, Police Station Sarai Khawaja, has stated that Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev, Police Check Post, Sector 37, told him that he had asked the petitioner that the punishment to drill has been fixed and he should go after signing the departure report.
He got infuriated.
Petitioner refused to sign it.
This witness, who was the Station House Officer, then went to the Police Post, Sector 37 to ascertain the true facts.
On enquiry from employees, he was told that no quarrel had taken place between Assistant Sub-Inspector Keshav Dev and the petitioner.
Witness No. 4 Head Constable Khem Chand, who was posted in the same Police Post, has stated that he did not have any knowledge of the quarrel.
Similarly, witness No. 5 Constable Siya Ram stated the same version.
18.
In spite of this, petitioner was found guilty and a report was submitted.
Show Cause Notice (Annexure P-5) was issued to the petitioner by the Superintendent of Police, Faridabad.
Reply to the Show Cause Notice (Annexure P-6) was given to the Superintendent of Police by the petitioner and the Punishing Authority, ie, the Superintendent of Police, Faridabad, who vide his order dated October 4, 1988, passed an order for the stoppage of four increments of the petitioner with cumulative effect.
19.
Against this order, petitioner filed a mercy petition (Annexure P-9) before the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2).
Respondent No. 2, while issuing Show Cause Notice suo motu under Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules, did not take into consideration that all the employees of the Police Post had stated categorically that no quarrel had taken place.
Instead of showing mercy to the petitioner, he issued a Show Cause Notice to the petitioner and terminated his service.
20.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in the case of State of Punjab v. Raj Kumar, 1988(1) RCR(Criminal) 639 : AIR 1988 Supreme Court 805, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court has held in para 11 of its judgment, that in the very nature of their duties, the members of the police force would often stand exposed to criticism and complaints by not only the members of the public but also by the members of the force themselves and consequently they stand placed more vulnerable than members of other Government services of being implicated in false or exaggerated charges.
In order to protect them from false implications and resultant proceedings, the Goverment had thought it necessary to have an initial screening of the complaints received against members of the police force by the District Magistrate.
Such screening would, however, extend only to matters which fall within the zone of departmental action and it could never extend to cases where the offences alleged to have been committed would attract investigation under the Criminal Procedure Code.
21.
Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules is applicable to only departmental enquiries and punishments.
In the present case, the matter was not referred to the District Magistrate as envisaged in Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
22.
Learned counsel has further relied upon a judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Punjab State and others v. Gurdip Singh, 1994(3) SCT 261 (P&H) : 1994(3) Recent Services Judgments 70, wherein Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules has been discussed.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on misconduct.
In the citation (supra), there was only a single stray case of taking liquor by the petitioner.
There was no evidence that the petitioner had created nuisance under the influence of liquor.
Petitioner had put in about 10 years qualifying service for grant of pension under the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol II (iv).
There was no finding that the misconduct alleged was incorrigible and the delinquent was unfit to serve the police force.
No regard was shown to the length of the service of the petitioner and his claim to pension.
Impugned order of dismissal was set aside.
23.
In the case in hand, there is no finding that the petitioner is incorrigible and is not fit to serve the police force, nor was this fact taken into consideration that he had served the police force for 25 years.
24.
In view of the above discussion, petition is allowed.
Orders (Annexures P-7, P-8 and P-12) are set aside.
Respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner with continuity in service and pay all the monetary benefits, which are due to the petitioner, within three months from the date of passing of this order.
Petition allowed.