Surya Kant, J - The three petitioners, who are orthopaedically handicapped candidates, have knocked at the doors of this Constitutional Court seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the Notification dated June 17, 2004 (Annexure P-1) to the extent it provides that an orthopaedically handicapped candidate can be admitted in MBBS course only if he suffers from locomotory disability of the "lower limbs" and pursuant to which the entrance test, known as PMET-2004 for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS courses in different colleges of the State of Punjab, has been held.
The petitioners have also sought a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to admit them in the MBBS course irrespective of the fact as to whether their disability pertains to the "upper limbs" or the "lower limbs".
A direction has also been sought to admit them to the MBBS courses in the physically handicapped category for the academic session 2004-05 as three seats reserved for the aforementioned category have remained unfilled.
2.
The petitioners have passed their 10+2 examination from the schools situated in the State of Punjab.
They appeared in the PMET-2004 conducted by Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot and on the basis of the marks secured by them, they have ranked at No. 866, 1801 and 2338 respectively.
The State of Punjab has issued a Notification dated June 17, 2004 (Annexure P-1) in which a detailed policy for admission to Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic/Homeopathic streams for the academic session 2004-05 has been laid down.
In terms of clause 6-A(d) of the Notification, 3% seats in Government Colleges are reserved for physically handicapped candidates.
The petitioners belong to the physically handicapped category and each one of them has been issued the disability certificate by the Competent Authority certifying that they suffer disability between 50% to 70%.
These certificates have been collectively placed on record as Annexure P-2.
The petitioners, therefore, appeared in the PMET-2004 in the reserved category of physically handicapped persons.
In terms of the Prospectus, total 10 seats in the MBBS courses were reserved for physically handicapped students whereas only 12 candidates, including the petitioners, were found mentioned in the list displayed by the University.
The counselling for physically handicapped candidates was held on 1882004 and on that day only 9 candidates of the physically handicapped category were present against 10 seats.
Out of the 9, 6 candidates were admitted whereas the candidature of 3 candidates, namely the petitioners, was rejected on the ground that their disability did not pertain to the "lower limbs".
The decision to reject candidature of the petitioners was taken on the recommendations of a Medical Board, composition of which was also prescribed in the Prospectus-cum-impugned Notification.
Aggrieved at the rejection of their candidatures that the petitioners have approached this Court.
3.
Upon notice, written statements have been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab (respondent No. 2) as well as Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot (respondent No. 1).
Both these respondents have come up primarily with the stand that in terms of the guidelines issued by the Medical Council of India (MCI) in their circular dated July 14, 2003, 3% reservation meant for physically handicapped candidates was confined to those candidates only who are suffering from locomotory disorder of lower limbs between 50% to 70%.
According to the respondents, a physically handicapped candidate having locomotory disorder in the upper limbs, will not be able to elicit sign during clinical examination and/or finer movements for conducting of surgical procedure.
In this regard, the University has referred to the reports of the Medical Board in relation to the petitioners (Annexure R-1), the relevant part of which reads as follows :-  "4.
Percentage of disability :- (a) Nidhi Karma - As she has deformity of the left arm and not having disability of lower limbs, she is not eligible for this category as per Government instructions/notification.
(b) Hitesh Ganger - He is having no disability of lower limbs and not eligible as per Government Notification.
(c) Dony Goyal - He is having no disability of the lower limbs.
Hence, he is not eligible as per Government Notification."
3.
Thus, according to the respondents, Clause 6-C (a) and (b) which contain "Explanation" in relation to different reserved categories, is in consonance with the guidelines issued by the MCI and is supplementary to Clause 6-A(d) of the Prospectus-cum-Notification (Annexure P-1).
It has also been contended by them that there is nothing like a "principal clause" contained in clause 6-A or an explanation attached thereto, therefore, the principles of statutory interpretation need not be applied while examining the aforesaid provisions of the Prospectus-cum-Notification (Annexure P-1).
Reliance has also been placed by them upon the guidelines issued by the MCI, which the Govt. of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide its circular dated May 12, 2004, has circulated to all the State Governments for being followed while providing reservation of seats to persons with disabilities in admission to Medical/Dental courses.
4.
We have heard Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners, Shri Anupam Gupta, learned counsel for the University and Shri Ashok Aggarwal, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the State and have perused the record.
5.
Before adverting to the rival submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be useful to refer to the relevant provisions contained in the Notification (Annexure P-1), a part of which has been impugned by the petitioners and the same reads as follows :-  "6.
Reservation A.
Government Colleges  The reservation for various categories in all government colleges will be as under (40%) : (a) Scheduled Casts - 25% (b) Backward Classes - 5% (c) Border Area/Backward Area 1% each - 2% (d) Physically handicapped (Disability 50% to 70%) to be determined at the time of interview by a duly constituted board of concerned speciality) Only for orthopaedically handicap (as per MCI guidelines) - 3% No reservation for this category in BDS course.
xxx xxx xxx xxx C. Explanation :- The following point shall be observed while granting above reservation both in government and private college : (a) The candidate under category A(d) shall be admitted only if he/she has locomotory disability of lower limbs between 50% to 70% and with this disability he/she is otherwise found fit medically to pursue the course in the speciality concerned by the Medical Board duly constituted by the Government and consisting of Heads of the respective Departments of three government Medical Colleges at Patiala, Amritsar and Faridkot.
(d) The reservation for handicapped category is 3%.
The MCI has clarified that only orthopaedically handicap are entitled to reservation and students having hearing/visual impairment are not eligible for reservation.
There is no reservation in BDS course for this category.
xxx xxx xxx xxx" 6.
According to the petitioners, clause 6-A(d) of the Prospectus-cum- Notification (Annexure P-1) categorically provides 3% reservation for those physically handicapped candidates whose disability is assessed between 50% to 70% by a duly constituted Medical Board at the time of interview and as per the MCI guide-lines, this reservation is confined to orthopaedically handicapped candidates only.
Thus, in the principal clause, there is no classification amongst orthopaedically handicapped candidates with disability in "lower limbs" or the "upper limbs".
However, under the pretext of "explanation", the eligibility to claim reservation under category A(d) has been restricted only to those candidates who have locomotory disability of lower limbs only.
This, contend the petitioners, amounts to artificial classification amongst the category of orthoppaedically handicapped candidates and is also contrary to the spirit of guidelines issued by the MCI.
Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners, has made a pointed reference to the guidelines dated July 14, 2003 issued by the MCI, which are also being relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
At this stage, we may refer to the guide-lines issued by the MCI as contained in their circular dated July 14, 2003, referred to above, for filling up the reserved seats with candidates having locomotory disability, for admissions in medicine courses.
Vide the aforementioned circular, the MCI has approved and reiterated its previous guidelines contained in the circular dated July 5, 2001, however, with certain modifications.
We may usefully quote the relevant part of these guidelines, which are in the following terms :-  "The above mentioned questions were discussed in detail.
The Executive Committee also considered the following relevant portion of the guidelines dated 572001 :- "......
In view of the above observations the visually handicapped and hearing disabled should be deleted from this category and they should be considered invalid for admission in the MBBS.
Amongst the locomotory disabled the upper limb should be functional & normal as it is required to elicit sign during clinical examination and finer movements are desired for conduct of surgical procedure.
Again the feeling and the sensation are important for clinical diagnosis and the treatment and locomotory disabled involving upper limb should be considered not eligible for admission to the professional medical course.
The locomotory disabled involving the lower limb is permissible but it should be with the following guidelines:-  3.
If it involves only one lower limb it should have a minimum of 40% and should not exceed 60%.
4.
If it involves both the lower limbs the total disability should not exceed 60% with a minimum of 40%.
The disability certificate should be produced by a duly constituted and authorised Medical Board.
The candidates should have minimum eligibility criteria as per MCI guide- lines.
The candidates should be otherwise fit medically."
"The committee also decided that besides and in addition to any other medical certificate, the candidate for seeking the benefit of reservation, as stated above, should present him/herself before a Medical Board comprising of at least one Expert/Specialist from the speciality of Orthopaedics of a Central Government Hospital/Medical Institution in Delhi & Union Territories and from State Medical Boards in the States and obtain a valid disability certificate from the Medical Board having been issued within three months prior to presenting his application for seeking admission in any medical course by claiming the benefit of reservation.
In other words, the last valid disability certificate of the candidate from a Medical Board should not be more than three months old from the date of submitting his or her application for seeking admission in the reserved category for disabled candidates."
8.
Shri Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners, has contended that in terms of the previous guidelines dated July 5, 2001 read with guidelines dated July 14, 2003, it is clearly spelt out that the paramount factor to be taken into consideration while examining the locomotory disability of a candidate is the existence of the "feeling" and "sensation" in the disabled part of the body as it plays an important role for conducting a clinical diagnosis or surgical procedure.
According to him, the object of the afore-mentioned policy is to provide reservation to physically handicapped candidates suffering from locomotory disability and as such the policy requires a liberal interpretation.
It is argued that if the "feeling" and "sensation" are found in a locomotory disabled candidate involving "upper limbs", he should also be considered eligible for admission at par with a candidate having such "feeling" and "sensation" with locomotory disability of the "lower limb" inasmuch a candidate with locomotory disability of the upper limbs will be equally capable in clinical examination/diagnosis and/or conducting the surgical procedures, therefore, the artificial classification incorporated in Clause 6-C(a) of the Prospectus-cum-Notification (Annexure P- 1) is in the teeth of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
According to Shri Patwalia, petitioner Nos. 1 and 2, though are suffering from locomotory disability of upper limbs, however, both of them have a perfect "feeling" and the "sensation" in their respective disabled hands.
They not only perform normal functions but have finer movements as well and are fully capable of clinical examination/diagnosis and/or to conduct surgical procedure.
These petitioners, therefore, need not be deprived of the benefit of reservation meant for physically handicapped persons merely because they suffer locomotory disability in upper limbs instead of lower limbs.
In addition, petitioner No. 3 (Dony Goel), contended Shri Patwalia, actually suffers from locomotory disability involving lower limbs and not the upper limbs and that his case has been erroneously rejected by the Medical Board constituted by the University.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon the OPD card dated 2112002 issued by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi which mentions treatment etc. given to petitioner No. 3 and according to which petitioner No. 3, on account of the spinal problem, his right leg has been shortened to the extent of one inch.
It is thus contended that the disability suffered by petitioner No. 3, of course, permanent in nature, pertains to the lower limbs.
9.
On the other hand, Sarvshri Anupam Gupta and Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for the respondents have contended that the issue as to whether a candidate suffering from locomotory disability involving upper limbs, even if has "feelings" and "sensation" in the disabled part, should be declared fit for MBBS courses and consequently, capable to perform clinical examinations/diagnosis and/or conduct the surgical procedure, falls within the exclusive domain of the medical experts and this Court having no expertise in relation thereto, need not venture into an unknown field.
They have further contended that the MCI has issued uniform guidelines which the Union of India has directed to be followed in such like matters throughout the country.
While referring and relying upon these guidelines, it has been urged by them that candidates suffering with locomotory disability involving upper limbs have been expressly held ineligible for admission to the professional medical courses, therefore, the Medical Board constituted by the University rightly rejected the petitioners' candidature for the reservation in question.
10.
After giving our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that clause 6-C(a) contained in the Prospectus-cum-Notification (Annexure P-1), per se, does not suffer either from the vice of arbitrariness and/or unreasonable classification.
The MCI issues guidelines as an expert apex body in relation to admissions to the medical courses.
There can be no doubt that it must have excluded certain categories of physically handicapped persons (including those having hearing/visual impairment) as ineligible for admission to such courses keeping in view the nature of job/duties of a medical practitioner.
The physical capability for clinical diagnosis and to conduct surgical procedures are the basic and essential factors which have to be kept in view while extending the benefit of reservation meant for physically disabled candidates for admission to the medical courses.
It is equally true that the Court does not possess the expertise to go into these intricacies which can be answered by specialised and highly qualified professionals only.
It, however, appears to us that, while laying down the guidelines dated July 5, 2001, which have been slightly modified while issuing the guidelines dated July 14, 2003, the experts in the MCI presumably have not gone into one of the related issues, namely, if a candidate is suffering from locomotory disability of upper limbs like "shortening of hand" in an accident etc. but if such candidate has normal "feeling" and "sensation" in such shortened hand and is capable to perform all the normal functions but at the same time has been certified to be a locomotory disabled person due to "shortening of the hand", can such candidate be also considered eligible for admission to the medical professional courses or not.
We may mention here that there are cases like one of the petitioners herein whose hand has been shortened by not more than 1/2 inch but the shortening being incurable, it has been held to be a locomotory disability between 50% to 70% and thus, would have been fully eligible to get the benefit of reservation meant for physically handicapped persons but for the fact that her disability relates to the upper limbs and not the lower limbs.
At the cost of repetition, we may re-state that the Court is not the expert body to answer the aforementioned question either way.
11.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, coupled with the fact that the future career of the petitioners is involved and the intention of the Govt. of India, the MCI as well as the State Government to provide 3% reservation to physically handicapped candidates, of course, subject to their eligibility and medical suitability are writ large and also keeping in view the special circumstances that three seats in the MBBS course belonging to the aforementioned reserved category have remained vacant, we are of the view that the issue requires fresh consideration by an Expert Committee which should, of course, be headed by a nominee of the MCI.
12.
There is yet another reason for us to take this view as in the case of petitioner No. 3, his disability certificate (Annexure P-2) suggests that "he is permanently disabled from O/C Bractual Palsy C wasting of left arm and forearm C Fixed plexion deformity of left elbow at 50 C shortening of left upper limb by three inches - Disability is permanent and 60% (sixty)."
However, the original OPD card of AIIMS, where petitioner No. 3 is stated to have been treated in the year 2002, indicates that he suffers locomotory disability of "shortening of his right leg" to the extent of once inch due to the spinal deformity.
It, thus, appears that petitioner No. 3 is suffering from a locomotory disability of lower limbs but certainly not of the upper limbs.
Faced with the OPD card issued by the AIIMS relating to petitioner No. 3, Shri Anupam Gupta, learned counsel for the University, with his usual fairness, agreed to get his case reconsidered by the Medical Board constituted by the University.
We are, therefore, of the view that while the case of petitioner No. 3, in any case, requires reconsideration by the Medical Board, let the issue, as to whether the locomotory disability of upper limbs will always render a candidate ineligible for admission to the medical courses even if such disability has not caused any adverse impact upon the "feelings" and "sensation" in such disabled part, be also considered afresh.
13.
For the reasons aforementioned, we dispose of this writ petition with the following directions :-  (i) though the MCI is not a party to this writ petition, however, Baba Farid University of Health Sciences and the State of Punjab (respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively) shall immediately contact the MCI along with a copy of this order but not later than five days from the date of receipt of its copy; (ii) the Medical Council of India will constitute an expert committee either at its own level, or advise the University and/or the State Government to constitute the same, however, the MCI will send its nominee, who shall be the Chairman of such newly constituted Medical Board-cum-Expert Committee; (iii) the aforementioned Expert Committee/Medical Board will re- examine the case of the petitioners herein.
While, in relation to petitioner Nos. 1 and 2, the Expert Committee/Medical Board shall examine as to whether they will be ineligible for admission to the Medical course because of their locomotory disability involving "upper limbs" even if the "feelings" and "sensation" in such upper limbs are absolutely normal and do not hamper the day-to-day functioning in any manner.
In the case of petitioner No. 3, in addition to the aforesaid aspect, the Expert Committee/Medical Board will additionally examine as to whether the locomotory disability suffered by him pertains to the "upper limbs" or the "lower limbs"; (iv) if the Expert Committee/Medical Board holds that the petitioners are ineligible to seek admission in the medical courses, then the claim of the petitioners shall stand rejected automatically.
However, if they or anyone of them are/is found eligible by the Expert Committee/Medical Board for the MBBS course, the respondents are directed to admit them/him to such course forthwith and not later than two days from the date of submission of the expert opinion by the Expert Committee/Medical Board.
(v) Three seats in the MBBS course, which were directed to be kept unfilled vide our order dated September 23, 2004, shall not be filled by the respondents till the afore-mentioned directions are complied with.
No costs.
Petition allowed.
s