Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The petitioner has impugned the judgment of the Presiding Officer, Bathinda, dated 1111989 by which despite holding that the services of the petitioner were terminated illegally yet instead of reinstatement he has been awarded a sum of Rs. 352275 being six months wages.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Driver by the Notified Area Committee, Baghapurana-respondent No. 2.
The petitioner had put in more than 240 days of service during the 12 calendar months preceding the termination of his services on 30.4.1986.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court.
3.
Before the Labour Court the petitioner stated that he has worked with respondent No. 2 for more than 240 days and, hence, the termination of his services were in violation of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputed Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
The respondent produced RK Bansal, Executive Officer of the Notified Area Committee, who did not deny that the workman had served the respondent for 240 days during the past 12 calender months preceding the termination of the services of the petitioner.
The employer also produced no attendance register or the pay bills.
In these circumstances, the Labour Court rightly returned a categorical finding that the services of the petitioner-workman were terminated illegally in violation of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act and, hence, the order of termination is illegal.
However, while granting the relief the Labour Court ordered that as the post of Tractor Driver has been abolished by respondent No. 2, therefore, instead of reinstatement the petitioner be given six months pay as compensation in lieu of illegal termination of his services.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that once the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the termination is wholly illegal and against the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act then the petitioner ought to have been reinstated with full back wages.
He, however, submits that the petitioner is ready and willing to forego the back wages in case the respondent takes him back in service forthwith.
5.
Mr. SC Pathela, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, states that he has no instructions from respondent No. 2 whether the petitioner can be taken back in service or not.
6.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has not been able to show any material on the basis of which it can be said that the petitioner had not put in more than 240 days of service preceding his termination.
7.
In view of the above, it is held that the order dated 30.4.1986 terminating the services of the petitioner is illegal.
Resultantly, the award of this extent is upheld.
However, as far as the relief is concerned, the petitioner is directed to be taken back in service forthwith i.e. within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order as a Tractor Driver with continuity of service and without back wages as the petitioner himself has stated that he will not claim back wages.
Petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.