JS Narang, J - This petition has been filed challenging the award dated October 10, 1985 passed by the Labour Court.
The brief facts are that respondent No. 1 i.e. the workman was appointed as a Conductor on July 8, 1981.
It is on December 28, 1981, the workman was on duty with Bus No. 8229 as Conductor; it has been alleged that he had charged an amount of Rs. 45/- and did not issue tickets to passengers from Bhiwanigarh to Sunam; the bus was checked by the Inspector, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa and the matter was accordingly reported.
The workman was served with a charge-sheet and departmental enquiry was held and the workman was found guilty.
Show Cause Notice was served upon him by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa to the effect as to why the services of the workman be not terminated.
The workman was also accorded personal hearing by the Competent Authority.
The services of the workman were terminated vide order dated May 28, 1982.
2.
The workman served a demand notice seeking reference under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The conciliation proceedings were held but no settlement could be arrived at.
The reference was made by the Competent Authority vide order dated February 23, 1984 to the Labour Court.
Claim statements was filed, which was contested by the petitioner and upon pleadings of the parties, issues had been framed and the parties led oral as well as documentary evidence in support of their pleadings for proving the issues before the Labour Court.
3.
It may be noticed that the onus of the issue, which was casted upon the petitioner, no evidence was led as has been noticed in the impugned award.
The perusal of the issue shows that a categoric issue had been framed as to whether valid and proper domestic enquiry has been held by the petitioner and that this issue has been proved by the petitioner.
Resultantly, the findings have been returned against the petitioner.
As a consequence thereto, finding in respect of issue No. 2 was necessarily required to be returned in favour of the workman.
Resultantly, the order of termination has been held to be bad in law.
In view of the findings returned by the Labour Court upon the issues, reference has been accepted and the workman has been ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service with full backwages.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has fairly conceded that the workman stands reinstated and he has already been paid full backwages with continuity of service.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no reason to interfere in the award dated October 10, 1985 rendered by the Labour Court as the petitioner did not produce any evidence to prove that a valid, proper and fair enquiry had been conducted by the Competent Authority.
It is the settled law, if, the delinquent official is not granted appropriate opportunity to defend himself and the proper procedure for conducting the enquiry has not been followed, the delinquent official cannot be punished on the basis of such enquiry report.
6.
In view of the above, I find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.