GS Singhvi, J - This petition is a typical example of how a government servant succeeds or is helped in frustrating departmental action in relation to the delinquency committed by him while in service.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Clerk in the Forest Department on November 10, 1961.
He was promoted as Assistant with effect from 3111978; as Superintendent Grade-II with effect from 471986 and as Superintendent Grade-I with effect from 15122000.
He retired from service with effect from 3132001 on attaining the age of superannuation.
While he was posted in Hoshiarpur Forest Division at Dasuya, an enquiry was got conducted into the allegation of shortage of 2350 quintals of polythene bags causing loss of Rs. 89,437,50.
Shri Baldev Singh, who was asked to enquire into the matter, submitted report dated 30.8.1993 with the finding that petitioner was among the officer/officials responsible for the shortage of polythene bags.
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forest accepted the report and issued show cause notice dated 2821994 to the petitioner to explain his position.
He challenged the same by filing a suit for declaration and permanent injunction in the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Phillaur, which was ultimately dismissed on 28.5.1998 in view of the statement made by the petitioner that an assurance had been given to him by the departmental authorities for reconsideration of his case.
After 11 days of his retirement, the State Government in the Department of Forest and Wild Life Preservation issued notice dated 1142001 (Annexure P-7) proposing to hold an enquiry against the petitioner under Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume (2) (for short 'the Rules') on the following charge:  1.
"While Sh. Gurdev Singh, Superintendent, was posted in the office of Divisional Forest Officer, Dasuya, he was having the charge of stores from 6/90 to 1/91.
The Stores was checked by DSP Vigilance Bureau, Hoshiarpur, on 20.07.1993 and polythene bags weighing 2350 quintals were found short in it.
The value of these bags is 89,43750.
Sh. Gurdev Singh is responsible for the same.
Due to the negligence of Sh. Gurdev Singh the Government has suffered a loss of Rs. 89,43750 and Sh. Gurdev Singh has made himself liable for punishment under Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1970."
The petitioner filed reply dated 862001 (Annexure P-8).
He not only controverted the charge of having caused loss to the government but also challenged the very initiation of enquiry on the ground that the same was ultra vires to Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules.
After two years, the State Government appointed Shri Kuldeep Singh, IFS as enquiry officer vide order dated 1762003.
Thereupon, the petitioner filed the present writ petition with the prayer that the charge-sheet and order appointing Shri Kuldeep Singh as enquiry officer may be declared illegal and quashed.
He has averred that the departmental enquiry could not have been initiated against him after retirement in relation to an event which took place more than 10 years before institution of the enquiry.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, an attempt has been made to explain the delay by stating that on receipt of the report submitted by Baldev Singh in 1993, action was initiated against the petitioner.
Later on, the matter was enquired by Vigilance Department, which submitted report in October, 2000.
Therefore, the matter was referred to the State Government for grant of sanction and the required sanction was received in the month of April, 2001.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
We are extremely unhappy to note that the departmental authorities by their actions and omissions delayed the issuance of charge-sheet to the petitioner till his retirement and thereby facilitated his virtually exoneration of the serious charge involving loss to the public exchequer to the tune of Rs. 90,000/- (approximate).
However, in view of the plain language of Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules and the judgments of this court, we have no option but to quash the charge-sheet and further proceedings.
5.
Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules which contains an embargo on the institution of an enquiry against the retired officer in relation to an event which had taken place more than 4 years before such institution reads as under :  "2.2(b).
Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re- employment - i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the government.
ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution; iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the officer during his service."
6.
In Narender Dev Sharma v. State of Punjab and another, 1996(2) SLR 270, one of us (GS Singhvi, J) interpreted the above-quoted Rule and held :  "A look at the above-quoted Rule shows that the Government is empowered to withhold pension or a part thereof and recover from the pension payable to an employee the pecuniary loss which may have been suffered by the Government due to grave misconduct or negligence committed by the Government servant during the course of employment.
Such an action can be taken on the basis of a departmental inquiry which may have been initiated against the concerned employee before his retirement and which may be pending at the time of his retirement.
The departmental inquiry initiated against an employee does not come to an end on his retirement but by operation of the statute it is deemed to be continuing even after his retirement.
At the same time, the competent authority is empowered to initiate disciplinary inquiry against the employee after retirement provided that such inquiry pertains to an incident of four years prior to the date of initiation of the inquiry and the sanction is given by the competent authority for such initiation."
7.
In Sub Inspector Puran Chand (Retd.)
v. State of Punjab and others, 2000(3) SCT 515 (P&H) : 2000(2) RSJ 85, a Division Bench of this Court interpreted Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules and held as under :  "Pointed attention of this Court has been drawn to clause (2) of the aforesaid rule 2.2(b).
A careful perusal of the same would show that in case a departmental proceeding is to be initiated against an employee after his retirement, it cannot be in respect of an event, which took place more than four years from the date when the proceeding is initiated.
It is clear that the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner in the instant case on 24111998, whereas the incident in question in respect to which he has been proceeded against relates to the year 1988 i.e. one decade prior to the issuance of the charge-sheet.
It is obvious that issuance of the aforesaid charge-sheet is wholly unacceptable in law, as the same is clearly barred by the provisions of clause (2) of rule 2.2(b) extracted above."
8.
In view of above discussion, we hold that the enquiry instituted against the petitioner vide charge-sheet dated 1142001 is time barred and is liable to be quashed as such.
As a sequel to this, the order appointing Shri Kuldeep Singh as enquiry officer is also liable to be quashed.
9.
Before concluding, we may mention that in compliance of the direction given by this Court on 21.11.2003, the petitioner has placed on record copies of the plaint (Annexure P-11) filed in the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Phillaur, statement made by him on 20.5.1998 (Annexure P-12) and order dated 28.5.1998 (Annexure P-13) passed by Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Phillaur.
We have gone through these documents and are satisfied that the same do not have any bearing on the issue raised in this petition.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Charge-sheet dated 1142001 and order dated 16.6.2003 passed by the State Government for appointment of Kuldeep Singh as enquiry officer are quashed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.