GS Singhvi, J - In this petition the petitioner has prayed for quashing orders dated 2361997 (Annexure P2) and 2962000 (Annexure P5) passed by Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (P), Allahabad (respondent No. 2) and Government of India, Ministry of Defence, respectively declining his claim for disability pension.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 9121980.
The Recruitment Medical Board, which examined him at the time of entry in the service did not record any adverse note about his health and did not make mention of any constitutional disease.
After sixteen years, the Medical Board placed him in low medical category i.e. CEE on account of primary hypertension which, in the opinion of the Board, was aggravated due to stress of military service.
Thereafter, he was invalided from service w.e.f.
28121997.
His claim for disability pension was rejected by respondent No. 2 on the ground that the cause of his disability was constitutional in nature and not related to service.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the decision of respondent No. 2 was rejected by the Government of India on the ground that the disease, namely, primary hypertension had no causal connection with the service and the same was neither attributable to nor aggravated by the duties of military service.
3.
The petitioner has relied on the provisions of Regulation 173 of the Army Pension Regulations, 1961 and pleaded that rejection of his claim for disability pension should be declared illegal and quashed because at the time of entry in the service, the Medical Board did not record any note about constitutional disease and, in any case, respondent No. 2 could not have overruled the opinion of the Medical Board without assigning any reason.
4.
The case set up by the respondents is that the disease due to which the petitioner was discharged from service is constitutional in nature and is not related to the service.
They have averred that the petitioner was offered sheltered appointment, but he declined to accept the same.
5.
Shri RS Sangwan, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that respondent No. 2 did not have the jurisdiction to overrule the opinion of the Medical Board, albeit without assigning any reason and, therefore, the impugned orders may be declared illegal and quashed.
In support of this argument, Shri Sangwan relied on the judgment of this Court in Mohan Lal v. Union of India, 1995(4) SCT 754 (P&H) : 1995(3) All Instant Judgments 150; Wing Commander RL Sharma (Retd.)
v. Union of India, 1994(4) SCT 268 (P&H) : 1994(7) SLR 473; Ex-Sepoy Sarwan Singh v. Union of India, 2004(2) S.C.T.
611, CMP No. 18397 of 2002, decided on 192003; Havaldar Ram Phal v. Union of India, 2002(4) SCT 952 (P&H) : 2003(2) RSJ 228 and order dated 14.1.1993 passed by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 Ex-Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India.
6.
Shri SK Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents fairly conceded that respondent No. 2 has not recorded any reason for overruling the opinion of the Medical Board that the disease of the petitioner was aggravated due to stress of the military service, but argued that the petitioner is not entitled to relief because he has not placed on record any evidence to prove that the disease which resulted in his discharge from service was attributable to or aggravated on account military service.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments and gone through the judgments on which Shri Sangwan has placed reliance.
In our opinion, the impugned orders are liable to be quashed in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh's case (supra) and this Court in RL Sharma's case (supra); Ram Phal's case (supra) and Sarwan Singh's case (supra).
In RL Sharma's case (supra), one of us (GS Singhvi, J) examined the question whether opinion of the Medical Board/Re-Survey Medical Board can be overruled by the controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and observed :-  "It is interesting to note that this Medical Board was headed by an officer of the rank of Colonel.
There were two other doctors.
The approving authority namely the DDM approved the assessment made by the Medical Board.
Thereafter, when the case was sent to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, Assistant Accounts Officer of the said office conveyed that degree of disablement of the petitioner is less than 20%.
This letter of the Assistant Accounts Officer was based on the assessment made by the Lieutenant Colonel AMA Medical Advisor (Pension), and the same was accepted by the authorities of the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad.
Interestingly, none of the documents placed by the respondents gives any reason or rationality or basis on which the authorities of the office of the Controller of the Defence Accounts (Pension) recorded their conclusion that the degree of disablement of the petitioner was less than 20 percent.
They have also not recorded as to why the expert opinion of the Medical Board at Chandigarh was being treated as erroneous or was not being agreed upon.
A look at Annexure R6 further shows that where the approving authority does not concur with the findings of the Medical Board, it has to direct the holding of a fresh Medical Board or to direct further treatment of the individual concerned to dispose of the matter after due consideration thereof.
The respondents have not shown that after the receipt of the opinion of the Re- survey Medical Board, they have taken a decision to refer the case of the petitioner for examination by a fresh Medical Board or for his treatment in terms of Annexure R6.
Instead of adopting this procedure, the respondents arbitrarily and casually rejected and overruled the opinion of the Medical Board with regard to the degree of disablement of the petitioner.
I am not suggesting that the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) is, under all circumstances bound to accept the opinion of the Medical Board, but there can be no manner of doubt that if the opinion expressed by the Medical Board is overruled there must be cogent reasons and this can be done only after following the proper procedure.
In the case in hand, neither any reason has been assigned nor the procedure prescribed in Annexure R-6 has been followed by the respondents before holding that the petitioner's degree of disablement was less than 20 per cent.
Thus, the denial of disability pension to the petitioner and rejection of his claim for grant of disability is based on arbitrary and irrational decision.
On account of this decision the petitioner has been discriminated qua other persons who having awarded by the disability pension in terms of Annexure R-1."
8.
In Mohinder Singh's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court disposed of the appeal filed by the appellant by recording the following observations:-  "We have examined the relevant materials and we do not feel satisfied with the plea taken in the counter-affidavit.
No details of the consultation has been disclosed by the respondent nor it is claimed that the appellant has been re- examined by any higher medical authority.
We are not prepared to act on the vague allegations in the counter-affidavit referred to above.
In view of all the relevant circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the Disability Pension assessed at the rate of 40% by the Medical Board, which had examined the appellant, should be respected until a fresh Medical Board examined the appellant again and came to a different conclusion.
Accordingly we direct that for the period 181989 to 3111993 the appellant shall be paid the Disability Pension at the rate of 40% and it will be open to the authority concerned to have the appellant re-examined by a properly constituted Medical Board for reassessment of the disability with effect from 01.02.1993."
In Sarwan Singh's case (supra), a Division Bench of this court followed the ratio of Ram Phal's case (supra) and Mohinder Singh's case (supra) and granted relief to the petitioner by observing that the opinion of the Medical Board could not have been overruled by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and that too without assigning any reason.
9.
Before concluding, we deem it proper to mention that during the course of hearing, Shri SK Sharma placed before us Corrigendums dated 2061996 and 2161996 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Defence amending Rules 14, 17 and 27 of the Entitlement Rules, 1982 vide which Medical Advisor (Pension)/Joint Director, AFMS (Pension) attached to the office of Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) had been declared as competent authority to give opinion on the assessment of the disability and acceptance of death/disablement due to causes attributable to/aggravated by military service.
We have gone through these corrigendums and are of the opinion that the same do not help the cause of the respondents.
In paragraph 17(b) of the Appendix attached to Defence Ministry's letter No. 1(1)/81/D (Pen-C) dated 22.11.1983, as amended by Corrigendum dated 2161996, the competent authority has been given power to alter or modify the recommendations of the Invaliding Medical Board/Release Medical Board/Resurvey Medical Board, but this can be done only for the reasons to be recorded in writing.
In the present case, no reason whatsoever was recorded by the competent authority for rejecting the opinion of the Medical Board that the disease, namely, primary hypertension which resulted in invalidation of the petitioner from service was aggravated due to stress of the military service.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that the rejection of the petitioner's claim for disability pension is legally unsustainable and orders Annexures P2 and P5 are liable to be quashed.
Hence, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders Annexures P2 and P5 are declared illegal and quashed.
The respondents are directed to determine the disability pension payable to the petitioner with effect from 131997 and pay him the arrears within a period of four months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.