SS Saron, J - This petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari, mandamus, prohibition or any other suitable writ, order or direction for quashing the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Administrative Officer in the Haryana Urban Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as `HUDA') respondent No. 1.
The petitioner was working as Superintendent Grade-I since November 1970.
It is stated that he has been discharging his duties sincerely, honestly and diligently.
One post of Administrative Officer was created in HUDA and it was decided that the said post would be filled up by promotion.
It was further provided that the qualifications for the said post were to be five years experience as Superintendent Grade-I or seven years experience as Superintendent Grade-II/Head Clerk.
No statutory rules were applicable at the time when the post become vacant.
However, HUDA decided to adopt the Government instruction from time to time to fill up the said post of Administrative Officer.
HUDA adopted the instructions of the Haryana Government dated 951985 (Annexure P-1) for filling up the aforesaid post.
The case of the petitioner is that even though he possessed the necessary qualification and also fulfilled the eligibility criteria for promotion, but he was not promoted to the said post and instead a person junior to him i.e. respondent No. 3 was promoted.
The petitioner has thus assailed the said promotion.
2.
A written statement has been filed in this case on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2.
However, no written statement has been filed by respondent No. 3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents No. 1 and 2, the stand that has been taken, is that the competent authority to take a decision for the promotion to the post of Administrative Officer is the Personnal Committee of HUDA.
The case of the petitioner for promotion was considered keeping in view the instructions (Annexure P-1) and also the instructions on the subject issued by the State Government from time to time.
A gist of the last three Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner as also of respondent No. 3 has also given in the written statement.
However, it is the stand of the respondent-authorities that the petitioner was not considered fit for promotion on a senior post of Administrative Officer on the basis of criteria of seniority-cum-merit and his Annual Confidential Reports.
3.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that admittedly, as per the stand of the respondent-authorities dated 951985 (Annexure P-1), the criteria that has been adopted is that of seniority-cum-merit.
He has made a pointed reference to para 2 of the instructions dated 951985 (Annexure P-1) which reads as follows :  "The matter has been considered further by the State Government and it has been decided that in future only such official/officials who have obtained at least 70% or more reports of `good' or better categories during the last 10 years should be considered eligible for promotion to a higher post.
However, as before, greater weightage shall be given to the reports earned on the higher post from which further promotion is being considered."
I have considered the submissions made by the counsel for the petitioner.
A perusal of para 2, (sic) Annexure P-1, shows that the matter had been considered by the State Government and it had been decided that in future only such officials who have obtained at least 70% or more good or better categories during the last 10 years should be considered eligible for promotion to a higher post.
However, as before, greater weightage shall be given to the reports earned on the higher posts from which further promotion is being considered.
It is stated by the petitioner is sub-para (3) of para 7 of the petition that the petitioner is more qualified and has better merit than respondent No. 3 inasmuch as he is a Graduate whereas respondent No. 3 is a Matriculate.
Besides, the petitioner has been working as Superintendent Grade-I since 1970 whereas the respondent No. 3 has been working on the same post since 1974.
Besides, the petitioner and respondent No. 3 have more than 70% good reports.
It is not for this Court to assess the comparative merits of the candidates for promotion to the post of Administrative Officer for that is the function of the Personnel Committee of HUDA.
However, it is not disputed by the respondents that during the last 10 years, the petitioner has indeed earned more than 70% good reports which is within the ambit of the criteria fixed by the HUDA by adopting instructions dated 951985 (Annexure P-1).
It is also not in dispute that petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3, and that the criteria is also seniority-cum-merit.
In this view of the matter, the ratio of the judgment in BV Sivaiah & Others v. K Addanki Babu & Others, JT 1998(5) SC 96 : 1998(4) SCT 46 (SC) is applicable wherein in para 18, it was held as under :  "We thus arrive at the conclusion that the criterion of seniority- cum- merit in the matter of promotion postulates that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration the senior, even though less meritorious shall have priority and a comparative assessment of merit is not required to be made.
For assessing the minimum necessary merit the competent authority can lay down the minimum standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of assessment of merit of the employee who is eligible for consideration for promotion.
Such assessment can be made by assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of performance on the basis of service record and interview and prescribing the minimum marks which would entitle a person to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit."
Keeping in view the above enunciated dictum of the Honourable Apex Court, it is evident that where both the parties have the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administrative, the senior, even though less meritorious is to be given priority and a comparative assessment of merit is not required to be made.
Therefore the petitioner being senior and both the parties i.e. the petitioner and respondent No. 3 having 70% good reports the petitioner was liable to be given preference in the light of the law enunciated by the Apex Court in B.V. Sivaiah's case (supra).
4.
For the foregoing reasons, the promotion of respondent No. 3 is set aside.
The respondent HUDA is directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Administrative Officer in accordance with the criteria mentioned in Annexure P-1 and in the light of observations of the Apex Court in B.V. Sivaiah's case (supra).
5.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner and respondent No. 3 have already retired from service and therefore the relief if any that is to be given to the petitioner is only by way of notional fixation of pay.
In these circumstances, it may be indicated that any of the benefits including retiral benefits drawn and being drawn by respondent No. 3 on the post of Administrative Officer would not be withdrawn from him as he has actually worked on the said post.
This would be in consonance with the observations of the Honourable Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, JT 1995(1) SC 24 : 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC).
The writ petition is accordingly allowed in the above terms.
Petition allowed.