KC Gupta, J - This writ petition has been filed by GR Bains petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus or any other suitable writ, order or direction for quashing the charge sheet dated 3031998, the enquiry proceedings conducted by Shri BK Thapar respondent No. 3, the enquiry report dated 10111998, show cause notice dated 2711999 and the order of punishment dated 541999 whereby he was dismissed from service and recovery of the amount was imposed upon him.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that petitioner was appointed to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) in the P.W.D.
(B&R) department after being selected from open competition conducted by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
He joined the service on 2881980.
His last posting was with the Rural Works, Sub Division, Khanna.
3.
The Executive Engineer, Division No. 2 lodged a complaint against the petitioner with the Superintending Engineer Ludhiana in May 1995 alleging embezzlement on his part.
The Chief Engineer vide order dated 23.8.1995 Annexure P1, appointed Shri KL Batra, the then senior-most Executive Engineer as Investigating Officer to inquire into the complaints and to submit his report.
Subsequently, vide order dated 13101995 Annexure P2, two more complaints were referred to him.
After investigation which was conducted for about 4 months, Shri KL Batra submitted his investigation report, copy of which is Annexure P3 and exonerated the petitioner for involvement in any financial implication.
4.
However, the respondents ignored the report of Shri KL Batra and a de novo enquiry was ordered to be conducted against the petitioner by appointing Shri Gurdev Singh Mann, Superintending Engineer, vide memo dated 921996 Annexure P4.
Shri Mann conducted the investigation and submitted his report dated 1431996 copy of which is Annexure P5.
He also exonerated the petitioner for any financial irregularity.
5.
The said report was considered by the State Government and it was conveyed to the Chief Engineer Punjab B & R Department vide memo dated 2121997 that the Government had decided to act on the report dated 1431996 and there was no need to any further investigation in the matters.
Copy of the said order is Annexure P5/A  6.
It was next averred that to the utter surprise of the petitioner, he received letter dated 1551996 whereby he was directed to appear before Shri DS Sandhu, Superintending Engineer for investigation of the embezzlement case.
Copy of the said letter is Annexure P6.
Thereafter, the petitioner received memo dated 1171997 to appear before Shri Gurbachan Singh Mann SE Ferozepur on 2971997 for enquiry and copy of the said letter is Annexure P7.
7.
Aggrieved by the said latter, the petitioner filed writ petition bearing No. 10685 of 1997 in which the Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab, made a statement that notice during the preliminary enquiry had been wrongly issued to the petitioner and it could be ignored.
8.
(i) It was further averred that on 1311998, the petitioner received copy of the report submitted by Shri GS Mann SE and he was placed under suspension on 29.1.1998 on the report of Shri Gurbachan Singh Mann and vide order dated 321998, this Court in civil writ petition No. 1485 of 1998 stayed the operation of the suspension order.
He was served with a charge sheet along with others on 3031998.
The writ petition filed by him was disposed of on 1151998 with the direction that the enquiry proceedings should be completed within six months.
An enquiry was conducted by Shri BK Thapar SE respondent No. 3.
During enquiry, neither any witness was examined, nor the author of the preliminary enquiry report which was placed on file, was examined and no opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross examine the witnesses.
The petitioner was also not paid the subsistence allowance during the enquiry although he had filed several representations for payment of the same during enquiry and he even filed civil writ petition No. 381 of 1999 impugning the action in not paying the subsistence allowance.
(ii) It was further averred that on 2711999 the petitioner was served with a show cause notice along with copy of the enquiry report.
In the meanwhile, on 221999 writ petition No. 381 of 1999 was disposed of with direction to release the subsistence allowance within two weeks.
The petitioner submitted reply to the show cause notice and on 11.3.1999 he was afforded personal hearing.
On 541999 the competent authority passed the impugned order of dismissal along with recovery of Rs. 2,64,320/- from him which was stated to be illegal and void.
Accordingly, the present writ petition was filed.
9.
Vide order dated 1951999, notice of motion was issued as it was contended that the fact finding report submitted by Shri GS Mann, SE Ferozepur circle, which was relied upon in the show cause notice was not produced before the Enquiry Officer, nor Shri GS Mann was examined as a witness in support thereof.
Ultimately, it was admitted on 2622002 and was ordered to be heard within two years.
10.
Separate written statements were filed.
One written statement was filed by Harjit Singh, Under Secretary, Public Works, Punjab B&R on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 and another written statement was filed by Shri BK Thapar respondent No. 3.
The latter in his written statement admitted that he was appointed as Enquiry Officer to probe the allegations levelled against the petitioner and others by conducting a departmental enquiry.
Respondent No. 3 further stated that the enquiry was conducted as per Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1970 and full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend himself in the enquiry proceedings and the charges against him were proved on the basis of documentary evidence produced during the course of enquiry.
11.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 in their written statement amongst others, stated that Shri BK Thapar SE was deputed as Enquiry Officer to conduct the departmental enquiry against the petitioner and others and the report submitted by Shri Gurbachan Singh Mann SE Ferozepur was sent to the petitioner.
It was further stated that subsistence allowance was paid to the petitioner from 6/1998 to 441999 under proper receipt.
It was further stated that the Enquiry Officer had submitted his enquiry report dated 10111998 which was conducted by him in accordance with law.
12.
I have heard Mr. Sanjiv Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. SS Bahl, learned Addl.
AG Punjab and carefully gone through the file.
13.
The following charges were levelled against the petitioner on the basis of the report of Superintending Engineer, Ferozepur, which was submitted to the Government vide letter dated 28111997 :-  "Charges against Sh. GR Bains, S.D.E.
: On the basis of report of SE Ferozepur submitted to Govt. vide No. 2655/MC/dated 28111997 the following charges have been levelled against Sh. Bains : Charge No. 1 : Sh. GR Bains, SDE is charged for the embezzlement/loss of Govt. money for item No. 1.
1) Bogus payment in respect of Vr.
No. 77 amounting to Rs. 1,01,220/- for widening & strengthening of Khanna-Bhari Road.
2) Payment made beyond the provisions in the estimate amounting to Rs. 8,90,784/-.
3) Bogus payment of Rs. 2,98,200/-.
4) Excess payment of Rs. 79,560/-.
5) Bogus payment to the tune of Rs. 40 thousand vide Vr.
No. 63 dated 18101994.
7) Bogus payment of Rs. 8400/- vide Vr.
No. 132 dated 30031995.
8) Bogus payment of Rs. 1260/- against Vr.
No. 52 dated 09.03.1995.
As detailed in the statement of allegations and he has violated para 713 of D.F.R.
& Articles 121 and 12 of the Accounts Code Volume III.
Charge No. 2 : He has also not checked a single M/Roll produced before him during the execution of work, as such, he has not performed his duty properly as incharge of Sub Division.
Charge No. 3 : He is responsible for employing tractor/trolleys against M/Rolls without the approval of the competent Authority whereas the basic purpose of M/Rolls is to employing labour only, as such, he acted beyond his power.
14.
Shri BK Thapar SE was appointed as Enquiry officer.
The petitioner participated in the same.
The Presenting Officer made statement that he would like to produce the witnesses mentioned in the list of witnesses to be relied upon as follows :-  1.
Superintendent Rural Works Division No. 11, Ludhiana.
2.
Head Draftsman, Rural Works Division No. 11, Ludhiana.
3.
Superintendent Head Office, Patiala.
15.
However, on 3111998, the Presenting Officer made a statement that he had submitted the written statement in respect of one Kewal Krishan X-en, Shri GR Bains, SDE i.e. the petitioner, Shri Ram Gopal, Jagdish Lal, Bhajan Singh and Harjit Singh JEs and he had no more documents to produce and did not propose to produce the witnesses and closed the evidence.
Thus, no evidence was produced.
Even the author of the preliminary report Shri GS Mann SE was not examined.
No opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross-examine the witnesses.
16.
The mandatory provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1970 which prescribe the procedure for conduct of departmental enquiries for imposing major penalties are as under :-  "8) Procedure for imposing major penalties : 9) If the Government employee who has not admitted any of the articles of charge in his written statement of defence or has not submitted any written statement of the defence, appears before the inquiring authority, such authority shall ask him whether he is guilty, or has any defence to make and if he pleads guilty to any of the articles of the charge, the inquiring authority shall record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signatures of the Government employee thereon.
10) XX XX XX 11) The inquiring authority shall if the Government employee fails to appear within the specified time or refuses or omits to plead, require the presenting Officer to produce the evidence by which he proposes to prove the articles of charge, and shall adjourn the case to a later date not exceeding thirty days, after recording an order that the Government employee may for the purpose of preparing his defence - i) inspect within five days of the order or within such further time not exceeding five days as the inquiring authority may allow, the documents, specified in the list referred to in Sub-rule (3); ii) submit a list of witnesses to be examined on his behalf; iii) apply orally or in writing for the supply of copies of the statements, if any recorded, of witnesses mentioned in the list referred to in Sub-rule (3), in which case the inquiring authority shall furnish to him such copies as early as possible and in any case not later than three days before the commencement of the examination of the witnesses on behalf of the punishing authority; and iv) give a notice within ten days of the order or within such further time not exceeding ten days, as the inquiring authority may allow for the discovery or production of any document which is in the possession of Government, but not mentioned in the list referred to in Sub-rule (3) and the Government employee shall also indicate the relevance of the document required by him to be discovered or produced by the Government.
12) The inquiring authority shall on receipt of the notice for the discovery or production of documents, forward the same or copies thereof to the authority in whose custody or possession the documents are kept, with a requisition for the production of the document by such date as may be specified in such requisition : Provided that the inquiring authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, refuse to requisition such of the documents as are in its opinion not relevant to the case.
13) On receipt of the requisition referred to in Sub-rule (12), every authority having the custody or possession of the requisitioned documents shall produce the same before the inquiring authority : Provided that if the authority having the custody or possession of the requisitioned documents is satisfied for reasons to be recorded by it in writing that the production of all or any of such documents would be against the public interest or security of the State, it shall inform the inquiring authority accordingly and the inquiring authority shall on being so informed, communicate the information to the Government employee and withdraw the requisition made by if for the production or discovery of such documents.
14) On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the articles of charge are proposed to be proved, shall be produced by or on behalf of the punishing authority.
The witnesses shall be examined by or on behalf of the presenting Officer and may be cross-examined by or on behalf of the Government employee.
The presenting Officer shall be entitled to re-examine the witnesses on any points on which they have been cross- examined, but not on any new matter, without the leave of the inquiring authority.
The inquiring authority may also put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks fit.
15) XX XX XX 16) When the case for the punishing authority is closed, the Government employee shall be required to state his defence orally or in writing as he may prefer.
If the defence is made orally it shall be recorded and the Government employee shall be required to sign the record.
In either case, a copy of the statement of defence shall be given to the presenting officer, if any appointed.
17) The evidence on behalf of the Government employee shall then be produced.
The Government employee may examine himself on his on behalf, if he so prefers either at the outset or after the conclusion of examination of the witnesses produced by him.
The witnesses produced by the Government employee shall then be examined and shall be liable to cross-examination, re- examination and examination by the inquiring authority according to the provisions applicable to the witness for the punishing authority.
17.
Thus, the perusal of the above said provisions would reveal that once a delinquent official denies the charges, the inquiring Officer shall proceed with the enquiry.
It further provides that after the prosecution produces its evidence, the matter is to be adjourned for a minimum 5 days to enable the delinquent official to produce a list of witnesses and documents which he wishes to rely.
On receipt of such notice, the inquiring authority will either direct the delinquent official to produce documents or reject the same if the same are not relevant.
In the present case the Enquiry Officer had given a complete go by to the rules.
He had not given adequate opportunity to the petitioner to prepare his written statement and also an adequate opportunity was not given to produce his defence and infact the whole proceedings conducted by the Enquiry Officer was just an eye wash because he only relied upon the preliminary report given by Shri GS Mann, SE  18.
This Court in NC Arora v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) SCT 206 observed that where any witness had not been examined and no opportunity to cross- examine any witness qua the validity of documents was given, then such documents cannot be read into evidence against the delinquent.
It was further observed that where the delinquent was asked to lead his defence evidence without recording any prosecution evidence, then such procedure is unknown to any law and thus, a glaring defect in the proceedings causing great prejudice to the petitioner's right to defence and the punishment order passed on the basis of such enquiry report is violative of rule 7(2) as also the principles of natural justice.
It has also been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in State of UP v. Ravinder Nath Chaturvedi and another, 1995 Supp.
(3) SCC 592 : 1995(4) SCT 677 (SC) that where none of the witnesses had been examined and reasonable opportunity to cross-examine them had not been afforded, then the whole proceedings were vitiated and the Hon'ble Apex Court quashed the punishment and directed the enquiry to be conducted afresh after examining an Officer acquainted with the record to prove the State's case and giving the delinquent an opportunity to cross-examine him.
In the present case the author of the departmental enquiry Shri GS Mann was not examined.
His preliminary enquiry report was simply placed on record.
No opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross-examine the author of the enquiry report as well as with respect to the documents produced on file.
In my opinion, the procedure adopted by the Enquiry Officer did not conform to the requirement of the Statute inasmuch as no evidence was produced by the department to substantiate the allegations against the petitioner.
Mere filing of documents by the departmental representative which he had collected from different sources cannot amount to production of evidence by the department to substantiate the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Thus, whole enquiry proceedings are vitiated and are against the principles of natural justice.
The findings of the Enquiry Officer are based on the preliminary enquiry report which was made at the back of the petitioner.
19.
There is another aspect of the matter.
During the enquiry subsistence allowance was not paid to the petitioner.
He made a number of representations i.e. on 11111998, 18111998 and 24121998.
Ultimately he filed civil writ petition No. 381 of 1999 impugning the action of the respondents in not paying the subsistence allowance and also impugning the order of suspension.
The said writ petition was ultimately disposed of on 221999 with a direction to the respondents to release the subsistence allowance within two weeks.
The subsistence allowance was paid later on when the enquiry had already been concluded.
It has been observed by the Division Bench of this Court in PL Mehta v. State of Haryana, 1999(4) SCT 235 that where subsistence allowance is not paid during enquiry, then it amounts to using economic pressure to break the defence of the delinquent.
If payment is not made despite demand of the official showing his inability to participate in the proceedings, the conduct of the employer will be totally unfair and illegal and will vitiate the entire proceedings taken against the delinquent.
It has also been observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court by taking a serious view, in Ghansham Dass Srivastava v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1973 SC 1183 that delay in payment of subsistence allowance to an employee under suspension creates financial difficulty for the employee and hampers his defence.
Thus, the petitioner had been handicapped in his defence due to non-payment of subsistence allowance and as such, he could not properly attend to the departmental proceedings.
20.
Therefore, in view of the discussion above, I hold that the enquiry report dated 10111998 submitted by Shri BK Thapar is illegal, void and has got no effect on the rights of the petitioner and the same is vitiated on account of lack of evidence and against the principles of natural justice and the same is hereby set aside.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The charge sheet, dated 3031998, the proceedings conducted by Shri BK Thapar respondent No. 3, the show cause notice dated 2711999, the enquiry report dated 10111998 and the order of punishment dated 541999 whereby punishment of dismissal from serving along with recovery of the amount was imposed upon the petitioner are also set aside.
However, the department is at liberty to proceed with the enquiry afresh in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.