Hemant Gupta, J. - It is the plaintiff's second appeal challenging the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below.
The plaintiff has sought declaration to the effect that he is entitled to pay scale of Health Educator (State Level) for the period he worked on the said post i.e. from 27.6.1983 till August, 1989.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant was appointed, as District Family Welfare Education Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 250-400 (subsequently revised to Rs. 1640- 2900).
The plaintiff and his wife requested for posting him at Chandigarh in view of the unfortunate murder of son of the plaintiff.
A sympathic view was taken and he was posted at Chandigarh on 27.6.1983 for a period of one month.
Subsequently, vide order dated 25101984, Ex.P1 the plaintiff was adjusted at Chandigarh subject to the condition mentioned therein.
The plaintiff continued to work as Health Educator till August 1989.
The plaintiff retired on 3091991 and thereafter moved a representation for grant of pay scale of the post of Health Educator.
The said request was declined vide order dated 30.11.1993.
The said order was challenged in the suit filed on 411997.
Both the Courts have dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant holding that he was posted at Chandigarh vide order dated 25101984 with specific condition that he will not claim seniority/higher pay-scale in view of his adjustment and will also not claim for the appointment of this post.
It as thus concluded that the plaintiff having accepted the terms and conditions of the posting order, has no right to demand higher pay-scale.
3.
In the second appeal, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that initially he was posted as Health Educator at his request.
However, subsequent continance on the higher post is an act of the respondents and, thus, he is entitled to the pay-scale of the said post atleast from 25101984.
4.
The said contention is devoid of merit.
The plaintiff was initially appointed as Health Educator in the year 1983.
Vide order dated 25101984, he was posted at Chandigarh with the conditions mentioned above.
The plaintiff has accepted such condition and was posted at Chandigarh.
He has given up his right to claim higher payscale when he joined posting at Chandigarh in pursuance of order dated 25101984.
5.
In view of the above circumstances, the plaintiff is estopped to claim higher payscale.
In BL Sreedhar and others v. KM Munireddy (dead) and others, 2003(1) R.C.R.
(Civil) 251 : (2003)2 Supreme Court Cases 355, the Supreme Court concluded that if a man either by words or by conduct has intimated that he consents to an act which has been done and that he will not offer any opposition to it, although it could not have been lawfully done without his consent, and he thereby induces others to do that which they otherwise might have abstained from, he cannot question the legality of the act he had sanctioned to the prejudice of those who have so given faith to his words or to the fair inference to be drawn from his conduct.
6.
In view of the principle laid down, I am of the opinion that the plaintiff has consented to the posting as Health Educator in his own pay-scale to avail the benefit of posting at Chandigarh and, thus, he cannot question the legality of the posting on his own pay-scales as Health Educator.
7.
It has been held in State of MP v. Mangilal Sharma, (1998) 2 SCC 510 : 1998(1) SCT 322 (SC) that claiming of any legal character is maintainable under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act.
However, when decree-holder has failed to claim payment of arrears of salary then the executing Court has no jurisdiction to direct payment of salary.
It has been held in para 6 which is as under :-  "A declaratory decree merely declares the right of the decree-holder vis-a-vis the judgment-debtor and does not in terms direct the judgment-debtor to do or refrain from doing any particular act or thing.
Since in the present case decree does not direct reinstatement or payment of arrears of salary the executing court could not issue any process for the purpose as that would be going outside or beyond the decree.
The respondent as a decree-holder was free to seek his remedy for arrears of salary in the suit for declaration.
The executing court has no jurisdiction to direct payment of salary or grant any other consequential relief which does not flow directly and necessarily from the declaratory decree.
It is not if in a suit for declaration where the plaintiff is able to seek further relief he must seek that relief though he may not be in need of that further relief.
In the present suit the plaintiff while seeking relief of declaration would certainly have asked for other reliefs like the reinstatement, arrears of salary and consequential benefits.
He was, however, satisfied with a relief of declaration knowing that the Government would honour the decree and would reinstate him.
We will, therefore, assume that the suit for mere declaration filed by the respondent- plaintiff was maintainable, as the question of maintainability of the suit is not in issue before us."
8.
The plaintiff is claiming difference in payscale for the period he worked on such post from year 1984 to the year 1989.
The amount claimed was an ascertainable amount.
The right to sue arose firstly in the year 1984 and continued till the year 1989.
However, the suit has been filed in the year 1997.
The plaintiff has filed a suit for declaration after the period fixed for filing suit for recovery of ascertainable amount had expired.
9.
In view of the principles laid down in the above judgment, I am of the opinion that the plaintiff cannot be granted any decree for the recovery of the amount of difference in payscale in a suit for declaration simpliciter without claiming ascertainable amount of arrears of salary.
Thus, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.