JS Narang, J - The petitioner was appointed as Groundman on part time basis with effect from March 18, 1991 and he continued in such service upto April 14, 1995.
Subsequently, he was appointed on full time basis with effect from April 15, 1995, and he continued in service as such, thereafter.
On October 6, 1995, the services of the petitioner were discontinued and consequently the dispute was raised before the Labour Court, which was decided vide award dated 1711997.
Resultantly, the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The Government of Haryana had taken a policy decision in respect of the part time employees, who are stated to have completed five years service became entitled to be regularised.
Copy of the scheme dated 23.2.1999, so propounded, has been appended Annexure P2.
The petitioner submitted an application on 20.4.1999 to the competent authority for seeking regularisation accordingly.
The recommendation was duly made and was sent to Director, Sports and Youth Welfare, Haryana.
Instead of regularising the services of the petitioner, he received an order of termination dated August 26, 2002, which has been made a subject matter of challenge in the present writ petition apart from the prayer for regularisation in the light of the policy decision of Government of Haryana.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and the State has contested the claim of the petitioner by way of filing the written statement.
The preliminary objection has been taken that the petitioner does not possess the requisite educational qualifications i.e. being 8th pass prescribed by the Departmental Group-D Service Rules, 1996.
It has been further averred that he worked as part time Groundman from March 18, 1991 to April 14, 1994 and thereafter from April 15, 1994 to October 5, 1995 on full time basis.
It has been fairly admitted that after termination of his services in pursuant to the award of the Labour Court, he had been reinstated on July 28, 1997.
It has been further averred that the case of the petitioner is not covered under the policy decision dated February 1, 1999, taken by the Government of Haryana as he does not possess the length of three years continuous service as on February 1, 1999, nor the case is covered under the policy decision dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996 as he does not possess three years continuous service as on January 31, 1996, as he was not in service on that date.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner fulfils the requisites required to be fulfilled as contained in the policy decision of Government of Haryana issued on February 1, 1999.
The State has admitted the factum of his being inducted as a part time Groundman with effect from March 18, 1991, and consequently on regular basis with effect from April 15, 1994.
His reinstatement in pursuant to the award rendered by the Labour Court has also been admitted and it is stated that he had been reinstated on 28.7.1997 with continuity of service.
It is the claim of the petitioner that admittedly after April 15, 1994, he worked on whole-time basis and his case is on much better footing i.e. that he did not remain as part timer but was absorbed as a full timer, as such, his period of five years stood completed on March 17, 1996 as the continuity of service stood concluded by virtue of the awarded rendered by the Labour Court and it is in pursuant to the said award the petitioner had been reinstated on July 28, 1997.
Reliance has been placed upon a judgment rendered by two Division bench of this Court in re : Dalbir Singh Machanic v. State of Haryana and others, 2001(2) S.C.T.
744.
CWP No. 14001 of 1999, decided on August 14, 2001, Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(1) SCT 540 (P&H) : 2002(2) RSJ 631, Vidya Devi and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 333 (P&H) : 2002(2) RSJ 484.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. RD Sharma, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, has taken the stand that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of the aforestated policy as the same is applicable only in the case of part timers and not in respect of those who have partly worked as part timers and partly as whole timer.
So far as other policies are concerned, he does not fulfil the requisite to the effect that he had not completed five years service as on March 31, 1996.
Thus, the petition merits dismissal.
Even otherwise, his services were sought to be dispensed with by virtue of the notice under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The right to retrench a workman from its employment cannot be taken away because the employer is the sole judge to decide as to whether it should retain an employee in service or dispense with his services by paying the adequate retrenchment compensation under law.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has counter stated that the impugned notice, which is the subject matter of challenge in the present petition, has not been issued bona-fide but has been issued only to hoodwink or to defuse the applicability of the policy of the Government of Haryana vide which the petitioner becomes entitled to be regularised.
If the notice is tainted with such approach on the part of the employer, the notice would not be sustainable and the same deserves to be quashed.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the petition deserves to be allowed.
In the first instance on the basis of the admission of the respondents that the petitioner had been taken into part time employment with effect from March 18, 1991 and he continued to serve as such upto April 14, 1995 and thereafter worked on whole-time basis and completed the period of five years employment.
The argument that the petitioner did not work five years on part time basis is of no consequence, the fact of the matter is that the petitioner did complete his service of five years though part of which was rendered as part time.
The case of the petitioner is on much better footings than the case of part timer.
It looks that the respondents made their best possible effort to edge out the petitioner, as is evident from the fact that he had been terminated earlier which order was challenged before the Labour Court and by virtue of the award he had to be reinstated with continuity in service with full back wages and that he was taken in service on July 28, 1997.
It is strange when the effort has been made by the petitioner for seeking regularisation the impugned notice dated 2682002, has been issued under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, for terminating his service.
This again seems to be an effort to edge out the petitioner denying the benefit of regularisation.
Such act on the part of the employer is deprecacable.
The employer must know as to how many employees are required for carrying out the particular jobs which are undertaken.
The employer especially the Government does not have the right to play-up with the lives of its employees by adopting the questionable methods.
The petitioner did acquire the right to be regularised in pursuant to the policy decision, copy Annexure P2, and in all fairness, the respondents were required and expected to regularise the services of the petitioner but for the reasons best known to them such order has not been passed.
Resultantly, we hold that the petitioner has become entitled to be regularised with effect from the date he completed five years of service i.e. March 17, 1996 and, therefore, we command the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner accordingly in accordance with the provisions of law and the policy applicable.
This exercise be carried out within two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
8.
So far as the impugned notice dated 2682002, copy annexure P4 is concerned the same having not been issued with honest intent and purpose the same is hereby quashed.
It is further observed that in the case of passing appropriate orders for regularisation the petitioner be granted the consequential relief accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.