NK Agrawal, J - This is a joint petition filed by 106 students under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking a direction to the Education Secretary and the Director of Higher Secondary Education, Haryana Government (for short, the Director) to permit them to appear in the ensuing examination.
2.
An educational institution named as the Rajiv Gandhi Teachers Training Institute, Panchkula (for short, the institute) sought permission from the Director to run JBT and OT (Hindi) courses.
Permission to run one unit each in the two courses, namely, D.Ed.
and OT (Hindi) was granted, vide memo dated 4101994.
This permission was granted subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions by the institute.
Permission so granted was, however, withdrawn, vide memo dated 981995 on the ground (as mentioned in the memo) that various irregularities and deficiencies were found in the functioning of the institute.
It was noted in the withdrawal memo that there were complaints about the extortion of money by way of tuition fee and there were deficiencies in the provisions of facilities.
A Committee consisting of an Additional Director and two Deputy Directors of the Education Department of the Haryana Government had visited the institute and had made enquiries into the various complaints and deficiencies.
They had noticed many deficiencies and irregularities like maintenance of duplicate attendance registers, recovery of excess fee in lumpsum, lack of sufficient accommodation for the classes, library and laboratories, lack of proper sanitation and drinking water facilities etc.
Permission was withdrawn by the Director with immediate effect and the institute was directed to close its classes immediately.
It was made clear in the withdrawal letter that permission had been earlier granted, vide letter dated 2111994 for one academic year only.
A note had been recorded in the said letter that the students studying, for the time being, would be adjusted in another corresponding institution in the State.
The institute challenged the withdrawal of permission by filing a writ petition (CWP No. 11871 of 1995).
The following order was passed by this High Court in the said writ petition on 5101995:  "After having heard the learned counsel for the parties, order dated 981995, copy of which is Annexure P-21 to the writ petition, is quashed, the same having been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
The respondent - State is at liberty to pass a fresh order after issuing notice to the petitioner.
Writ petition stands disposed of."
3.
After the withdrawal of permission was cancelled by this High Court on the ground of absence of due opportunity, a show-cause notice was issued by the Director to the institute on 27121995.
The institute was required to send its reply within 15 days.
The institute, however, chose to send its replies on 1421996 and 1931996 raising certain objections.
The Director, after looking into the reply, again withdrew the permission, vide withdrawal letter dated 2131996.
4.
The petitioners' contention is that they took admission after the withdrawal of permission had been quashed by the High Court and they should not suffer if they sought admission under the impression that the permission, granted to the institute, had not been finally withdrawn.
It is stated that the High Court had quashed the withdrawal of permission on 5101995 and thereafter the matter was under examination of the Haryana Government.
The petitioners, therefore, sought admission to the various courses under the belief that the institute had the requisite permission to conduct the courses.
5.
From the facts given by the petitioners, it is apparent that permission to run the courses had been granted to the institute on 4101994.
This permission had been granted for a period of one academic year only subject to fulfilment of certain conditions by the institute.
Though the withdrawal order dated 981995 was quashed by the High Court, that would not automatically accord permission to the institute to run further courses except to the extent of those courses which had been commenced under the permission dated 4101994.
While withdrawing the permission, vide order dated 981995, the Director had taken care about the existing students.
The following assurance was given in the withdrawal letter:-  "The students who are studying in your institution are being adjusted in another corresponding institution in the State."
It is evident from the aforesaid remarks made by the Director in the withdrawal letter that sufficient precaution was taken for safeguarding the interests of the existing students undergoing training in the institution.
6.
After the withdrawal letter dated 981995 was cancelled by the High Court on the ground that the institute was not afforded due opportunity to show- cause, the Director proceeded to issue a show-cause notice on 27121995 and also published a notice in the newspaper (Dainik Tribune) on 31121995 cautioning the prospective candidates that no private institute had been given affiliation for the purposes of admission to D.Ed./OT Classes in the Session 1995-97.
The said notice reads as under:  "It has come to notice that some private institution, such as Rajiv Gandhi Memorial Institute, Panchkula, is attracting candidates for D.Ed./OT courses in the name of having affiliation with Department of Secondary Education, Haryana.
It is clarified that no private institute has been given affiliation for the purposes of admission in D.Ed./OT Classes, Session 1995-97."
7.
Though the permission granted for one academic year was under a cloud and was likely to be withdrawn, the institute went ahead, inviting applications for fresh admission to the courses for the next year on 30121995.
It is thus evident that the institute deliberately proceeded to invite applications for the fresh courses, though no specific permission had been granted for the future years.
The permission already granted was under review and a show-cause notice had already been issued to the institute.
In this light, there is no force in the petitioner-candidates' plea that, since they had taken admission to the courses run by the institute prior to the date of withdrawal, they should be allowed to appear in the annual examination.
The petitioners' plea, that they have attended the classes regularly and that the institute had shifted to a different building so as to comply with the directions issued by the Director, also does not help them inasmuch as they are themselves to blame in seeking admission to the courses without ascertaining that the recognition granted for one academic year was under review by the Government of Haryana and the permission had been earlier withdrawn.
The institute, while making fresh admissions, had taken a misleading and totally false stand that the institute had a right to continue new classes and fresh courses after the High Court had quashed the withdrawal order.
A show-cause notice had already been issued to the institute on 27121995, but still the institute opted to go ahead by issuing a notice on 30121995 inviting applications for the courses for the new academic year.
If the candidates took the risk despite a public notice having been published in the newspaper, they cannot seek any help on the ground of having been under the bona fide belief that the institute had the recognition/permission to run the courses.
8.
It is a common sight that ill-equipped and ill-managed institutes are emerging though they are not at all capable of imparting good education to the boys and girls.
Some of the institutions are run by certain vested interests with motives other than imparting good education and training.
These institutes take undue advantage of the craze in the young generation to possess higher certificates and degrees.
Some institutes assume the character of commercial organizations, rather than educational institutions, distributing diplomas and certificates on payment of fixed charges or fees.
Cases of exploitation and fleecing of the needy and aspiring boys and girls are not lacking.
9.
From the facts emerging in the present case, it is clear that permission to run the courses had been granted by the State Government of Haryana on 4101994 for one academic year only.
After the withdrawal order was quashed by the High Court, a show-cause notice was duly issued to the institute and sufficient precaution was taken by the State Government to prevent the gullible candidates from seeking admission to the various courses in the institute.
The publication of warning in the newspaper (The Dainik Tribune) on 31121995 is sufficient to hold that the students, seeking admission despite such notice, cannot seek any help from this Court.
As has been already seen, the State Government had taken care to protect the interests of the existing students by assuring them, in the withdrawal order dated 981995, that they would be adjusted in other corresponding institutions in the State.
So far as those candidates are concerned, their interests must be safeguarded inasmuch as they had taken admission to the courses in the institute during the period of recognition.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
In that case, the matter before the Supreme Court related to the recognition to an institution of Maharashtra in the year 1975.
The recognition was withdrawn in the year 1985.
It was held that the students, who had joined the course during the period when the course continued to be recognized by the Government of Haryana, could use the certificates obtained by them from that institute for seeking appointment in the State of Haryana.
It was, however, made clear that, if any person had joined the Certificate Course after the date of derecognition, he would not be entitled to the benefit of this order, and any certificate obtained by them from the said institute would be of no avail.
This observation of the Supreme Court does not help the petitioners because they took admission to the courses in the institute after the period of recognition had already expired and the matter of recognition was under enquiry.
A public notice had already been issued to warn the students not to take admission to the courses run by the institute.
In the result, the petition has no force and is dismissed.