Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of a writ of Certiorari and quashing of order dated 25102001 (Annexure P-9) to the writ petition.
The petitioner also prays that the respondents be ordered and directed to issue order of posting of the petitioner in terms of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bhupinder Pal Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, JT 2000(5) SC 557 (Civil Appeal No. 6750 of 1999), decided on 152000.
2.
In order to examine the merit of the relief claimed by the petitioner reference to basic facts would be necessary.
According to the petitioner she passed graduation on Punjabi and was possessing the requisite qualifications for the post of Mistress in Punjabi.
She applied in response to an advertisement dated 1211996 issued by the respondents for that post.
She was called for interview on 23111996.
She qualified in the interview and was selected for the post of Mistress in Punjabi and placed at merit No. 582 of the general category as declared by the respondents vide their order dated 20111997.
When she went to join the Institution and requested the District Education Officer for issuing her a posting order, she was told that she does not possess essential qualifications of teaching of Punjabi at the time of submission of the application i.e. on 1521996, or at the time of publication of the corrigendum on 30.10.1996, as such she cannot be allowed to join.
The petitioner earlier filed a writ petition before this Court being C.W.P.
No. 8896 of 2000 which was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to consider the legal notice served by the petitioner upon them dated 1552000 in furtherance to the order of the Division Bench dated 1382001 and the claim of the petitioner was rejected.
This compelled the petitioner to file the present petition with the above prayer.
3.
Upon notice, the respondent filed a detailed reply.
In short, the stand by the respondent is that as the petitioner did not possess the essential qualifications or the prescribed education as on the date of the application as well as on the extended date contained in the corrigendum issued by the respondents, her result was not declared by the date.
As such the respondents have rightly cancelled her appointment and dispensed with her services.
No illegality or infirmity has been committed by the respondents in issuance of the impugned order, which otherwise is well reasoned.
4.
The above narrated facts depict that controversy in the present falls within a very narrow campus.
Whether the petitioner was eligible at the given point of time or not is the basic question that falls for consideration in the present case.
The petitioner relies upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Bhupinder Pal Singh (supra) to contend that she had taken the examination prior to the cut off date and in fact her papers were even evaluated though her result was declared few days after the cut off date.
She was issued a letter of appointment which could not be withdrawn by the respondents in light of the laws afore-referred.
Interestingly, the respondents also reply upon the same judgment to argue that the petitioner cannot be granted the relief prayed for.
5.
In the writ petition, the petitioner has specifically stated that the order passed by the respondents is in violation of the orders of the Apex Court in the above noted case.
Various instances have been cited in the writ petition to say that the respondents have issued appointment/posting letters to the candidates who acquired the requisite qualification after the cut off date i.e. 30.10.1996.
The petitioner has been denied such appointment in an arbitrary manner.
Petitioner has annexed the result-cum-detail card of one Shri Sandesh Singh as Annexure P-10, to the writ petition which has been issued on 29111996 apparently beyond the cut off date.
In response to these averments, in the written statement filed by the respondent-State that they have passed the speaking order dated 25102001 (R2) and the same is not liable to be set aside.
However, in regard to the candidate Sandesh Singh it is stated that he had submitted his confidential result prior to the cut off date and as such was issued appointment letter.
In reply to paragraph 17(i)(iv) it has been stated that the petitioner had given the Punjabi examination much before the cut off date.
However, his result was declared after the cut off date and as such was not permitted to join his duties.
6.
In view of the definite stand taken by the respondents we should now consider the effect of judgment of the Supreme Court in Bhupinder Pal Singh's case (supra).
Reliance has been placed on the following conclusions of the Apex Court by the learned counsel for the parties :-  "17.
It is also stated in the enquiry report that total number of candidates issued appointment letters and joined was 305 while total number of candidates issued appointment letters but not joined was 277.
There were another 433 candidates who, though selected, were not issued appointment letters.
18.
It was conceded during the course of hearing that candidates belonging to category-1 had acquired the requisite eligibility qualifications by the extended date.
As to category-3 it was conceded that the candidates had given Punjabi examination before the cut off date and though the results were not declared but their answer books were evaluated before 30.10.1996 and the results were formally declared after the cut off date and they had passed the requisite examination in Punjabi."
7.
As is evident from the above conclusions, the case of the petitioner would fall under category-3.
There also the candidate had given the Punjabi examination before the cut off date though their results were declared and answer books evaluated prior to the cut off date.
Formal declaration of the result thus was not taken to be the determining factor.
Here it is the admitted case that the petitioner had taken the Punjabi examination prior to the cut off date and the result was declared close to the cut off date.
In normal circumstances it may be inferred and in fact it is not disputed by the respondents that the mark sheets had already been evaluated by that time.
8.
The conduct of the respondents is another relevant factor which is to be taken into consideration.
The respondents being fully aware of the fact that the result of the petitioner of passing Punjabi examination was not declared, issued the letter of appointment on 20111997 by which date admittedly, the result of the petitioner had been declared.
The letter of appointment contained the stipulation that the candidates will present original testimonials of educational qualifications before joining, to the District Education Officer of the concerned district.
In other words, the petitioner could produce the original testimonials of the prescribed qualification before joining in term of the letter of appointment.
The petitioner did report for joining the duties within the stipulated period and adhered to the conditions of the letter of appointment.
In the circumstances of the case, we are unable to see any justification on the part of the respondents to prohibit the petitioner for joining duties.
9.
In view of our above discussion we are unable to sustain the order passed by the Director of Public Instructions, Punjab, Chandigarh, dated 25102001.
The impugned order is hereby quashed with a further direction to the respondents that they should permit the petitioner to join on the post in furtherance of the letter of appointment issued by the respondent.
10.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed in the above terms, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.