MM Kumar, J (Oral) - This is an application filed under Sub-Sections 5 and 6 of Section 20 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (for brevity `the Act') in which a prayer has been made for deciding the appeal on merits and for setting aside the order of the Lok Adalat dated 2852001, which is to be treated as a decree under Section 21(1) of the Act.
2.
Learned State counsel has not been able to dispute that the order dated 2852001 was made in pursuance of settlement and there was no element of compulsion.
Before passing the final order on 14122000 a detailed order was passed by the Lok Adalat directing the State counsel to get instructions as to whether some one from the department was promoted as Assistant Administrative Officer w.e.f.
1.9.1979 to 3051980.
In response to the query made by the Lok Adalat, a communication was placed on record showing that the post was kept vacant in view of the pending litigation.
it is obvious that the parties have voluntarily submitted to the jurisdiction of the Lok Adalat.
After the decision has gone against the appellant, the present application has been made under Sub-sections (5) and (6) of Section 20 of the Act, which read as under :  "20.
Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats - (1) to (4) XXX XXX XXX  (5) Where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived at between the parties, the record of the case shall be returned by it to the court, from which the reference has been received under sub-section (1) for disposal in accordance with law.
(6) Where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived at between the parties, in a matter referred to in sub-section (2), that Lok Adalat shall advise the parties to seek remedy in a court."
3.
A perusal of sub-section (5) shows that if no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived at, then the dispute between the parties could be continued before the Court and the parties to the litigation can also move an application before the appropriate Court that the case referred to the Lok Adalat shall be withdrawn and dealt with by the Court or the Tribunal, who had transferred the same to the Lok Adalat.
However, the above provisions of both sub-sections would not apply to the facts of the present case because no application was filed before this Court for recalling the case from the Lok Adalat because of disagreement of the parties nor it could be said that no award by the Lok Adalat could be pronounced.
4.
After hearing the learned State counsel, I do not find any substance in the present application as the award made by the Lok Adalat has to be treated as a settlement executable as a decree under Section 20 of the Legal Services of Authorities Act, 1987.
The application is absolutely frivolous.
The appellant is expected to avoid litigation rather than creating litigation.
Such type of frivolous application should not have been filed by the appellant-State.
The officer who has filed this application is warned to be careful in future.
A copy of this order be placed on his service record.
Application dismissed.