Viney Mittal, J - The petitioners have filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of directions to the respondents to regularise their services.
2.
The petitioners have averred that they were appointed as Malies on daily wages on various dates in the year 1990.
In the year 1992, their services were terminated.
The petitioners raised independent industrial disputes.
Vide separate awards dated March 12, 1997, the learned Presiding Officer of the Labour Court, Ambala held that the termination of the services of the petitioners was illegal and consequently ordered their reinstatement.
However, while ordering the reinstatement the learned Presiding Officer also ordered that the petitioners would be entitled to the continuity of service and back wages.
Copies of the awards dated March 12, 1997 have been appended as Annexures P/1 to P/3 with the present petition.
3.
The aforesaid orders were challenged by the management before this court.
The writ petitions filed by the management were dismissed.
According to the petitioners, the awards had attained finality.
4.
After the petitioners were reinstated in pursuance to the awards passed by the Labour Court, the petitioners have claimed the regularisations of their services.
It is maintained by the petitioners that the State of Haryana had issued policies dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996, whereby such daily wagers who had completed three years of service as on January 31, 1996 and had been in service on the aforesaid date and had completed 240 days of service in one year without break of more than 30 days in one year were entitled to the regularisation of their services.
The petitioners have averred that their cases were fully covered by the aforesaid policies which were applicable to the respondents as well and, therefore, they were entitled to the regularisation of their services.
5.
In pursuance of the notice of the present petition, the respondents have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed by the respondents, contesting the claim of the petitioners.
The respondents have stated that since the petitioners were not in service in the year 1996, therefore, their services were not liable to be regularised.
It is further maintained by the respondents that since the petitioners had not worked with the respondent- Corporation after 1992, therefore, their claim for regularisation was without any basis.
6.
We have heard Shri SP Laler, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Shri RK Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for respondents No. 1 and 2 and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
7.
In our considered opinion, the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is not in dispute that the termination orders of the petitioners passed in the year 1992 were subsequently held to be illegal by the learned Labour Court by passing the awards Annexures P/1 to P/3.
The petitioners were ordered to be reinstated.
It was further ordered that they would be entitled to full back wages with continuity of service.
In view of the aforesaid awards of the Labour Court it would be deemed as if the petitioners have been in continuous service from the years 1992 till 1997 and were in service even on the cut off date i.e. January 31, 1996.
In this view of the matter, the petitioners fully come within the parameters of the policies dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996 and therefore, their claim for regularisation of their services is fully justified.
8.
In view of the above, we allow the present petition and direct the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners with effect from February 191996.
The petitioners would also be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
9.
However, their claim to the arrears of salary on such regularisation would be restricted to a period of 38 months prior to the date of filing of the present petition which was filed on July 3, 2000.
The respondents are further directed to implement the directions contained in the present judgment within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
Petition allowed.