Viney Mittal, J - The present civil writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner-Gurjog Singh for the issuance of a writ of certioraris to quash the order dated December 19, 2000, vide which the claim of the petitioner to continue on the post of Punjabi teacher on the basis of his selection in the year 1998 by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, has been rejected.
A copy of the aforesaid orders dated December 19, 2000 has been appended as Annexure P-17 with the petition.
Certain facts may be noticed.
2.
Vide an advertisement dated November 7, 1996, the Haryana Staff Selection Commission advertised 311 posts of Punjabi teachers (male), out of which 7 posts were meant for Ex-servicemen General category.
A copy of the aforesaid advertisement has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the petition.
The petitioner states that he was belonging to Ex-serviceman category being dependent of Ex-serviceman and applied for the aforesaid post alongwith all necessary documents.
The petitioner was selected after interview and ultimately was offered an appointment letter on April 23, 1998.
A copy of the aforesaid appointment letter has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the petition.
In pursuance to the aforesaid appointment letter, the petitioner accordingly joined as a Punjabi teacher on April 30, 1998.
3.
One Ajaib Singh filed a writ petition in this Court, challenging the aforesaid selection and the petitioner was also impleaded as a respondent on the ground that on the last date of the submission of the application, the petitioner was not eligible and that still he had been selected and appointed.
When the aforesaid writ petition filed by the Ajaib Singh was pending in this Court, the Staff Selection Commission again advertised various other posts of Punjabi teachers including 5 posts of Ex-servicemen General category.
A copy of the second advertisement issued by the Staff Selection Commission is appended as Annexure P-7 with the petition.
4.
The petitioner states that since his earlier appointment was under challenge, therefore, in order to avoid any risk and as a matter of abundant caution, he still applied again for the said post before the Commission and he was again called for the interview and again selected as a Punjabi teacher.
Although the petitioner was duly selected even in the second selection, but still when the department came to know that the petitioner was already working, therefore, no further action was taken, nor any appointment letter was issued to him.
It is the case of the petitioner that although in the writ petition filed by Ajaib Singh, he was found not eligible for the post but still this Court left question of selection of certain candidates, who were not found eligible to be appointed on the cut off date, open to be considered by the competent authorities.
In these circumstances, the petitioner states that although there was no direction by this Court to cancel the appointment of the petitioner, but still the State Government decided to terminate the services of the petitioner on the recommendation made by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission.
A copy of the aforesaid recommendation made by Haryana Staff Selection Commission has been appended as Annexure P-11 with the petition.
Consequently, the Director Secondary Education, forwarded the aforesaid recommendation to the District Education Officer, vide his communication Annexure P-12 and in turn, the District Education Officer issued a show cause notice to the petitioner.
A copy of the show cause notice has been appended as Annexure P-13 with the petition.
5.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply to the show cause notice and brought it to the notice of the authorities that the petitioner had even been selected against the second advertisement.
It was represented by the petitioner that since the petitioner has duly been selected again, therefore, his services ware not liable to be terminated under any circumstances.
However, the petitioner states that without adverting to the explanation given by the petitioner, the termination order was passed by the respondents on October 19, 2000.
A copy of the aforesaid termination order has been appended as Annexure P-15 with the present petition.
The petitioner aggrieved against the aforesaid order, challenged the same in CWP No. 14598 of 2000.
The aforesaid civil writ petition was disposed of vide order dated October 31, 2000, whereby the respondents were directed to consider and decide the question of appointment/continuance of the petitioner on the post of Punjabi teacher, which was to be made on the basis of his second selection in the year 1998, by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission.
6.
In accordance with the aforesaid directions, issued by this Court vide order dated October 31, 2000, the claim made by the petitioner was considered and the same has been rejected by the District Education Officer, Rohtak vide order dated December 19, 2000.
It is this order dated December 19, 2000, appended as Annexure P-17 with the petition, against which the petitioner has made the grievance in the present petition.
7.
On a notice having been issued of the writ petition, respondents have appeared and filed a written statement, contesting the claim made by the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondents in their written statement is that after the decision of the Ajaib Singh's case, the case of the petitioner was also examined by the respondents and it was found that the petitioner was not possessing the requisite qualifications before the last date of submission of application form.
The respondents have maintained that in fact, the petitioner had passed additional Punjabi subject of BA after the last date of submission of application.
With regard to the second advertisement and the second selection, respondents have stated that in the "meantime rule changed and applicant also applied again vide advertisement No. 2/98 of 7.8.98 for selection/appointment and B.Ed.
with Punjabi as teaching subject was required, it is submitted that the petitioner is not qualified in Punjabi as teaching subject i.e. 'Contents-cum-Methology' in B.Ed.
It is further submitted that the petitioner is not B.Ed.
as far as Punjabi subject is concerned."
8.
We have heard Sh. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the respondents.
Sh. Malik has submitted that even after the amendment of the rules and after the new rules had been notified on May 12, 1998, the second advertisement was issued on August 7, 1998.
According to him even as per the second advertisement which has been appended as Annexure P-7 with the petition, the qualification for the post of Punjabi teacher have been laid down as follows :-  "i) Matric from Panjab University or Board of School Education, Haryana or equivalent qualification recognised by the said Board.
ii) Giani Pass (in Gurmukhi Script) i.e. Honours in Punjabi from a recognised University.
iii) Pass in L.T.C.
(OT) in Punjabi, conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
or Graduate from a recognised University with Punjabi as an elective subject/M.A.
in Punjabi from a recognised University.
BA Honours in Punjabi with B.T./B.Ed.
or equivalent qualification.
iv) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard."
On the basis of the aforesaid advertisement, Sh. Malik submits that in fact, it is apparent that the petitioner was duly qualified as per the eligibility conditions laid down therein and thereafter, by any stretch of imagination, as he has already been selected and also selected again in the selection in pursuance of the second advertisement, there was no justification in terminating the services of the petitioner.
Sh. Malik has further drawn our attention to the following averment made in para 14(iv) to the following effect :-  "(iv) That many candidates who has also passed B.Ed.
without teaching subject Punjabi in B.Ed.
has been appointed in this very selection, in which the petitioner was also selected.
The details of the names are given below for ready reference :  I) Pawan Kumar, Punjabi Teacher, Merit No. 32 (BC), presently working in GBSS School, Faridabad.
II) Baljit Lal Punjabi Teacher, Merit No. 31 SC(B), presently working in GBSS School, Faridabad.
III) Rajinder Pal s/o Sh. Shishu Ram, Punjabi Teacher, Merit No. 20, Roll No. 23, posted in Distt.
Kaithal.
So all the above candidates have the same qualifications but they were appointed and the claim of the petitioner was arbitrarily ignored."
Sh. Malik submits that the aforesaid averments, made in the writ petition, have not at all been controverted in the written statement by the respondents when the following reply has been given by them with regard to the aforesaid paragraph :-  "(iv) That the contents of sub-para (iv) of the petition are admitted being the matter of record.
Hence needs no comments.
However the petitioner is not entitled to be appointed as Punjabi teacher as per to prevailing instructions.
There is no violation of rules.
Hence the petitioner have no claim on the said post."
9.
In reply to the aforesaid submission, Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents states that in fact even after the promulgation of the new rules, the petitioner who did not possess the requisite qualification namely B.T./B.Ed.
with Punjabi as a teaching subject from a recognised University, was not eligible to be appointed to the post of a Punjabi teacher.
Sh. Amol Rattan maintains that in view of the rules, the non-mentioning of the aforesaid qualifications in the second advertisement was of no consequence.
On a specific query of the Court with regard to persons possessing similar qualifications as the petitioner, having been appointed in pursuance to the second advertisement, Sh. Amol Rattan submitted that although it was admitted in the written statement that such persons have been appointed but maintained that such appointment of other persons would give no right to the petitioner.
10.
Having given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, we find that the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
When the petitioner was already elected in the earlier selection and although he was found not eligible on the cut off date and as a matter of abundant caution, he had again applied for appointment in pursuance to the second advertisement, and even in the second selection he was duly selected, then subsequently, the petitioner could not be singled out for termination merely on the basis of his not possessing the requisite qualifications as per the amended rules.
It is the admitted case between the parties that the petitioner does possess the requisite qualifications as laid down in the second advertisement Annexure P- 7.
The aforesaid qualifications given in the advertisement dated August 7, 1998 (after the promulgation of the new rules) have already been noticed above.
It is also the admitted case between the parties that certain persons namely Pawan Kumar, Baljit Lal and Rajinder Pal who also possess similar qualifications, as the petitioner, were selected and appointed in pursuance to the second advertisement and are still continuing to their posts.
Thus, singling out the petitioner for termination is an act of discrimination by the respondents and the same cannot be sustained.
The petitioner was also entitled to be continued on the post of a Punjabi teacher alongwith aforesaid persons.
11.
Accordingly, we allow the present writ petition and while quashing the orders dated December 19, 2000, a copy whereof has been appended as Annexure P-17 with the writ petition, declare that the petitioner shall be deemed to be in service for all intents and purpose from the date his services were terminated i.e. October 23, 2000 and shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits with continuity in service and parity with all other incumbents, who were selected in the second selection in pursuance to the advertisement dated August 7, 1998.
No costs.
Petition allowed.