Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of C.W.P.
bearing Nos. 13722 of 1999, 15049 of 2000 and 17621 of 2000 as the common question of law arises in these case.
However, the facts for the purpose of this order are taken from C.W.P.
No. 13772 of 1999.
2.
The petitioners were initially appointed as Mechanics.
However, vide notification dated 351991, the State Government revised scales of pay of `Skilled' and `Semi Skilled staff" in the Transport Department.
Mechanics were also redesignated as Technician Grade II and Technician Grade III.
Technician Grade III was put in revised Grade of Rs. 1200-2100.
The petitioners have claimed that they were promoted from Technician Grade III to Technician Grade II on 2881997 in higher pay scales of Rs. 1350-2400 and were given one increment for further promotion.
The claim of the petitioners is that they are entitled to two additional increments on the promoted post in view of the State Government instructions dated 1651996.
3.
Earlier a few employees filed writ petition bearing C.W.P.
No. 7755 of 1998 before this Court claiming one advance increment.
This Court vide order dated 18.9.1998 directed the respondents to decide the representation within a period of six months.
However, an order dated 6.8.1999 was passed disposing of the representation of the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 7755 of 1998 that promotion orders of the officials were issued after giving benefit of excess annual increment inadvertently.
It was a case of redesignation and not promotion.
Similar orders were passed in respect of the petitioners on 23.9.1999 after issuing a show cause notice.
Petitioners have submitted a reply to show cause notice as well.
It was found that the petitioners were not entitled for promotion as Technician Grade II as it was not a case of promotion but redesignation.
Consequently, it was ordered that financial benefits given to the petitioners as advanced annual increment shall be recovered in instalment.
It is the said order which is impugned in the present writ petition.
4.
In reply, the State has controverted the averments made by the petitioners.
It is denied that petitioners were promoted as Technician Grade II.
It is further submitted that there is no provision of promotion from Technician Grade III to Technician Grade II in the notification dated 351991.
There was erroneous recommendation for promotion and, thus, the order of promotion was cancelled after complying with the principle of natural justice.
Since petitioners have been granted financial benefits inadvertently, therefore, State Government is entitled to recover the same.
5.
The identical question was decided by the Division Bench of this Court in Brij Lal and another v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(4) SCT 715 (P&H).
It was found that the designation of the petitioners were changed to Technician Grade III with effect from 3111989.
It was found that the petitioners are not entitled to promotion or for an additional increment.
It was so held :-  "A perusal of order Annexure P-7 shows that in view of the notification of the Punjab Government dated 351991, designation of the petitioners was changed to Technician Grade-III with effect from 3111989.
At that time their designation was mentioned as "promoted post" in place of "placement post".
Due to this mistake, the petitioners were granted one additional increment second time by order datted 15.4.19999 with effect from 27.1.1998.
It is only this mistake which has been corrected.
In view of the above, it becomes evident that no further relief can be granted to the petitioners.
The petitioners are at liberty to seek their remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 as stated in the preliminary objection to the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
It is, however, made clear that no recovery shall be effected from the petitioners on account of any amount paid to the petitioners on the basis of additional increment wrongly granted to them."
6.
In the present writ petition, the State Government has passed an identical order on 23.9.1999 as was impugned in the above mentioned writ petition.
The said order has been passed after issuing show cause notice and granting an opportunity of hearing.
Thus, no illegality can be found so far as the question of fixation of pay is concerned.
However, the petitioners were granted financial benefits on account of mistake of the department.
There was no fraud or misrepresentation on the part of the petitioners.
Therefore, the financial benefits given to the petitioners cannot be recovered in view of the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668 (SC) : 1995(2) RSJ 139.
However, the counsel for the respondents has made reference to the Division Bench's judgment in Bishan Chand v. The Registrar Cooperative Societies, Punjab and others, 1997(4) SCT 146 (P&H) : 1997(4) RSJ 500 to contend that the State Government is not bound to perpetuate a wrong and they are entitled to rectify the mistake.
However, in our opinion, in Sahib Ram's case, it has been held that where benefit of higher pay scales has been given not on account of any misrepresentation then the amount may not be recovered from the employee.
It was held as under :-  "Admittedly, the appellant does not possess the required educational qualifications.
Under the circumstances the appellant would not be entitled to the relaxation.
The Principal erred in granting him the relaxation.
Since the date of relaxation the appellant had been paid his salary on revised scale.
However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances, the amount paid that date may not be recovered from the appellant."
Keeping in view the above said judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, we are of the opinion that the order directing the recovery of excess amount paid to the petitioner on account of mistake of the respondents is inequitable and, therefore, not sustainable.
Consequently, we allow the present writ petition to the extent that the respondents shall not be entitled to recover financial benefits given as advanced annual increment.
Petition allowed.