Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 8287 and 8489 of 2001 as the common question of facts and law are involved in these petitions.
2.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are taken out from C.W.P.
No. 8287 of 2001.
Ram Pal-petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India claiming a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the stipulation in the order dated Marc 27, 2001 wherein although the petitioner had been promoted with effect from an earlier date but it had been provided that he would not be entitled to any arrears of pay on account of aforesaid retrospective promotion.
3.
The petitioner was initially appointed as J.B.T.
Teacher on ad hoc basis with effect from February 18, 1988.
His services were subsequently regularised with effect from January 1, 1991.
The petitioner subsequently passed his B.Ed.
examination on November 26, 1993 and became eligible for promotion as SS Master.
Accordingly, his case for promotion was sent to respondent No. 2 in the year 1994.
The petitioner has averred that vide order dated December 17, 1997, respondent No. 2 promoted a number of JBT Teachers who were junior to the petitioner but the claim of the petitioner was ignored.
The petitioner made a representation.
There was no response.
Ultimately, he approached this court through C.W.P.
No. 9107 of 2000.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this court vide order dated July 18, 2000 whereby respondent No. 2 was directed to consider the claim of the petitioner and decide the legal notice served by him.
In pursuance of the aforesaid directions vide order dated March 27, 2001, respondent No. 2 namely, the Director Secondary Education, Haryana, ordered the promotion of the petitioner with effect from December 17, 1997.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated March 27, 2001 has been appended as Annexure P/4 with the petition.
However, while promoting the petitioner from an earlier date, namely, December 17, 1997, it was stipulated that the petitioner would not be entitled for any arrears but he would be entitled to the benefits of salary and pay fixation on account of the retrospective promotion.
4.
The petitioner is now aggrieved against the denial of arrears of pay to him with effect from December 17, 1997 and has approached this court through the present petition challenging the aforesaid stipulation contained in the order Annexure P/4.
5.
Upon a notice of the present writ petition issued to the respondents, they have put in appearance.
A written statement contesting the claim of the petitioner has been filed.
The facts as averred by the petitioner are not disputed.
However, the respondents have stated that the case of the petitioner for promotion could not be considered earlier because the petitioner has failed to submit his promotion case in time to the competent authority.
However, the respondents have not disputed that later on the case of the petitioner was considered and he was given promotion with effect from December 17, 1997 ie from the date his juniors were promoted.
With regard to the denial of the arrears of pay, the respondents have maintained that since the petitioner did not work on the promotional post of SS Master from December 17, 1997 to January 7, 1999, therefore, he was not entitled to any arrears.
6.
I have heard Shri Ravi Sharma, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
7.
As noticed by us above, the facts as averred by the petitioner has not been disputed by the respondents.
The only defence raised by the respondents for contesting the claim of the petitioner is that since he has not worked on the promotional post prior to his promotion order, therefore, he was not entitled to the arrears of salary on the promoted post on the principles of "No Work No Pay."
8.
After considering the matter in detail, we find that the stand adopted by the respondents is wholly unsustainable.
When the respondents themselves chose to concede the claim of the petitioner to the promotion with effect from the date his junior was promoted then there was no question of denying him the pay to the promotional post.
The principle of "no work no pay" would not be attracted to the facts of the present case inasmuch as the petitioner had been claiming the promotional post with effect from the day he became eligible.
In any case, the claim to the promotional post crystilised when persons junior to him were promoted on December 17, 1997.
It is not that the petitioner was offered the work of the promotional post but had denied to work upon the same.
Since the petitioner was offered the work to which he was legally entitled to, he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he was subsequently held entitled to.
9.
In a similar situation, a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT 785 held as follows :  7.
Similarly, the argument that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of emoluments on the principle of `No work, no pay' is apparently mis- conceived and based upon wrong notions of law.
If a civil servant is not offered the work to which he was legally entitled he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he subsequently is held entitled to.
Permitting such a course to be adopted would be encouraging the imposition of double penalty, this is, firstly by declining the civil servant his right of promotion and secondly by depriving him of the emoluments to which he would have been entitled to upon promotion which subsequently is considered in his favour.
Deprivation to work against the post to which a civil servant is entitled on promotion is always at the risk and responsibility of the State and cannot be made a basis for depriving such a civil servant of the emoluments to which he was entitled, had he been promoted in accordance with the rules at the time when he became eligible for such promotion.
The Courts cannot ignore the magnitude of the suffering and the pains to which a civil servant is subjected on account of deprivation of the monetary benefits particularly in this age of skyrocketing prices and non-availability of essential requirements of livelihood.
The Court cannot shut its eyes and forget the holocaust of economic deprivation to the petitioner and his dependents.
Such a deprivation might have upset the career of the dependents, depriving the society of the services of such youth and budding dependents or children of the petitioner.
The executive once being satisfied that a civil servant was entitled to the promotion with retrospective effect cannot deprive him of the benefits of salary accruing on account of such promotion from an early date without assigning valid, cogent and specific reasons.
The order impugned in this case by which the petitioner/appellant was deprived of his right to claim back wages is admittedly non-speaking without assigning any justification or cogent and specific reasons.
10.
In this view of the matter, we have no hesitation in allowing the present petitions and while quashing the stipulation, contained in order dated March 27, 2001 (Annexure P/4) to the effect that the petitioner will not be entitled to any arrears, we direct the respondents to pay all the arrears to the petitioner with effect from the date the aforesaid promotion order took effect i.e. with effect from December 17, 1997.
Let the aforesaid payment be made within a period of four months from the day a certified copy of this order is received by the respondents.
Both the petitions stands disposed of accordingly.
Petitions allowed.