Jawahar Lal Gupta J (Oral) - The petitioner is working as an Art & Craft teacher.
He has approached this Court with the prayer that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to grant him higher scale for the post of Master on the basis of his educational qualifications.
2.
The petitioner alleges that he had joined the service as a teacher in the year 1975.
In accordance with the circular issued by the State Government, the teachers possessing the qualifications of BA/B.Sc./B.Com./ B.Sc.
Agriculture and BT were entitled to be placed in the scale of Masters.
The petitioner claims that after passing matriculation examination, he had "acquired two years certificate course in Arts and Crafts Teachers Training Course from the Mehar Chand Technical Institute, Jalandhar.... in the year 1965.
Besides this, the petitioner had also undergone five years diploma course in 'Commercial Art' of Govt. College of Arts and Crafts, Chandigarh and passed in the Ist division in the year 1969".
On the basis of these qualifications, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to the grant of the higher scale.
The petitioner's representations, copies of which have been produced at Annexures P/7, P/13, P/17 and the legal noticed dated February 5, 2002 having elicited no response, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. Ashwani Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Panjab University has vide its letter dated December 29, 1964 certified that persons possessing 5 years' diploma in Art from the Government School of Arts, Punjab are eligible for appointment as Lecturer in Arts in the affiliated colleges.
Thus, the qualifications of the petitioner are higher than those laid-down by the Government in the circular dated July 23, 1957.
Consequently, the petitioner is entitled to be placed in the Master's scale.
4.
A perusal of the letter dated July 23, 1957 shows that the teachers were broadly placed in two categories.
These were classified as under :  CATEGORY `A' BA/B.Sc./B.Com./B.Sc.
(Agriculture) and BT/Diploma in Physical Education/Diploma in Senior Basic Training.
CATEGORY `B' Group I : Matric with basic training (including JTs) Group II : JTs (including Assistant Mistress with BA/Inter/Matric plus J.A.V.
Training).
Group III : i) Shastries ii) Gianies, Prabhakars, Drawing Masters and Craftsmen Certificate Holders.
iii) Munshi Fazil iv) S.Ts.
including S.Vs with.
training in Physical Education of Agriculture Group IV : Untrained teachers with qualifications like B Com., B.Sc.
(Agriculture) etc.
In addition, there are smaller categories of special posts, such as Headmasters/Headmistress/District Inspectors/Inspectors of Schools, with qualifications of category `A' above."
5.
It further appears that for these two categories, different scales of pay were prescribed.
So far as category `A' is concerned, the following provision was made :  "CATEGORY `A' Rs. 110-8-190-10-250 with a higher start for MA or MSc.
as at present.
The existing percentage of posts fixed by Government for the scales of Rs. 110-8- 190-10/250 and Rs. 250-10-330 should remain unchanged at 85% and 15% respectively."
6.
A perusal of the above would show that a teacher possessing the qualification of graduation in Science/Commerce/Agriculture with the qualification of BT or Diploma in Physical Education or Diploma in Senior Basic training was to be placed in category 'A'.
The short question that arises is does the petitioner fulfil these qualifications ?
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner is not a graduate.
On his own saying, he has only passed the matriculation examination.
Still further, he does not have the qualification of BT or B.Ed.
He does not have the Diploma in Physical Education or Senior Basic Training.
Still further, even for the various posts in category `B' the diploma awarded to the petitioner is not one of the recognised qualifications.
8.
Mr. Chopra submits that the Punjab University has certified the diploma acquired from Government College of Arts as a requisite qualification for appointment to the post of Lecturer.
We have perused this letter.
It is addressed to the Director of Industrial Training.
The minimum qualifications required for different posts in the institutions under the Directorate of Industrial Training have not been placed before us.
Still further the letter appears to have been issued by the Principal of the Vaish College of Education, Rohtak.
In what context was this letter ?
There is nothing on record.
In any event, the stipulation in the letter of July 23, 1957 is clear and categoric.
There is no moving space.
The recognised qualifications have been clearly laid-down.
No provision for bringing in equivalent or other qualifications exists.
Thus, the special provision made in case of teachers in the Education department would over-ride any general provision made in respect of certain other departments.
It deserves mention that recruitment to the posts of Master teachers was initially governed by the provisions of the rules called the Punjab Educational Service Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955.
These, rules were notified on May 30, 1957.
Appendix B of these rules embodies the qualifications for different posts.
For the posts of Masters, the qualifications are as under : -  Masters BA, MA, MSc., SSTC or BT Senior Basic Trained.
9.
In case of Science and Agriculture Masters, graduation in science or agriculture has been prescribed.
The rules do not recognise the diploma in Arts as a qualification for appointment to the post of Master.
Even for the post of Drawing Master or Art and Craft Masters, the diploma acquired by the petitioner is not enough.
One year's teachers training is the required qualification.
The rules of 1955 were superseded by the rules called the Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Service Rule, 1978.
However, the basic provision with regard to the qualifications has remained unchanged.
10.
In view of the above, it is clear that the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter dated July 23, 1957 embodied qualifications for the post of Masters, as laid down under the statutory rules.
The petitioner admittedly does not possess those qualifications.
Thus, the question as posed above has to be answered in the negative.
11.
Mr. Chopra submits that the qualifications of the petitioner are in fact higher than those required for the post.
12.
This Court while considering a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution does not normally enter academic thickets.
It is not in a position to lay-down that the diploma acquired by the petitioner is higher than the qualifications of BA/BT or B.Ed.
In any case, the syllabi and the other data have not been placed before this Court.
Thus, it cannot be said even prima facie that the petitioner's claim is sustainable.
13.
Mr. Chopra submits that similar claim has been sustained by this Court on earlier occasions.
Reference has been made to the judgment dated October 13, 1993 delivered by this Single Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11995 of 1989.
We have perused the judgment.
The issue which arose for the consideration of the learned Judge was totally different.
It related to the effect of the letter issued by the Government on February 19, 1979.
It was held that the benefits under the letter of 1957 were not affected by the letter of February 19, 1979.
No such issue arises in the present case.
14.
Mr. Chopra was at pains to point out that the petitioner had repeatedly represented and that the department has failed to respond.
Learned counsel referred to the several representations that have been submitted by the petitioner.
We have considered this aspect of the matter.
A perusal of the paper-book shows that the petitioner's request was declined by the authority vide order dated June 6, 1990.
A copy of this communication has been produced as Annexure P/15-5 by the petitioner.
A perusal of this letter shows that the petitioner's request which had been forwarded by the School to the District Education Officer was returned with the observation that "the official is not BA B.Ed.
Hence his case cannot be sent to the Department".
Thus, the petitioner was made aware of the view of the department.
Thereafter, maintained total silence for a period of more than 10 years.
After the issue of the letter dated June 6, 1990, the petitioner had submitted representation of September 27, 2001.
Thereafter he had issued the notice dated February 5, 2002.
The department having communicated its view to the petitioner more than a decade earlier cannot be blamed for remaining silent after the receipt of the aforesaid representation/notice.
No other point has been raised  15.
In view of the above, it is held that the diploma acquired by the petitioner after passing the matriculation examination is not shown to be equivalent to the qualifications of BA, B.Ed.
It has not even been proved to be a recognised qualification under the rules governing the petitioner.
It is not one of the qualifications mentioned in the letter dated July 23, 1957.
Thus, the petitioner's claim for a higher scale of pay with effect from the date of his entry into service on the basis of the letter of July 23, 1957 cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.