GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioners have prayed for striking down Rules 6(1) and 7(3)(ii) of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class - II (Public Health), Public Works Department Rules, 1967 (for short, `the Rules') (the year of the Rules has been wrongly typed in the prayer clause as 1966).
2.
The petitioners joined service as Junior Engineers in Public Health Branch of the Public Works Department of the State of Punjab between 1963 and 1967- 68.
At that time, they possessed the qualifications of Matriculation and diploma in Civil/Mechanical/Electrical Engineering.
They have challenged the constitutionality of Rules 6(1) and 7(3)(ii) of the Rules on the ground that the prescription of separate quota of promotion for those Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers who possess the qualifications specified in Appendix `B' attached to the Rules is wholly irrational and is violative of their fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
They have averred that Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers have a common seniority irrespective of their qualification and, therefore, there can be no justification to prescribe a separate quota for degree holder Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers for promotion to the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers.
3.
The respondents have defended the prescription of separate quota for Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers possessing the qualification specified in Appendix `B' of the Rules by contending that the rule-making authority is entitled to lay down conditions of eligibility for promotion and also provide separate quota of promotion for those possessing higher qualifications.
4.
Shri Vipin Mahajan relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma, 1986(4) SCC 617, and argued that the impugned Rules may be declared unconstitutional and struck down because there is no valid ground to classify the cadre of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers into two sub-cadres for the purpose of promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer/Assistant Engineer.
He submitted that bifurcation of promotion quota of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers has resulted in diminishing the chances of promotion of the petitioners and similarly situated persons and, therefore, the respondents may be directed to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion against all the posts of Sub Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers.
5.
On the other hand, Shri DV Sharma, Additional Advocate General argued that the decision of the rule-making authority to lay down separate quota of promotion for Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers possessing the qualification of BE or AMIE is perfectly justified because educational qualifications always provide rational basis for classifying one group into two sub-groups for the purpose of promotion to the higher post.
6.
I have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments.
In my opinion, the plea of the petitioners and the supportive argument advanced by Shri Mahajan with the help of the decision of the Supreme Court in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) deserves to be rejected because the classification for promotion based on qualification has been repeatedly upheld by the Supreme Court in State of J&K v. Triloki Nath Khosa, 1974(1) SCC 19; P. Murugesan v. State of TN, 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 340; Rajasthan SEB Accountants Assn.
v. Rajasthan SEB, 1997(3) SCC 103; Secretary- cum-Chief Engineer v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(3) SCT 90 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 87; Food Corporation of India v. Om Prakash Sharma, 1998(4) SCT 238 (SC) : 1998(7) SCC 676; and Kuldeep Kumar Gupta v. Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board, 2001(1) SCT 316 (SC) : 2001(1) SCC 475.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) relied upon by Shri Mahajan was over- ruled by a larger Bench in P. Murugesan's case (supra) and it was held as under :  "Since the decision of the Constitution Bench in Triloki Nath Khosa the Supreme Court has been holding uniformly that even where direct recruits and promotees are integrated into a common class, they could for purposes of promotion to the higher cadre be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
When the rules can be framed barring altogether the diploma- holders from promotion, the rule-making authority cannot be precluded from restricting the promotion.
The rule-making authority may be of the opinion, having regard to the efficiency of the administration and other relevant circumstances that while it is not necessary to bar the diploma-holders from promotion altogether, their chances of promotion should be restricted.
Hence, on principle, there is no basis for the contention that only two options are open to a rule-making authority - either bar the diploma- holders altogether or allow them unrestricted promotion on par with the graduates.
The power of rule-making under the proviso to Art. 309 has been held to be legislative in character.
Therefore, the test is whether such a restrictive view is permissible vis-a-vis a legislature.
If not, it is equally impermissible in the case of the rule-making authority under the proviso to Art. 309.
The only test that such a rule has to pass is that of Arts.
14 and 16.
The facts of the case disclose that though the degree-holders and diploma- holders belonged to one class they represented two different categories.
Since 1969 the graduate supervisors and non-graduate supervisors were treated differently in the matter of pay, designation and in the matter of promotion though they were discharging identical functions and duties.
Further, in the Government service, the ratio of 3:1 as between graduates and diploma-holders has been in vogue since prior to 1965 and the Corporation has been trying to implement the said ratio in its service too.
It was furthermore permissible to the rule-making authority, if it thinks it necessary in the interests of administration to limit the promotional chances of non-graduates to one out of four vacancies, on the basis of academic qualifications.
The contention that by prescribing a longer qualifying period of service for diploma-holders, they have been equated with the graduates and that thereafter no further distinction is permissible cannot be accepted.
The distinction was in the matter of promotion and not for any the purpose.
If that distinction is not discrimination, another distinction now created (quota rule) is also not discriminatory."
7.
In view of the law laid down in the aforementioned cases, I have no hesitation to hold that the decision of the rule-making authority to prescribe a separate quota of promotion for Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers possessing the qualification of degree/AMIE does not suffer from any constitutional infirmity.
Rather, the separate promotion quota for degree- holders and those who have passed AMIE would add efficiency of service.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.