Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the order passed by the appropriate Government dated 631992 vide which the industrial dispute sought to be raised by the workman within the preview of Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, hereinafter referred to as the Act, was declined.
The impugned order reads as under :  "On the subject cited above it is informed to you that the Govt. did not think it fit to send your case for decision to the Court because after examination it has been found that you have left the service on your own and have raised the dispute after the lapse of five years six months and no reason has been explained for delay.
Sd/-  for Joint Secretary to Govt. Haryana,  Labour Department."
2.
According to the petitioner he was initially appointed as Beldar on daily wages in January, 1983 at Kaithal in the Irrigation Branch and continued to work there till 1.3.1984 when he was appointed in the regular pay scale.
He worked to the satisfaction of all concerned and was also granted annual increments for the years 1985 and 1986.
Thereafter the petitioner was transferred to Narwana Sub Division in 1986 and service book of the petitioner was also transferred.
He worked there for two months but was not allowed to work after 1771986.
The matter was dealt with by the Conciliation Officer.
However, he filed the papers on 29111987.
Thereafter the petitioner served a demand notice on 1101999.
According to the petitioner he had been approaching the respondents for granting him the employment but of no consequence.
In reply to the demand notice, written statement was filed on behalf of the department in which it was stated that the petitioner had left the job if his own accord and no claim of the petitioner was pending.
The petitioner contested the said issue, but the appropriate Government vide order dated 631992 declined to make reference in furtherance to the demand notice served by the petitioner and rejected the request vide the impugned order.
Thus, the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned order is contrary to the law inasmuch as merely on the ground of delay the appropriate Government could not have declined to make the reference in terms of Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
For this he relies upon the case of Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Limited and another, 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : 1999(2) RSJ 407 and also to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of a Rohtash v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(4) S.C.T.
945, CWP No. 2936 of 2002, decided on 732002.
Further it is contended that the appropriate Government has in fact determined the dispute on merits in holding that the workman had left the service at his own, which jurisdiction is not vested in the appropriate Government in terms of a judgment of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Om Parkash v. State of Haryana and another, 1993(3) SCT 260 (P&H) : (1993-2) PLR 500.
4.
The above contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner deserve to be considered with some merit.
Normally, the appropriate Government may not decline to make a reference only on the ground of delay unless the dispute had patently become stale or no industrial dispute was in existence.
In Ajaib Singh's case (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court enunciated the principles that where there is delay in serving the demand notice the Government may not decline the reference as the Labour Court could mould a relief keeping in view the facts and circumstances of each case.
5.
Be that as it may, the question of delay hardly arises in the present case.
The workman was not permitted to work in his post by the respondents after 17th of July, 1986.
He served a notice and the proceedings before the Conciliation Officer had taken place in the year 1987 itself.
Paragraph No. 5 of the writ petition reads as under :  "That to that effect the petitioner made several requests to the respondents as well as to the Labour unions and in the year 1987, as admitted by the respondents in the reply dated 16192 to the Demand Notice submitted by the petitioner, matter was sent to the Conciliation Officer but that was filed on 291187 without any notice to the petitioner."
Reply filed by the respondents to paragraph No. 5 to this paragraph of the writ petition may also be noticed, which reads as under :  "That in reply to para 5 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the petitioner filed demand notice on 19-8-1987.
As per record of the Labour- cum- Conciliation Officer, Kurukshetra the same was filed because the petitioner did not appear before him on the fixed date."
6.
From the above admitted facts, which appear from the pleadings of the parties on record, it is clear that the workman had taken recourse to his remedies at the first available opportunity and there was no delay on his part.
According to the workman after closure of the proceedings by the Conciliation Officer on 29111987 in furtherance to the demand notice dated 1981987 the workman continued to request the respondents for granting him employment.
Getting no relief from any quarter, he again served a notice on 1131991 which ultimately resulted in passing of the impugned order.
Thus, I have no hesitation in holding that there was no unreasonable or intentional delay on the part of the workman in serving demand notice and as such the reference could not be declined on the ground of delay.
The order in this behalf is factually incorrect.
7.
The parties are at issue whether the workman had abandoned the job voluntarily or her services were terminated on 1771986.
This was a matter which could be determined only upon recording of evidence and then taking a final decision on the merits of the dispute.
This jurisdiction is certainly not vested in the appropriate Government.
Apparently it has transgressed its jurisdiction.
Prima-facie an industrial dispute existed between the management and the workman and keeping in view the controversy between the parties, it required determination by a Labour Court in accordance with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Even on this score the appropriate Government has fallen in error of jurisdiction in determining the dispute and declining the reference.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated, I allow this writ petition and quash the order dated 631992 Annexure P/4 to the writ petition.
It is further directed that the appropriate Government shall make a reference on the demand notice of the petitioner to the appropriate forum in terms of Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.