MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of appropriate direction to the respondents to charge the fee from the petitioners as prescribed by the Government of India vide its notification dated May 16, 1997 and as approved by the Government of Punjab.
A further prayer has been made that although the petitioners were admitted in the session 1997-98, the fee prescribed for the candidates admitted in the session 1998-99 should be charged from them as the notification issued by the Government of India on May 16, 1997 has been made applicable from the session 1997-98.
The consequential relief sought is that the amount already paid by the petitioners be refunded back to them.
2.
Facts in brief unfolded in this petition are that the petitioners were admitted in BDS course at Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Dental Sciences & Research-respondent No. 4 in the session 1997-98.
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 15 were admitted against payment seats whereas petitioner Nos. 16 to 36 were admitted against free seats.
All the petitioners were asked by respondent No. 4 to deposit an amount of Rs. 100 lac as security.
In addition, petitioners admitted against payment seats were asked to deposit an annual fee of Rs. 100 lac and those who were admitted against free seats were asked to deposit Rs. 43,000/- for the sessions 1997-98.
Accordingly, the petitioners had deposited the amount of security and the annual college fee as is evident from Annexure P-1/I to P-1/IV.
3.
Petitioners claim that as per Clause 8(b) of the Dental Council of India (Norms and Guidelines for Fees and Guidelines for Admission in Dental Colleges) Regulations, 1994 (for brevity Regulations 1994), fee payable in respect of payment seats even in private dental colleges has to be fixed by Government of India from time to time.
It has been further provided that the fee structure fixed by the Government of India is binding on the following institutions : (a) Dental Colleges established and/or run by private educational institutions; (b) Such other dental colleges to which these regulations have been made applicable by the Government or by recognising and/or affiliating authority.
According to the petitioners, a notification dated May 16, 1997 under Clause 8(b) of the Regulations 1994 fixing the upper limits of fee for payment seats and free seats was issued.
According to that notification, an amount of Rs. 75,000/- is payable by a candidate getting admission in BDS course as fee for payments seats, out of which Rs. 10,000/- pa would be paid back to the Government/authority running the hospital utilised by such dental college.
For free seats, an amount of Rs. 8,000/- pa was prescribed.
The afore-mentioned fee norms was to be valid for a period of three years from the academic session 1997-98.
It has further been asserted that the State level Committees set up by respective States/UTs were to fix the actual fee to be levied within the minimum and maximum limits prescribed by the notification dated May 16, 1997 issued by the Government of India (Annexure P-2).
The petitioners have further asserted that the respondent State constituted a State Committee comprising of Principal Secretary, Medical Education and Research, Government of Punjab, Director, Research and Medical Education.
The Vice Chancellor, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, was appointed the third member who was to act as a Chairman.
The Committee made its recommendations which have been accepted on August 7, 1998 by the Government fixing Rs. 75,000/- pa for payment seats and Rs. 8,000/- pa for free seats.
4.
The petitioners have further pleaded that a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14249 of 1998, titled as Malvika Mahajan and others v. State of Punjab and other and certain other connected petitions decided on April 26, 1999 (Annexure P-8) had issued directions to respondent No. 4 to return back Rs. 100 lac charged by respondent No. 4 as security amount to all the students admitted in the year 1998-99 and also to return the excess fee to all the students of the session 1998-99.
However, the petitioners have not been paid back either the security amount of Rs. 100 lac or the excess fee charged beyond the prescribed norms.
The petitioners have made representations to respondent No. 4 by relying upon the judgment of the aforesaid Division Bench.
Representations were also made to the Vice Chancellor of Baba Farid University-respondent No. 3.
In those representations, a request was made to direct respondent No. 4 to respect and follow the fee structure approved by the respondent State vide its notification issued on August 7/17, 1998 and charge for payment seats an amount of Rs. 75,000/- and for free seats an amount of Rs. 8,000/-.
It was further claimed that this fee structure has been made applicable from the academic session 1997-98.
However, the apathy shown by the respondents has resulted into filing of the present petition.
5.
Respondent No. 1 has filed its reply admitting that in pursuance of notification dated May 16, 1997 issued by the Government of India prescribing fee structure, the State Government issued notification dated August 7/17, 1998, which is stated to be valid for a period of three years commencing from the session 1997-98.
However, it is claimed that no case of violating the fee structure prescribed by the notification has been reported to respondent No. 1.
6.
I have heard Ms. Alka Chatrath, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. NS Boparai, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, for respondent No. 1 and Dr. MS Rahi, for respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
7.
Ms. Alka Chatrath has argued that the provisions of Clause 8(b) of the Regulations 1994 are mandatory in character and the fee structure settled by the Government of India vide its notification dated May 16, 1997 (Annexure P- 2) is binding on respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
She has further pointed out that the notification having been adopted by respondent No. 1 (Annexure P-3) vide its own notification dated August 7/17, 1998, the fee charged over and above the prescribed norms is liable to be refunded.
In support of her submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in C.W.P.
No. 14249 of 1998, titled as Malvika Mahajan and others v. State of Punjab and others and the connected writ petitions decided on April 26, 1999.
She has further submitted that the minority character of the institution as pleaded by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 would not mitigate the mandates of law regarding the payment of fee in such institutions.
In support of her submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on two Constitution Bench judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of TMA Pai Foundation and others etc. etc. v. State of Karnataka and others etc., 1994(3) SCT 357 (SC) : 1994 SC 13 and Unni Krishnan JP and others etc. etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others etc., 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 2178.
8.
Dr. MS Rahi, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 3 and 4 has submitted that the notification issued on May 16, 1997 was implemented from the session 1998-99 as has been done by other private institutions.
Therefore, it cannot be implemented from the session 1998-99 as has been done by other private institutions.
Therefore, it cannot be implemented from the sessions 1997-98.
He has also pleaded delay in filing the present petition.
He has further pointed out that respondent No. 3 is a minority institution and enjoys protection of Article 30 of the Constitution and, therefore, regulating the fee structure to be charged by the institutions would be direct interference in the internal administration of the institutions.
On the basis of afore- mentioned submission, it is asserted that every direction issued by the Government is not binding on the respondents.
In this regard, the learned counsel has relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Principal, Madhav Institute of Technology and Science v. Rajendra Singh Yadav and others, 2000(4) SCT 383 (SC) : JT 2000(8) SC 440.
Learned counsel has further pointed out that the prospectus issued by the respondent No. 3 for the session 1997-98 is binding on the petitioners and its terms cannot be varied.
According to the learned counsel the terms of the prospectus is law binding between the petitioners and the respondent-institute.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on para 22 of the Full Bench judgment rendered in the case of Amardeep Sihota v. State of Punjab, 1993(4) SCT 328.
9.
Mr. NS Boparai, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab has argued that no case of complaining violation of fee structure has been reported to respondent No. 1.
However, he has submitted that the notification dated May 16, 1997 (Annexure P-2) issued by the Government of India and notification dated August 7/17, 1998 issued by the State of Punjab is binding on respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as per the provisions of Clause 8(b).
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I have reached the conclusion that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
Regulations 1994 have been enacted by the Dental Council of India under Section 20 of the Dentist Act, 1948.
The relevant provisions of Regulations 1994 may first be referred :  Regulation 8 "8.
Fee Structure - (a) The term "fees" as applicable to "free seats" and "payment seats" shall cover all the institutional fees including tuition fee.
(b) The fee payable for payment seats in private dental colleges shall be fixed by the Government of India from time to time.
The fee structure fixed by the Government shall be binding on institutions covered under Clause 2 of these regulations."
The afore-mentioned provisions came up for consideration before a Division Bench of this Court in Malvika Mahajan's case (supra).
After detailed discussion, their Lordships of the Division Bench reached the conclusion that the charging of fee by an institution like respondent No. 3 in violation of the fee structure prescribed by the Central Government as well as the notification issued by the Government of Punjab on August 7/17, 1998 was illegal.
A direction was issued to the State Government to ensure that private dental colleges do not charge fee from the candidates over and above the one prescribed by the Government of India and the Government of Punjab.
The directions issued by the Division Bench read as under :  "(i) ..................xx...............xx..............xx (ii) the charging of fee etc. by the private Dental Colleges/Institutions in violation of the fee structure prescribed by the Central Government under Clause 8(b) of the 1994 Regulations and the order dated 781998 issued by the State Government is declared illegal; (ii) ..................xx................xx..............xx (iv) ..................xx................xx..............xx  (v) ..................xx................xx..............xx (vi) ..................xx................xx..............xx (vii) the State Government shall ensure that the private Dental Colleges do not charge fee from the candidates over and above the one prescribed by the Government of India and the Government of Punjab and if any of the private Dental Colleges refuses to follow the statutory norms prescribed under Regulation 8(b) of the 1994 Regulations, then the State Government shall take appropriate action against such college in accordance with law.
(viii) ..................xx................xx..............xx (ix) the private Dental Colleges/Institutions are also given liberty to approach the Central Government and/or the State Government to revise the fee structure and grant them permission to charge security etc. against the payment seats."
11.
The argument of Dr. Rahi that there is a delay in filing the writ petition does not deserve to be accepted because the petitioners have been vigilant about their rights.
In 1999, they made representations to respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4 for redressable of their grievances.
As no favourable response was received by them, the petitioners invoked the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court.
It cannot be assumed that the petitioners have acquiesced and have accepted the fee as well as security charged by respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
Moreover, no estoppel could be pleaded against the mandate of a statute.
Clause 8 of the Regulations 1994 has been held to be mandatory.
12.
The other argument of the learned counsel that the prospectus is binding would also not require a serious consideration in view of the fact that no fee has been prescribed in the prospectus.
It is also evident that even if some fee was prescribed by respondent No. 3 in its prospectus, it could not have been inconsistent with the notification issued by the Government of India and the State Government under Clause 8(b) of the Regulations 1994.
I am also not impressed with the arguments of Dr. Rahi that respondent No. 3 is minority institution and on that account is entitled to regulate the fee structure because such an argument has been repelled by the Division Bench in Malvika Mahajan's case.
13.
In the light of the directions issued by the Division Bench, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
Respondent no. 1 is directed to ensure that no fee over and above the one prescribed by the Government of India and the State Government in their notifications Annexure P-2 and P-3 be charged from the petitioners.
If any irregularity is discovered and it is found that security of Rs. 100 lac and any other excess fee has been charged from the students, the same must be refunded to the petitioners within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Petition allowed.