SS Saron, J - Shri SP Dogra, since deceased joined the services of the Central Bank of India in 1965.
He filed the present petition claiming that he had a very good record of service throughout his service career and on the basis of a seniority, good service record and merit he had earned due promotions.
He was working as Manager at the time of his retirement on 31.3.1999.
At that time he had to his credit service of 34 years in the respondent Bank.
Shri Dogra had been suffering from Multiplied Myeloma (Bone Cancer) since 1995-96.
He had been undergoing treatment and Chemotherapy at Jaslok Hospital, Mumbai and Rajiv Gandhi Memorial Cancer Research Institute, New Delhi for more than three years.
2.
It was stated by Shri Dogra that initially there was no pension scheme in the respondent-Bank.
However, with effect from the year 1993 Pension Scheme was introduced.
Shri Dogra at the relevant time was posted at Amritsar, and he applied for application of Pension Scheme to him and submitted the relevant papers to the Regional Officer, Amritsar, along with other staff members.
Shri Dogra was transferred in the year 1994 to Himachal Pradesh and was posted at Haroli Branch, Regional Office, Shimla.
He received letter dated 17111995 from the Zonal Office, Chandigarh informing him that his pension option has not been accepted by the Central Office, Bombay and he was advised to submit fresh option as per Central Office Circular dated 12.10.1995.
The said letter did not contain any reasons for not accepting his pension option.
In any case Shri Dogra while he was posted at Haroli, Shimla, against submitted his pension option vide letter dated 13121995 along with nomination letter to the Haroli Branch, which was forwarded vide letter dated 14121995 (Annexure P-1) for onward submission to the Zonal Office, Chandigarh.
Shri Dogra was then transferred to Civil Lines, Amritsar, on ground of his illness i.e. cancer.
While he was posted there, he received Provident Fund Statement dated 3131997 (Annexure P-2), wherein it was mentioned that he had not opted for pension.
Shri Dogra filed a representation for rectifying the record and brought to the notice of the respondents that he exercised fresh option vide letter dated 13121995.
It was also submitted that the Regional Office, Amritsar, vide their letter dated 28.7.1997 wrote to the Regional Office at Shimla seeking clarification from them as to whether Shri Dogra had opted for pension or not.
The Shimla office vide their letter dated 181997 confirmed that they had received the pension papers from Shri Dogra the opting for pension as per their record within the stipulated time.
The copy of the letter dated 181997 is placed on record as Annexure P-3.
It is submitted that the perusal of Annexure P-3 shows that even a duly attested copy of Pension option submitted by Sh. Dogra was sent by the Regional Office, Shimla to Regional Office, Amritsar.
Ultimately vide order dated 1222000 (Annexure P-11) the respondent-Bank informed Shri SP Dogra, that the pension department, at Central Office had not received his pension option and that his name does not figure in the consolidated lists submitted by Zonal Office/Regional Office.
It was also indicated further that his option letter was also not received by the department and, therefore, they cannot accept his option for pension.
He was asked to avoid any further correspondence on this subject as the matter had been made clear.
Sh. Dogra filed the present writ petition for quashing the said order dated 1222000 (Annexure P-11) and for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-Bank to grant pension to him in accordance with the pension option exercised by him vide letter dated 14121995 and also to grant commutation of pension in accordance with the option exercised by him vide letter dated 23.7.1999 (Annexure P-9).
3.
Notice was issued in the case.
The respondents appeared and filed their written statement.
It is contended by the respondent-Bank that pension scheme was introduced for the first time in 1995 and was made operative with effect from 1993.
Under the pension scheme an employee, who desired to become a member of the pension scheme was given option to adopt the same.
Those employees who gave their option under the pension scheme became members and are entitled to receive pension.
It has been denied that Sh. Dogra at any time during his service had ever given his option for pension under the scheme and the pension department at Central Office has never received the pension option inform of Sh. Dogra.
It is stated that the pension option had to be submitted within stipulated period and Shri Dogra failed to submit the same within the stipulated period.
The period stipulated under the scheme had never been extended in his favour.
It is also submitted that the provident fund statement issued in March, 1997 also indicated that Sh. Dogra had not opted for pension.
The various representations that the petitioner made did not find favour in view of the factual position.
The petitioner on superannuation had already been paid provident fund as well as other retiral benefits.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition, Sh. SP Dogra, died on 2492001.
Accordingly, C.M.
No. 30726 of 2000 was filed for bringing the present petitioners on record as legal representatives of the deceased.
The said Misc. application was allowed and the legal representatives of the deceased were impleaded as party-petitioners to the writ petition vide order dated 29102001.
5.
Learned Counsel for the parties have been heard at length and we have given our thoughtful consideration to their respective contentions.
6.
The respondent-Bank framed the Central Bank of India (Employees) Pensions Regulations, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations).
Regulation 3 of the Regulations provides for application of the same.
The relevant Regulation 3(3)(a) which is necessary for the purpose of present writ petition reads as under :-  3.
Application.
- These regulations shall apply to employees who, -  (1) xx xx xx xx (2) xx xx xx xx (3)(a) are in the service of the Bank before the notified date and continue to be in the service of the Bank or after the notified date; and (b) exercise an option in writing within one hundred and twenty days from the notified date to become member of the Fund; and (c) authorities the trust of the Provident Fund of the Bank to transfer the entire contribution of the Bank alongwith the interest accrued thereon to the credit of the Fund constituted for the purpose under Regulation 5;" The notified date has been defined in Regulation 2(r) which reads as follows :-  "2(r) "Notified date" means the date on which these regulations are published in the Official Gazette."
7.
The Regulations were notified on 2991995.
Regulation 3(1) provides for application of the Regulations to employees who were in the services of the Bank on or after 111986 but had retired before 1111993.
Regulation 3(2) provides for application of the Regulations to the employees who have retired on or before 1111993 but before the notified date.
Regualtion 3(3) as reproduced above provides for application of the Regualtion to the employees, who were in the services of the Bank before the notified date and continue to be in service of the Bank on or after the notified date i.e. 2191995.
Sh. SP Dogra was in the service of the Bank before the notified date and continued to be in the service of the Bank and retired on 31.3.1999 after the notified date.
Therefore, Regulation 3(3) of the Regulations would be applicable in this case.
Regulations 3(4) to 3(8) provide for the application of the Regulations to various other categories of employees.
8.
The pleadings of the parties and the documents placed on record evidently show that the petitioner had opted for pension.
The letter dated 181997 (Annexure P-3) written by Central Bank of India, Regional Office, Shimla, to the Regional Office, Amritsar, reads as under :-  "Central Bank of India, RO Shimla BO Ref.
No. R.O./, Dated 181997 Regional Office, Amritsar.
Sub :- Staff Shri SP Dogra, Manager, Civil Lines, Amritsar.
Reference :- Your letter No. RO/ASR/PRS/97-98/2288 ............ On the above noted subject, you are informed that as per our records, Shri Dogra has already given option letter for pension.
We are forwarding an attested copy of option letter dated 13121995 of Sh. Dogra to your office.
Staff had given option letter for pension within the stipulated time.
If you have not received the acknowledgement, kindly send pension option letter dated 13121995 to Pension Deptt.
Sd/-  Manager."
Encls., : A/A,  9.
The perusal of the above letter shows that Shri Dogra had given option letter for pension.
Attested copy of the same was again forwarded by the Regional Office, Shimla to the Regional Office, Amritsar.
It is stated that Sh. Dogra had given option letter within the stipulated time and that if the Regional Office, Amritsar, had not received the acknowledgement, then to kindly send pension option letter dated 3121995 to the pension department.
It appears that the option letter given by the petitioner on 13121995 while he was posted at Haroli Branch Shimla, appears to have been mis-placed during transmission and it is for this reason that the pension papers had not been finalised.
Besides, it is to be noticed that the respondent-Bank since December, 1996 was submitting single contribution of Provident Fund towards his deposits as per Pension Regulations, which was also patent from the perusal of the employees Provident Fund Statement given vide letter dated 3131997 (Annexure P-2).
The said letter contains various columns including columns depicting the employee contribution and the Bank contribution.
However, after December, 1996 there has been no contribution towards Provident Fund by the Bank.
This goes to show that the respondent-Bank had accepted the pension option and it is for this reason that the Bank stopped contributing towards the Provident Fund.
It is only when Sh. Dogra made a representation in July 1997 that the respondent-Bank immediately thereafter started making double contribution since July, 1997 onwards.
In fact in the month of July, 1997, the respondent-Bank remitted a sum of Rs. 6760/- as a consolidated amount from December, 1996 till July, 1997.
This conduct of the Bank for its own employees is not understandable.
10.
Besides, we are, in any case, unable to agree with the stand of the respondents that the Regulations providing for opting for pension would dis- entitle the employee for the grant of pension on his failure to exercise an option in writing within 120 days from the notified date to become member of the Fund and authorise the trust of the Provident Fund of the Bank to transfer the entire contribution of the Bank alongwith interest accrued thereon to the credit of the Fund constituted for the purpose under Regulation 5.
Regulation 5 provides for the constitution of fund.
Regulation 5 reads as under :-  "Constitution of the Fund.
- (1) The Bank shall constitute a Fund to be called the Central Bank of India (Employees') Pension Fund under an irrevocable trust within one hundred twenty days from the notified date.
(2) The fund shall have for its sole purpose the provision of the payment of pension or family pension in accordance with these regulations to the employee or his family.
(3) The Bank shall be a contributor to the Fund and shall ensure that sufficient sums are placed in it to enable the trustees to make due payments to beneficiaries under these regulations."
11.
We are of the view after perusing the material on record, that the petitioner had indeed given his option to be brought on the pension scheme on 13121995.
However, his case for pension does not appear to have been processed probably due to his illness.
It has been stated by the respondents that the remittance of provident fund by the Branch cannot be taken as proof of exercising option.
In our view this stand of the respondents is wholly unjustified and the respondent-Bank is taking a technical objection of limitation so as to dis-entitle Shri SP Dogra during his life time and thereafter his legal representatives the benefit of pension.
Besides, the stipulation provided for exercising the option is not so rigid as is sought to be made out by the respondents.
Regulation 3(b) and (c) of the Regulations envisage that the employee is to exercise an option within 120 days from the notified date to become member of the Fund and authorise the trust of the Provident Fund of the Bank to transfer the entire contribution of the Bank along with interest accrued thereon to the credit of the Fund constituted for the purposes under Regulation 5.
Therefore, when the contribution of the Bank along with interest accrued thereon is to be credited in the account of the Fund constituted for the purpose under Regulation 5, the rigour of exercising the option within 120 days is quite meaningless as Bank's contribution of the Provident Fund is to be credited to the fund constituted under Regulation 5 alongwith interest accrued thereon.
As such when the entire contribution of the Bank is to be transferred to the credit of the Fund alongwith interest accrued thereon, the period of 120 days prescribed for becoming member of the Fund by exercising an option is only directory.
Regulation 3(b) does not entail that if an employee of the respondent-Bank fails to exercise his option to become a member of the Fund constituted under Regulation 5 within 120 days of the notified date, he is thereafter completely debarred.
In fact pension is not merely a statutory right where the Regulations for the purpose of bringing an employee on the Pension Scheme are to be strictly adhered to.
The grant of pension to citizens and the employees is the fulfilment of a constitutional promise inasmuch as it partakes the character of public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, disablement or similar other cases of undeserved want.
The regulations of the respondent-Bank merely make effective the constitutional mandate.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case titled Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 Supreme Court page 1409 affirmed the decision of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of KR Erry v. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 Punjab Page 279 holding that pension is not to be treated as a bounty payable on the sweet will and pleasure of the Government and that the right to superannuation pension including its amount is a valuable right vesting in a government servant.
This has been the settled legal position.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Subrata Sen v. Union of India, 2001(4) SCT 424 (SC) : 2001(8) Supreme Court Cases 71 observed as under :-  "Payment of pension does not depend upon Pension Fund.
It is the liability undertaken by the Company under the Rules and whenever becomes due and payable, is to be paid.
As observed in Nakara case pension is neither a bounty, or a matter of grace depending upon the sweet will of the employer, nor an ex gratia payment.
It is a payment for the past services rendered.
It is a social welfare measure rendering socio-economic justice to those who is the heyday of their life ceaselessly toiled for the employ on an assurance that in their old age they would not be left in the lurch."
12.
Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances this writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 1222000 (Annexure P-11) is quashed and the respondents are directed to bring Sh. SP Dogra since deceased on the pension scheme on account of his having exercised valid option on 13121995.
All consequential benefits that accrue thereon shall be paid to the petitioners who are the legal representatives of the deceased.
The petitioners, however, are liable to pay the Bank's contribution to the Provident Fund along with interest accused thereon to the credit of the Fund constituted for the purposes under Regulation 5.
The respondents shall therefore calculate the pension amount and arrears of pension payable to the petitioners from the date of superannuation of Sh. SP Dogra i.e. 31.3.1999 to the date of his demise i.e. 2492001 and thereafter grant and pay to the petitioners other consequential benefits including Family Pension as provided under Chapter VII of the Central Bank of Indian (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995.
From the amount due and payable to the petitioners the respondents shall be entitled to deduct the amount of Bank's contribution of Provident Fund alongwith interest accrued thereon till the date of payment of the amount of contributory Provident Fund to the deceased Sh. SP Dogra and credit the same to the Fund constituted for the purpose under Regulation 5.
The balance amount shall be paid to the petitioners within a period of four months from the receipt of certified copy of the order.
Thereafter, the respondents shall continue to pay to the petitioners other permissible benefits under the Regulations including Family Pension.
13.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed in the above terms.
The costs of the petition and the interest on the delayed payment is jointly quantified as Rs. 10,000/-.
The respondents shall pay the same to the petitioners.
Petition allowed.