Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated April 19, 1999 (Annexure P- 5) passed by the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) vide which the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted to the post of Head Constable.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he was posted as Assistant Sub-Inspector in Police Station, Kalanaur during the month of June 1996 and First Information Report bearing No. 125 dated July 5, 1994 was registered against Bhagwan Singh and others under Sections 323/324 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Two persons, namely, S/Shri Bhagwan Singh son of Maldev and Ram Phal etc. his brother and his nephew made a complaint before the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4) in which it was stated that though the opposite party was aggressor, but the Station House Officer, Kalanaur had challaned the applicants.
Smt. Raj Shree, HPS, Deputy Superintendent of Police (Headquarters) made a preliminary enquiry into the matter and submitted a report dated July 21, 1994 to the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4) stating therein that the Station House Officer, Kalanaur has tarnished the image of the police as he has not investigated the case properly.
After the submission of the report dated July 21, 1994 by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Headquarters), Sub-Inspector Shiv Singh, the present petitioner along with Sub Inspector Madan Lal No. 61/RR was put under suspension vide order dated July 21, 1994 of the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4).
The Additional Superintendent of Police, Rohtak was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer on September 5, 1994 issued a charge- sheet against the petitioner after getting it approved from the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4).
No prosecution witness was produced after the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner, but the petitioner was asked to submit his defence statement and produce his defence witnesses.
A detailed reply was submitted by the petitioner on September 28, 1994 and witnesses were produced in his defence.
From the statements of the defence witnesses, it was proved that the petitioner had not demanded any money nor was any money handed over to him as illegal gratification.
The Enquiry Officer submitted a report to the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4).
The Superintendent of Police, Rohtak without issuing any show cause notice and even without supplying the copy of the enquiry report to the petitioner, passed an order against him vide which two annual increments of the petitioner with permanent effect were stopped.
Aggrieved against the order passed by the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4), an appeal was filed by the petitioner before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak (respondent No. 3) on January 9, 1995 stating therein that as the enquiry report along with the show cause notice was not supplied to him, the order of punishment could not have been passed against him as it was against the principles of natural justice.
The decision of the Apex Court rendered in the case of Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan, 1991(1) SCT 491 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471 was quoted and relied upon.
3.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak (respondent No. 3) instead of deciding the appeal of the petitioner passed an order against him that the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner is inadequate and why not punishment of dismissal be passed against him.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 10950 of 1996 challenging the action of the Superintendent of Police (respondent No. 4).
Vide order dated August 1, 1995, a Division Bench of this Court, directed the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak (respondent No. 3) to treat the writ petition as representation on behalf of the petitioner and pass a speaking order.
It was further directed that till the representation is decided, the services of the petitioner may not be terminated.
The petitioner filed reply to the show cause notice before the punishing authority, i.e., Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 3), who had issued a show cause notice under Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak (respondent No. 3) enhanced the punishment from stoppage of two increments to that of reversion in the rank.
The petitioner again filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15766 of 1995 challenging the order of punishment passed by Deputy Inspector General of Police (respondent No. 3) and a Division Bench of this Court stayed the reversion of the petitioner vide order dated November 1, 1995.
After issuing notice of motion, learned counsel for the State appeared before a Division Bench of this Court in the aforesaid writ petition on April 9, 1996 and made a statement before the Court that the matter of the petitioner had been considered and the impugned order may be treated as having been withdrawn.
On the statement made by the learned counsel appearing for the State, the Hon'ble Division Bench passed a fresh order that the matter should be considered and decided afresh and the impugned order may be treated as having been withdrawn.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range Rohtak (respondent No. 3) accepted the appeal of the petitioner vide order dated September 10, 1997 and set aside the punishment awarded to the petitioner vide order dated October 26, 1994 vide which the punishment of stoppage of two increments with permanent effect was passed.
It has been further averred that the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner from April 24, 1994 to March 31, 1995 was also spoiled by the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak (respondent No. 4).
The representation was filed by the petitioner before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, who accepted the same and the adverse remarks were expunged vide his order dated February 13, 1998, a copy of which is attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-2.
15 Assistant Sub Inspectors vide order No. 585/98 dated September 27, 1998 were to be promoted.
The case of the petitioner was also taken up.
The petitioner joined as Sub Inspector on September 27, 1998 and is working as Sub Inspector in Police Station City Rohtak.
4.
The Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2), while deciding the appeal of Sub Inspector Madan Lal, served a show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 under Rule 1628 of the Rules on the petitioner requiring him to show cause as to why not the punishment of reversion in rank be imposed upon him.
A copy of the show cause notice is annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P-3.
A detailed reply to the show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 (Annexure P-3) was filed by the petitioner stating therein that the powers set out under Rule 1628 of the Rules cannot be exercised after a lapse of more than one and half years from the passing of the order of his promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector.
Notice of motion was issued.
Written statement was filed.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondents.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) could not have taken suo motu notice by invoking Rule 1628 of the Rules and also could not have reverted the petitioner to the post of Head Constable after a lapse of more than one and a half year as he had already been promoted to the post of Sub Inspector.
He has further stated that the show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 (Annexure P-3) could not have been issued against the petitioner, especially when it had been decided by the Deputy Inspector General of Police (respondent No. 3) to promote the petitioner to the rank of Sub Inspector.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that in the first instance, the charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner by the Enquiry Officer.
As many as 8 prosecution witnesses were examined and the averment made by the petitioner that no prosecution witness was produced or examined is totally false.
After serving the charge-sheet, the petitioner submitted a list of defence witnesses.
The statements of the defence witnesses were recorded.
It was only after taking into account the statements of these witnesses and the reply submitted by the petitioner, an order was passed by the punishing authority, i.e., the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak.
7.
The amendment was made in Rule 16.24(ix) of the Rules vide notification No. CSR 31/CA5/1861/S.2 and 7/85 dated March 21, 1985 by which the aforementioned rule was deleted and with the deletion of the said rule, no show cause notice was required to be issued to the petitioner.
Though, in the present case, the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner, to which he filed reply and witnesses were produced by both the parties.
The Assistant Sub Inspector Shiv Singh, petitioner herein and Sub Inspector Madan Lal both were defaulters and had accepted illegal gratification of Rs. 3,000/- from one Bhagwan Singh, resident of village Marodhi Jatan, Police Station Kalanaur.
As both the defaulters had accepted illegal gratification together, thus, we do not find any infirmity in the action taken by the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) in issuing a show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 (Annexure P-3) to the petitioner because he was also a co-defaulter and his case was rightly reconsidered by the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) in exercise of the powers vested in him under Rule 1628 of the Rules and rightly reverted the petitioner from the post of Sub Inspector to that of Head Constable.
It was only after exercising the powers vested in him, the appellate authority under Rule 1628 of the Rules passed the order dated April 19, 1999 (Annexure P-5) which is now under challenge in this writ petition.
The enquiry file and the relevant record were gone into by the appellate authority and upon finding a grave misconduct on the part of the petitioner, then only a show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 (Annexure P-3) was issued to him.
The default of the petitioner came to the notice of the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2) only in the year 1998 when he was hearing the revision petition submitted by the co-defaulter, viz., Assistant Sub Inspector Madan Lal.
Respondent No. 2 was competent to review the order passed by his lower authority under Rule 1628 of the Rules.
Similar proposition of law has been dealt with by a Single Bench of this Court in the case of Ex-Constable Rakesh Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) R.S.J.
333, wherein it has been held that "the power of the Inspector General of Police and other specified authorities under Rule 1628 is in addition to the power vested in the same Authority under Rule 16.29.
Rule 16.29 does not control the provisions of Rule 1628 and the provisions of the earlier Rule cannot be read in derogation of the provisions of the latter Rule.
Specified Authority can act suo motu or at the instance of the office under Rule 1628, while under Rule 1629 the Appellate Authority can act when the appeal is filed by an appellate who is aggrieved of the order passed against him and the order being the one which falls within the scope of sub- Rule (1) of Rule 16.29.
The power of the specified authority under these rules to review the proceedings and to enhance the penalty imposed by the lower authority and also to issue notice to show cause for removal from service by the Appellate Authority, has been held to be well within the jurisdiction of the specified authorities."
8.
When the case of Sub Inspector Madan Lal was being considered by the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2), the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 3), in the meantime, promoted the petitioner to the post of Sub Inspector and the fact of the promotion was not in the knowledge of the Director General of Police, Haryana (respondent No. 2).
At the time of submitting of reply to the show cause notice dated November 27, 1998 (Annexure P-3), the petitioner did not point out this fact to respondent No. 2 that he had been promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector.
The Reviewing Authority has inherent powers to review the administrative orders of the departmental proceedings.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has wrongly relied upon the Punjab Civil Services Rules as these were not applicable in the case of the petitioner as the service conditions of the petitioner are governed under the Punjab Police Rules.
We do not find any merit in the writ petition.
It is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.