TS Doabia, J - Four writ petitions dealing with the same subject matter shall stand disposed of vide this common judgment.
2.
The facts be noticed as under :  Petitioners in writ petition No. 630/95 i.e. Farooq Ahmad Mir and others v. State & Ors. are at present members of Jammu and Kashmir Armed Police.
As per them initially they came to be appointed in the Jammu & Kashmir Police.
Later on, they were allocated to the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Police.
It is submitted that the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Police is a part and parcel of a single Police Force governed by the Jammu & Kashmir Police Act and Jammu & Kashmir Police Manual.
According to the petitioners, the Armed wing and the other wings such as Executive wing, traffic wing, Vigilance wing etc are to be treated as a single unified force.
It is one entity.
It is submitted that a person working in one wing can be transferred to another wing also.
In short it is submitted that a person borne on different cadres are inter-transferable.
The only distinction which is being pointed out is that beyond the level of inspector, the seniority has to be maintained State-wise.
What is sought to be urged is that the members of Jammu and Kashmir Armed Police being part and parcel of police Force should be treated as one force and single seniority should be prepared.
The promotions as and when the vacancies arise should be made on the basis of this common seniority.
With a view to sustain this argument reference is made to Jammu & Kashmir Police Act.
It is said that the term "Police District" has been defined in section 5 of the Act.
Reliance is also being placed on Regulation 173 of the Jammu and Kashmir Police Manual which deals with the posting and transfer and also on Regulation 172 which deals with the issue of seniority.
It is accordingly submitted that the entire police force is to be treated as a single unit and therefore a common seniority list has to be prepared.
With a view to sustain this argument, reliance is being placed on a Division Bench Judgment of this court in LPA No 28/72 decided on 5121972.
3.
In the writ petition SWP 1889/98 i.e. Abhay Kumar Mahajan v. State & Ors. the point of view which is sought to be put across is almost similar to the one raised in Farooq Ahmad Mir's case.
With a view to appreciate the controversy the facts in Abhay Kumar Mahajan's writ petition be also noticed :  4.
Petitioner Abhay Kumar Mahajan is a member of Executive Wing of the Police Force.
His grievance is that respondents No. 3 to 40 who came to be appointed in the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Police, have been given promotions in the Armed wing of the force.
It is submitted that if a common seniority list is maintained, then the petitioner who came to be appointed earlier to these private respondents was also eligible to be given the promotion on the same basis as has been done in the case of private respondents.
It is also urged that after respondents 3 to 40 became Inspectors a common seniority is being maintained and these private respondents have been placed over and above the petitioner on the basis of their having earned the promotions earlier to the petitioner in the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Wing of the Police Force.
With regard to respondent No. 41 it is submitted that he came to be promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police on the basis of reservation.
It is submitted that the concept of reservation is no longer available.
For this reliance is being placed on a decision of the Supreme Court reported as Indra Sawhney etc v. Union of India and ors., AIR 1993 SC 477 : 1993(1) SCT 448(SC).
It is stated that the aforementioned judgment was given on 16th Nov 92.
The Supreme Court of India had protected the rights of this category for a period of five years.
This period as per the counsel expired on 16th Nov 97.
It is accordingly urged that after 16th Nov 97 there can be no reservation.
It is urged that no doubt Article 16 of the Constitution has been amended but there is no corresponding amendment made in the Jammu & Kashmir Constitution, therefore the amendment made in the Constitution of India would not come to the rescue of respondent No. 41.
Reliance is also being placed on a decision given by this court in SWP No. 486/89 decided on 23rd Dec 96.
5.
In writ petition SWP No 1624/97 i.e. Sain Dass v. State the petitioner is a member of Jammu and Kashmir Police Telecommunication Wing.
It is submitted that there are three wings in this category.
These are Wireless, Cipher and Technical.
Petitioner is a member of Wireless section.
It is submitted that once a person is appointed in the Wireless section then he is to continue in that.
These are not transferable posts.
It is further submitted that separate seniority list is being prepared.
A copy of the same is placed on record as annexure C/1.
6.
In SWP No 131/98 i.e. Ved Parkash Saini and others v. State the petitioners No. 1 to 5 submit that they joined as Constable (Technician) in the year 1976, whereas petitioners No. 6 to 10 joined as constables (Technician) in the year 1978.
It is submitted that they were appointed Constables (Technician) against the post of Head Constables (Technician).
It is submitted that respondents 3 to 49 came to be appointed as Constables/Wireless Operators.
It is submitted that these are two different wings and different seniority was maintained.
It is submitted that thereafter a new wing namely Cipher Wing was created and many constables appointed as operators were given promotions to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspectors.
It is submitted that these persons were junior to them.
The argument is that this act of official respondents in promoting the Constables/Wireless Operators was not challenged because different seniority list was prepared vis-a-vis the wing to which they belonged.
It is further submitted that in the year 1997, a common seniority was issued of the Technical Staff as well as Operators.
It is submitted that the respondents who were junior to the petitioners were shown above in the seniority list on account of their promotions which they got earlier to the petitioners in the Cipher Wing.
It is thus submitted that the private respondents were given double benefit first by promoting them under the seniority list which was maintained separately and then by maintaining a common seniority list and again giving them further promotions as they were shown over and above the petitioners though appointed on a later date.
7.
The provisions of Police Act of Svt 1983 (1927 AD) Sections 4 and 5 of the Police Act in so far as relevant are reproduced below :  "Section 4 : Interpretation Clause  The following words and expressions in this Act shall have the meaning assigned to them unless there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such construction that is to say the words `Magistrate' shall include all persons who shall be enrolled under this Act : The words `general police district' shall embrace the local area within the State in which this Act shall be ordered to take effect : Section 5 : Constitution of the Force  The entire police establishment under the purposes of this Act be and deemed to be one police force and shall be formally enrolled and shall consist of such members (number ?)
of officers and men and shall be constituted in such manner and the members of such force shall receive such pay as shall from time to time be ordered by the Government."
Regulation 4 is also being reproduced below :-  "Inspectors shall be inter-range Assistant Sub Inspectors shall be borne on range rolls and shall receive range constabulary numbers.
Head Constables and Constables in each district shall be borne on district rolls and shall receive district constabulary numbers."
Provision of Regulations 172, 173 and 174 be also noticed.
These read as under :-  "172 : Authorities Empowered to Make Appointment:- Recruitment to the rank of Assistant Superintendents of Police is governed by the Indian Service (Recruitment) Rules 1954.
Deputy Superintendents of Police are appointed in accordance with the rules prepared by the Public Service Commission and sanctioned by the Government from time to time.
The table omitted.
(2) All appointments to non-gazetted rank above that of constables shall be made by the appointing authority on consideration of recommendations of a section board.
Such boards shall be constituted in accordance with the orders of the Inspector-General.
(3) The power to confirm the appointment of officers appointed on probation vests in the case of gazetted officers with the government and in the case of Inspectors, Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors with the Inspectors General of Police, in the case of Head Constables, Senior Grade with the Deputy Inspector General of Police and in the case of Head Constables Junior Grade and constables with Superintendents of Police.
(4) The seniority of Inspectors and Sub Inspectors shall be inter- range.
Assistant Sub Inspectors shall be borne on range rolls and shall receive range constabulary numbers.
Head constables and constables in each district shall be borne on district rolls and shall receive district constabulary numbers."
"173 : Seniority and Probation : The seniority of Assistant Superintendents of Police of the IPS is regulated by the orders passed from time to time by the Government of India.
No probationary Assistant Superintendent of Police shall be permanently appointed as an Assistant Superintendent of Police until he has passed the prescribed departmental examination.
A probationary Assistant Superintendent of Police who does not qualify these examinations will be removed from Government Service provided that the Government shall have power to relax this rule in special cases when the Probationary Assistant Superintendent of Police is likely to make a good Police Officer.
The probation and seniority of Deputy Superintendents of Police are governed by the Jammu & Kashmir Civil Services Rules."
"174.
Direct Appointments of Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors : Recruitment may be made direct only to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector up to a limit of 50% of the vacancies.
The Government may however permit the Inspector General of Police to make appointments direct to other non-gazetted ranks."
8.
It is on the basis of above submitted that the Jammu & Kashmir Armed Police is a part and parcel of the entire police and therefore, a single seniority should be maintained.
It is on this basis further promotions are to be made.
As noticed in the factual part in writ petition 630/95 the prayer made is that there should be a combined seniority list whereas in writ petition 131/98 the prayer made is that there should be a separate seniority list.
9.
The stand taken by respondent-State in Farooq Ahmad Mir's case is that Armed and Executive Wings are two different cadres.
It is submitted that upto the level of Inspectors, separate seniority list is maintained.
Thereafter, the cadre shrinks and a common seniority is maintained.
The fact that Executive Police personnel are transferred to other wings like CID, Vigilance, Traffic etc is said to be true but so far as armed police personnel are concerned it is submitted that they usually remain in Armed Police upto the rank of Inspectors.
However, it is submitted that they are transferred to CID, Police Training College and Central Bureau of Investigation.
Notwithstanding the above stand taken by the State it is submitted that the State is justified in maintaining a separate seniority list.
10.
A perusal of the Rules and Regulations quoted above do bring out that the entire police force is to be taken as a single entity.
This becomes apparent from the definition of word "general police district."
As a matter of fact, this precise question was considered by the Division Bench of this court in Letters Patent Appeal No 28/72 decided on 5121972.
This was an appeal preferred by the Inspector General of Police against a decision given by a learned Single Judge of this Court in writ petition 7 of 1971 decided on 9th Dec 71.
The contention which was put forward by the Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State was noticed.
This is being reproduced below :  "That the order of seniority of Armed Police and regular police was separate and distinct and the learned Single Judge has erred in holding in that there was one common seniority of the two police wing, and  2.
That in any case the observation of the learned Single Judge that the respondent would be entitled to subsequent promotion according to his seniority from the date of his appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector of police cannot be sustained."
11.
After noticing the facts, the provisions of section 5 of the Police Act and Regulation 172(4) what was observed by the Division Bench is being reproduced below :  "Section 5 of the Police Act provides that the entire police establishment in the general police district shall for the purpose of the Act be deemed to be one police force and shall be formally enrolled and shall consists of such members of officer and men shall be constituted in such manner and the members of such forces shall have receive such pay as shall from time to time be ordered by the Govt Rule 172(4) of the Rules lays inter-range.
In accordance with this sub-rule, the ASIs constabulary Nos and Head Constables and Constables in each district are borne on the district rolls and are to be given district constabulary Nos.
Thus there is no manner of doubt that the police establishment is one though there are various branches or wings thereof such as Criminal Investigation Branch, Anti Corruption Branch and traffic Branch.
Our attention has not been invited to any rule of Govt order whcih direct that the KAP which is maintained at Srinagar and Jammu for internal security of the State and is ordinarily used through the State to meet any emergency in the law and order situation is to be treated as a separate range.
In absence of such a rule or order we are inclined to think that the KAP is a Wing of the Police and that the order of seniority of Head Constables and ASIs is to be maintained range-wise i.e. Kashmir range and Jammu range and not for every one of its wings.
We are further of the opinion that for the purpose of promotion all the Head Constables in the Range are to be considered as one group for promotion to the rank of ASI and all the ASIs in range are like-wise to the rank of SI This conclusion receives support not only from a perusal of the order of the appellant promoting the respondent as ASI but also accepting the aforesaid appeal of the respondent and from various orders passed from time to time transferring various officers including the respondent from one wing to another."
It was ultimately said :  "Accordingly, I would allow the appeal in part and set aside that portion of the impugned judgment and order of the learned Single Judge whereby he has held the respondent entitled to promote on the basis of his seniority from the date he was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector instead I would direct the appellant to consider with all reasonable dispatch and expedition the fitness of the respondent for promotion on the relevant dates when officers junior to him were promoted (after the date of his appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector) taking into account all the relevant considerations prescribed by the relevant law and the rules.
In case the appellant finds that the respondent was entitled to promotion on those dates he would grant consequential monetary and other benefits due to him.
The direction regarding the grant of seniority to the respondent in the Regular Police Force on the basis of Govt order No. 107 of 1966 dated April 11, 1966 from the date he was initially promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector is however maintained.
There will no order as to costs of this appeal."
In view of the above it is held that the entire police force is a single entity and a common and seniority list has to be maintained and promotions are to be made accordingly.
12.
In writ petition 1624/97 the prayer made is that a separate seniority list should be maintained in respect of Inspector, Wireless wing and Telecommunication wing of the police force.
13.
The stand taken by the respondent in this petition is as under :-  "After series of discussions it was decided by the authorities to go in for combined seniority list in all ranks with Jammu & Kashmir Police Telecommunication Organisation.
It will not be out of place to mention that wing-wise seniority viz Wireless/Tech/Cipher in the organisation was in existence till 1993 it is submitted that the same was not based on any of the authority or order of the Government or other competent authority.
The set up based on conventions in the wireless department created undesired results, which resulted the working of the organisation adversely.
The pick and choose method were adopted for placing the officials in Technical/Cipher wings, which gave rise to favouritism and unequal distribution of sanctioned posts.
The senior officials in Wireless wing were ignored and denied equal promotion prospects."
The above stand taken by the official respondents is in line with the view expressed by the Division Bench in LPA 28/72 referred to above.
Therefore, this petition is found to be without merit and dismissed.
The respondents shall maintain a common seniority list and shall make promotions accordingly.
14.
In Writ petition 131/98 the stand taken in para III of the objections is as under :  "That the seniority list of wing-wise Wireless/Tech and Cipher was separate in Organisation till 1993.
This separate seniority list has created multiple complications because certain people from different wing were gave rise to favouritism of undue promotion as a result of unequal distribution of sanctioned strength of post due to which work of organisation was effected adversely."
15.
The above stand taken is in line with the view expressed by the Division Bench in the aforesaid Letters Patent Appeal which view has been adopted in Farooq Ahmad Mir case.
This petition shall also stand dismissed.
In writ petition SWP No. 1889/98 the stand taken by the respondent authorities in para 4 of the preliminary objections is also in the line with the view expressed by the Division Bench in LPA 28/72.
This petition shall also stand dismissed.
An additional argument has been raised in writ petition No. 1189/1998 Abhay Kumar Mahajan's case.
It is stated that respondent No. 41 who came to be promoted on the basis of reservation, this could not be so promoted.
The contention is that in Indra Sawhney's case the protection which was allowed qua promotional quota was only for a period of five years.
Thereafter the State was to make a provision in this regard.
As this has not been done, therefore no promotion could be made on the basis of reservation.
16.
A perusal of the judgment in Indra Sawhney's case makes it apparent that a view has been expressed that reservation could also be provided by an executive order.
It was observed that the appropriate Government has the power to prescribe conditions of service of its employees by an executive order under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
It was further observed that even where rules are silent Government can issue guidelines and instructions.
If this be the position then an individual order passed in favour of respondent No. 41 would be protected by the theory that the State can in the exercise of executive function pass such an order.
Therefore, the argument raised in this regard is found to be without any basis and the same deserves to be rejected.
In view of the above discussion, writ petitions shall stand disposed of in the manner indicated above.
Order accordingly.