Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner has filed the present Civil Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus for issuing a direction to the respondents to fill up the posts of Assistants which had fallen vacant on July 18, 2000 in accordance with rules applicable at that time.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as a Clerk and joined as such on November 14, 1990 with the State of Haryana.
The service conditions for the post of Clerk in the Deputy Commissioner's office where the petitioner is working are governed by the statutory rules called the Haryana Revenue Department, District Subordinate (Group-C) Service Rules, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules").
It is the case of the petitioner that in accordance with the aforesaid statutory rules, the posts of Assistants were required to be filled up by way of promotion from Clerks/Steno-typists on the basis of their seniority from amongst the Clerks/Steno-typists working in the Deputy Commissioner's office.
On August 18, 2000 and August 22, 2000 certain amendments/additions were made in the Rules.
Whereas under the original rules the promotion to the post of Assistants were to be made from amongst the Clerks/Steno-typists working in the Deputy Commissioner's office, now under the amended rules the aforesaid promotions were to be made from amongst the Clerks/Stenographers in Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's offices of a Division.
4.
The petitioner states that one post of Assistant was created/sanctioned on February 25, 2000.
A copy of the notification sanctioning the aforesaid post has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the petition.
Subsequently another post of Assistant fell vacant due to the promotion of one Madan Lal Sethi from Assistant to Assistant Superintendent (Revenue) on July 18, 2000.
The promotion order of aforesaid Madan Lal Sethi has been appended as Annexure P/4 with the petition.
It is further averred in the petition that one Nirmala Devi who was senior to petitioner Raj Singh and was working as a Clerk was also promoted with effect from July 7, 2000.
A copy of the aforesaid promotion order of Nirmala Devi has also been appended as Annexure P-5 with the petition.
5.
The petitioner further states that his case for promotion as Assistant against the vacant post of Assistant was considered but the same was deferred.
Subsequently the petitioner made a representation to consider his claim for promotion but no action whatsoever was taken by the respondents.
Thus aggrieved against the aforesaid inaction of the respondents in not filling up the vacant post of Assistant in accordance with old rules, the petitioner has approached this court by way of present petition.
6.
On a notice issued to the respondents, a written statement has been filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 contesting the claim made by the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondents is that since the rules were amended on August 18, 2000, therefore, as per amended rules it was the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, Rohtak who was competent to promote the petitioner as per seniority list of Clerks/Steno-typists of Deputy Commissioners' office of the Rohtak Division.
It is further stated by the respondents that when the case of the petitioner for promotion was in due process then in the meanwhile the promotion rules were amended and it was as per the amended rules that the promotions were now to be made.
7.
We have heard Shri R.K. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents.
8.
Shri Malik has submitted that since the posts of Assistant were to be filled up by promotion alone from amongst the Clerks/Steno-typists, therefore, as per the settled law the rules which were prevalent at the time of accruing of the vacancy were required to be followed and any subsequent rules could not be taken into consideration for making promotions.
9.
Shri Malik has placed reliance upon the decisions of the Supreme Court of India in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983(1) S.L.R.
798, Jagdish Chander and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(5) S.L.R.
98 and a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Ran Singh and others v. State of Haryana and another, C.W.P.
No. 128 of 1998 decided on September 20, 2000 to support his contention.
On the other hand Shri Amol Rattan learned Assistant Advocate General has submitted that the petitioner had no right to be appointed to the post of Assistant but had merely a right to be considered for promotion in accordance with rules/instructions.
Shri Amol Rattan has submitted that in fact when the case of the petitioner for promotion was under process, then at that stage there was an amendment in the rules on August 18, 2000 and since as per amended rules it was the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, Rohtak who was competent to promote a clerk as per the seniority list of Clerks/Steno Typists working in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners in Rohtak Division, therefore, the petitioner could not make any claim under the old rules.
10.
At this stage it may be relevant to notice rules 6 and 9 of the Rules (prior to the amendment) as under :  "6.
Appointing Authority - Appointment to the posts in the Service shall be made by the - (i) Commissioner in case of Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent or (ii) in case of other than (i) the Deputy Commissioner concerned.
11.
Method of Recruitment - (1) Recruitment to any post in the Service shall be made  (g) in cases of Assistant :- By promotion from amongst the Clerks/Steno-typists working in the Deputy Commissioner's office.
Unless otherwise provided all appointments by promotion shall be made on the basis of the seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to promotion on the basis of seniority alone as a matter of right."
Vide notifications dated August 18, 2000 and August 22, 2000 Rule 6 of the Rules was amended as follows :  "6.
Appointing authority - Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made by the Deputy Commissioner concerned."
The relevant portion of the amended rule 9 of the Rules is as follows : "(c) In the case of Assistant :- By promotion from amongst Clerks/Steno typist working in the Commissioner's/Deputy Commissioner's of a Division".
12.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and feel that the present petition deserves to succeed.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was holding the post of a Clerk in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak and as per the Rules prior to the amendment the petitioner was entitled to be considered for promotion.
Nothing has been shown to us that the amendment in the rules which came into force with effect from August 18, 2000 is in any manner retrospective in its operation.
In these circumstances the amendment in the rules of the year 1988 (old Rules) cannot in any manner take away the right of promotion of persons like the petitioner and, therefore, it must be held that the vacancies which had occurred prior to the amended rules would continue to be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
In fact the amended rules would be applicable to the vacancies which arose after the amendment.
13.
The Supreme Court in the case of YV Rangaiah and others (supra) held as follows :  "Having heard the counsel for the parties, we find no force in either of the two contentions.
Under the old rules a panel had to be prepared every year in September.
Accordingly, a panel should have been prepared in the year 1976 and transfer or promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade II should have been made out of that the panel.
In that event the petitioners in the (sic) to representation petition who ranked higher than the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 would not have been deprived of their right of being considered for promotion.
The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub- Registrar Grade II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and not on the State-wide basis and, therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
We have not the slighsheet doubt that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules."
14.
In the case of Jagdish Chander and others v. State of Haryana and others (supra) this Court following the judgment in YV Rangaiah and others case (supra) has also taken the view that when there was a change in the eligibility condition through amendment of Rules, then the vacancies for promotion arising prior to the amendment of the Rules were required to be filled in accordance with the provisions of the Rules as existing on the date when the vacancies arose.
Similarly in the case of Ram Singh and others v. State of Haryana and another (supra) a Division Bench of this court followed the same dictum and held that the amendment in the rules which takes away the right of promotion of those eligible for promotion under the existing rules is to apply to the vacancies subsequent to the new rules and the vacancies which had occurred before the amended rules, are to be dealt with in accordance with the old rules.
In view of the aforesaid discussion we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to fill up the vacancies of Assistants which arose prior to the amendment of the rules i.e. August 18, 2000 in accordance with the amended rules with reference to the eligibility and qualification provided therein (in the unamended rules) and consider the case of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with the aforesaid Rules.
The respondents are further directed to complete the entire process within a period of three months from a date a certified copy of this order is received by them.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.