Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners were recruited as Special Police Officers in the year 1994.
On June 26, 1998, a case was registered against the petitioners.
It was alleged that they had committed offences punishable under Sections 363, 366, 376 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
On June 29, 1998 the Superintendent of Police ordered the termination of services of the petitioners.
Aggrieved by the orders of termination, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They pray that the four orders which have been produced as Annexures P/3 to P/6 be quashed.
It is alleged that the petitioners were acquitted by the learned Sessions Judge vide his judgment dated March 276, 1999.
Therefore, the petitioners had served a legal notice dated April 23, 1999 on the respondents.
Nothing having been done, they were constrained to approach this Court.
In these premises, the petitioners pray that the orders regarding the termination of their services be quashed.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioners had been appointed on daily wages.
Their services could be terminated at any time without giving any notice.
The petitioners had raped a girl.
The matter was considered.
It was felt that the petitioners were not likely to make good police officers.
The petitioners "being daily wagers have rightly been discharged in accordance with rules and regulations governing the service....." On these premises, the respondents maintain that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
Mr. Kanwal, learned Counsel for the petitioners has contended that appointment of Special Police Officers is made under Section 17 of the Police Act, 1861.
The powers of the Special Police Officers have been laid down in Section 18.
They have all the powers and privileges available to a police officer.
Thus, they have the protection of Articles 311 of the Constitution.
Since, no notice or opportunity was given, the action of the authority in terminating their service is vitiated.
On the other hand, Mr. DV Sharma has contended that the petitioners have been simply discharged from service.
They have filed a wrong translation of the original orders as they have not been dismissed from service.
Consequently, no opportunity was required to be given.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioners were working on daily-wages.
It is also the admitted position that they were accused of having committed rape of a girl.
In such a situation, it was obvious that the petitioners shall be facing the trial.
Since the appointment was on daily-wages, the authority took the view that it would be appropriate to discharge them from service.
In doing so, it did not violate any provision of the Act or the rules.
5.
Mr. Kanwal contends that an opportunity as contemplated under Section 7 of the Act had to be given.
This contention cannot be accepted.
Section 7 is only applicable when the competent authority proceeds to dismiss a person on account of remissenness or negligence in the discharge of duties.
It is attracted when an officer is sought to be punished.
In the present case, there was no intention to punish the petitioners.
Having found that their work is not satisfactory, the authority had merely chosen to discharge them.
In fact, a daily wager works on day-to-day basis.
When he is found negligent in his performance, the authority can refuse to engage him.
This is precisely what appears to have been done in the present case.
6.
Mr. Kanwal has referred to the provisions of Sections 17 and 18 of the Act.
Section 17 provides for the appointment of Special Police Officers.
It authorises the State to engage persons provisionally for the preservation and protection of the inhabitants of the area so as to securer their peace and property.
Section 18 confers the powers of Police Officers on the persons appointed under Section 17.
However, these provisions have no relevance in the context of the facts of the present case.
It is not the exercise of powers by the petitioners, which is in dispute.
The simple question is - Has the authority erred in passing the impugned orders ?
The answer is - The petitioners having been appointed on daily wages, the authority has not violated any rule or law in ordering their discharge on the finding that their work is not satisfactory.
In the circumstances of the case, the authority had good reason to do so.
7.
Mr. Kanwal submit that the petitioners were acquitted by the Court.
We have perused the judgment.
It is clear that the complainant had turned hostile.
Thus, an order of conviction could not be passed.
This, however, cannot affect the order which had been passed much earlier to the order of acquittal by the Court.
8.
Mr. Kanwal contends that the petitioners have been discharged from service retrospectively.
The orders of discharge were actually passed on June 29, 1998.
However, these were made effective from June 26, 1998.
Thus, the orders are vitiated.
9.
We have perused the orders.
So far as the orders of discharge is concerned, there is no illegality.
So far as the retrospective effect is concerned, the orders having been passed on June 29, 1998, the petitioners would be entitled to claim salary for three days.
Except that, there is no illegality in the orders.
The law in this behalf is settled by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in R Jeearatnam v. The State of Madras, 1967 S.L.R.
657.
It was observed as under :-  "When a civil servant is suspended pending enquiry into charges against him and is subsequently dismissed with effect from the date of his suspension, such an order is in substance as order of dismissal from the date of the order with the superadded direction that the order should operate retrospectively from the date of suspension of the civil servant concerned.
The two parts of the order are clearly severable.
Assuming that the second part, giving retrospective effect to the order, is in invalid on the ground that an order of dismissal cannot be passed with retrospective effect, there is no reason why the first part of the order, namely, dismissal as from the date when such order is made, should not be given the fullest effect.
The Court, no doubt, cannot pass a new order of dismissal, but surely it can given effect to the valid and severable part of the orders."
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is in merit in the writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
The parties are however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.