Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
2.
The request of the workman for making reference under Section 10(1)(c) read with Section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was declined by the competent authority vide impugned order dated 762002, Annexure P-2 to the petition.
The rejection is primarily on the ground that there was unexplained delay of nine years in serving the demand notice.
Even in the petition before us, this delay of nine years has not been explained.
In the demand notice, which was served, no reference was made as to what were the reasons for such a long delay of nine years.
3.
Reference can be made to the judgement of Division Bench of this Court in the case of "Rohtash v. State of Haryana and others", 2002(4) SCT 945 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 2936 of 2002, decided on 732002.
After discussing the law on the point in great detail relying on the judgements of Hon'ble Apex Court, held as under :  "It is equally true that no straight jacket formula or hard and fast rule can be specified for adjudication of the expression "reasonable period or reasonable time".
This must be decided in context of the facts of each case, but it emerges to be the view of the more recent judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court that the appropriate Government is not debarred from declining a reference of industrial dispute on the ground that the same was patently stale or non-existence.
It is not possible to hold that the appropriate government while exercising such powers lack inherent or substantive jurisdiction.
The workmen in all these cases before us have intentionally slept over their rights and have rendered no reasons much less sufficient reasons for serving the demand notice after such long period varying from 8-14 years.
In the demand notice, it had not been averred as to what steps were taken by the workmen for all this long period.
Such unexplained inordinate delay has rendered the dispute in question as patently stale.
In these circumstances we are of the considered view that the order passed by the appropriate government for considering the above industrial dispute as totally stale on in the light of the case of The Nedungadi Bank Ltd v. KP Madhavankutty and others (supra) does not suffer from error which would call for interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction."
4.
Keeping in view the judgements of the Division Bench of this Court and Hon'ble Apex Court, we find no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.