RL Anand, J - Surinder Kumar, petitioner, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of the certiorari be issued and the order dated 1181985 (Annexure P-5) vide which his services were terminated be set aside as the said order is totally illegal and has been passed in an arbitrary manner.
It has also been prayed that a writ on the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing them to reinstate him with all consequential benefits including the arrears of pay and further to direct the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner in view of the instructions dated 2821991.
2.
The facts can be noticed in the following manner.
The petitioner was appointed as Instructor (Hosiery) in Hosiery Goods Training Centre on 21.7.1983.
His services were transferred to District Rural Development Agency (hereinafter called "DRDA"), Gurgaon on 3131985.
The SLSC approved the transfer of Hosiery Centre from Gurgaon to Rewari on 951990.
In stead of approving the previous service of the petitioner right from 1983, he was issued a fresh appointment letter on 141985.
The petitioner was not satisfied with this action and, therefore, he filed a suit for declaration challenging his fresh appointment with effect from 141985.
The suit of the petitioner was decreed by the Civil Court on 21111987.
The State filed an appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial Court and the appeal was also dismissed on 29.9.1988.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed an execution application for the implementation of the judgment passed by the trial Court.
The case set up by the petitioner in the present writ petition is that his services could not be terminated vide order dated 1181985 on the plea that the Hosiery Centre against which he was engaged at Rewari was no longer required in DRDA Scheme.
The petitioner alleges that if Rewari Centre was not required under the scheme, the best course was to revert back him to Gurgaon Centre.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that since the Rewari Centre has been closed down, therefore, the services of the petitioner has been rightly terminated vide order Annexure P-5.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The facts in this case are not much in dispute.
It is the common case of the parties that the petitioner was appointed as Instructor, Hosiery in Hosiery Goods Centre in the year 1983 and thereafter, his services were transferred to Gurgaon in DRDA which was even approved by the SLSC.
Subsequently, Gurgaon Centre was allegedly transferred to Rewari.
If for any reason, Rewari Centre has been closed down, the best course for the respondent authorities was to transfer the services of the petitioner to Gurgaon Centre.
It was not proper on the part of the Rewari Centre to terminate the services of the petitioner.
That was the reason that the petitioner had to file a civil suit which was decreed.
The action of the respondent authorities in issuing the fresh appointment letter to the petitioner was also declared to be illegal by the Civil court and the judgment was affirmed by the appellate Court.
6.
Be that as it may, once it is held that the action of the respondent authorities in terminating the services of the petitioner is illegal, the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated into service either at Rewari or at Gurgaon.
Since the Rewari Centre has already been closed down, therefore, it was obligatory on the part of the respondent authorities to adjust the petitioner at Gurgaon.
If for any reason the Gurgaon Centre is also closed down, it was obligatory on the part of the respondents to adjust the petitioner against some suitable post depending upon his qualifications.
The petitioner is a Matriculate.
On the date of the termination of his services, he was eligible for clerical post.
It has also been brought to the notice of this Court that the persons, like the petitioner, have been adjusted by the State Government in the clerical posts.
7.
In these circumstances, I allow this writ petition by giving directions to the respondent authorities to adjust the petitioner against a post of clerk in any District Rural Development Agency of the State of Haryana, within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
It is also made clear that on offering the post of Clerk to the petitioner and on joining the same, it will not be considered as fresh appointment in the department.
Rather the petitioner will be entitled to the benefit of his service right from the year 1983.
Since the petitioner has not performed any duty from the date of his termination till date, therefore, relying upon the principle of no pay for no work, the State will not be obliged to pay the back wages to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.