GS Singhvi, J.- The order passed by the Commandant, 5th Battalion, Haryana Armed Police, under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as 'the PPR') discharging the petitioner from service has been subjected to challenge in this petition.
The prayer made by the petitioner is to quash Annexures P2 and P5 and to direct the respondents to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in Haryana Police on 191992 as Constable after he was selected in an open competition.
His appointment was described as temporary, but, at the same time, he was placed on probation for three years.
On 1031995, respondent No. 3 issued show cause notice to the petitioner calling upon him to submit his explanation against the proposal of discharge from service under Rule 1221 of the PPR on the ground that the petitioner was habitual absentee.
To this notice, reply Annexure P1 dated 2031995 was submitted by the petitioner.
This was followed by the impugned order Annexure P2 dated 551995 whereby respondent No. 3 discharged the petitioner from service.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of discharge has been dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, on the ground that order of discharge from service passed under Rule 1221 of the PPR is not punitive and no appeal is maintainable against such an order.
The petitioner says that in the year 1995, he had appeared before the Superintendent of Police, Rewari, for enrolment but his candidature was rejected on the ground that he had been discharged from service on an earlier occasion.
3.
The petitioner has challenged orders Annexure P2 and P5 on the ground of violation of Article 311 of the Constitution of India as well as the principles of natural justice.
His contention is that the impugned order though innocuous in nature is in substance and in effect an order of punishment and before passing such an order it was bounden duty of respondent No. 3 to have given an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner by holding a regular departmental enquiry.
Another plea raised by the petitioner is founded on the allegation that in a similar case the appeal filed by an employee discharged under Rule 1221 of the PPR has been allowed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and order for his reinstatement has been passed.
Yet another ground of challenge to the impugned order is that respondent No. 3 did not consider various points raised in his reply dated 2031995.
4.
In the reply to the writ petition, the respondents have stated that power under Rule 1221 of the PPR has been exercised by the competent authority after proper consideration of the record of the petitioner together with his reply.
The respondents have stated that after joining service the petitioner absented from duty on sixteen different occasions, which is by itself sufficient to show that the petitioner is not likely to prove an efficient police officer.
The respondents have pleaded that show cause notice was given to the petitioner giving an indication of his past record and of the intention of the competent authority to discharge him from service under Rule 1221 and the impugned order has been passed after following the principles of natural justice.
The respondents have also stated that the petitioner was on probation and during his probation, the competent authority could pass an order of his discharge from service after taking into consideration his service record and there is no illegality in the order Annexure P2 passed by respondent No. 3.
5.
In compliance of the direction given by the Court, the respondents have produced the service record of the petitioner.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner joined service some time in the month of September, 1992.
In the first year of his service, the petitioner absented from duty on six different occasions.
In the second year of his service, he again absented from duty on six different occasions and during the year 1995, he absented from duty on four different occasions.
The record also shows that the petitioner was directed to report for law and order duty at Hansi on 371993 but he did not report at Hansi and went to Hisar.
For this lapse, the petitioner was awarded ten days' parade and absence was regularised by grant of casual leave.
Even earlier to this, he had absented on four different occasions during training period.
On 10.9.1993, the Incharge, Platoon No. 2, Faridabad, made a special report about the absence of the petitioner from duty upon which the competent officer awarded ten days' parade to him.
For his absence from duty on 891993 and 9.9.1993 also, the petitioner was given similar punishment.
For the year 1994, the petitioner's absence was 4 days, 20 days, 8 days and 22 days on four different occasions.
During the year 1995, the absence of the petitioner was for 3 days and 50 days on two different occasions.
Taking into consideration these periods of absence except last one, respondent No. 3 issued show cause notice to the petitioner indicating that he had not shown any improvement despite several opportunities and remained habitually absent which was indicative of the fact that he would not prove an efficient police officer in a disciplined force.
The petitioner was called upon to explain as to why he may not be discharged from service under Rule 1221.
After the petitioner filed his reply, the competent authority decided to discharge him from service under Rule 1221 of the PPR in view of the absence from duty and unsatisfactory reply.
6.
Apart from the above mentioned facts which are borne out from the service record of the petitioner, we find that although in reply to the writ petition various periods of absence of the petitioner have been indicated, he has not chosen to file any counter showing that during those periods he did not absent from duty.
7.
In the light of the above, we shall now consider whether the impugned order is vitiated due to violation of the provisions of the Constitution of India, the PPR and the principles of natural justice.
Rule 1221 of the PPR reads as under :-  "A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
A plain reading of this rule shows that the competent authority is vested with the power to discharge a Constable from service if it forms an opinion that he is not likely to prove an efficient police officer.
This power can be exercised within three years of enrolment.
8.
In so far as Annexure P2 is concerned, there is no express indication of stigma in the said order.
It does not refer to any allegation of misconduct nor does it say that the petitioner is being removed from service on the basis of any particular misconduct.
Therefore, the impugned order cannot per se be castigated as stigmatic.
9.
However, the argument of Shri Balhara that a full-fledged departmental enquiry should have been held by serving a charge sheet upon the petitioner deserves a close scrutiny.
According to the learned counsel, even though the order Annexure P2 does not contain express words of stigma, the termination of service of the petitioner has been brought about as a measure of punishment and, therefore, holding of enquiry in accordance with Rule 1624. of the PPR read with Article 311 of the Constitution of India was a condition precedent to the passing of the impugned order and as this procedure has not been followed, the termination of the service of the petitioner deserves to be nullified.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, placed reliance on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Sher Singh v. State of Haryana, 1992(1) PLR 456 and argued that an order passed in exercise of power under Rule 1221 of the PPR cannot be treated punitive per se and, therefore, it is not necessary for the competent authority to hold a detailed enquiry before exercise of the power under the aforesaid rule.
Shri Amol Rattan also relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana Vs. Jagdish Chander, JT 1995(2) SC 108.
10.
Before dealing with the rival contentions, we may mention that although the petitioner has not produced copy of the show cause notice, from the language employed in that notice which is available on the file produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General it is evident that the competent authority had taken note of various acts of absenteeism on the part of the petitioner during his probation of three years and had indicated that the petitioner had not made improvement despite several opportunities and that a person like the petitioner was not likely to prove an efficient police officer in a disciplined police force.
This notice gives a clear indication of the facts on the basis of which the action was proposed to be taken against the petitioner under Rule 1221 and an opportunity for representation was given to the petitioner.
This goes to prove that before passing the order of discharge from service under Rule 1221 on the ground mentioned in the show cause notice, respondent No. 3 had complied with the basics of the principles of natural justice.
11.
In Jagdish Chander's case (supra), the Supreme Court considered a similar fact situation in which the respondent had been discharged from service in exercise of power under Rule 1221 because he was absent from duty between April 20, 1992 to May 15, 1992.
His writ petition was allowed by the High Court.
On appeal, their Lordships of the Supreme Court interpreted Rule 1221 of the PPR and held :-  "A reading of this rule would indicate that the Superintendent of Police, before expiry of three years from the date of enrolment of the police officer into the service, has been obviously given power to observe the conduct and discharge of service by the police officer to find him whether he was efficient in the discharge of duties and maintains the discipline and conduct expected of him as a disciplined police officer.
During that period if the Superintendent of Police finds that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, exercising the power under the rule, he may discharge simpliciter the police officer from service.
For recording the finding that the officer is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, there must be anterior record and the Superintendent of Police must objectively consider that record and record the conclusion in that behalf.
But, if he records a finding, after considering the record, which would be a stigma on the career of the discharged police officer, it is settled law that the principles of natural justice require that an opportunity be given to him before recording finding adverse to the officer's conduct which disentitled the officer for any future employment or would be a blot on his career."
Their Lordships then quoted the order of discharge of the respondent from service, which contained express words indicating discharge from service on the ground of habitual absenteeism, negligence towards duty and indiscipline.
The Supreme Court held that the finding of habitual absenteeism and indiscipline causes stigma on his career and, therefore, he would have been given an opportunity to explain the grounds on which the Superintendent of Police proposed to pass the order of discharge and then to consider the explanation submitted by the police officer and as this procedure had not been followed, the order of discharge was liable to be nullified.
However, even then their Lordships did not uphold the order of the High Court for reinstatement with consequential benefits, but, directed that the respondent may submit his objections to the show cause notice to be issued by the appellant and then only appropriate order be passed.
In Sher Singh's case (supra), the Full Bench held that the Superintendent of Police can form his opinion regarding the likelihood or otherwise of making a constable as good police officer as elaborated under Rule 195 of the PPR but also on the basis of any other material.
This decision was considered in CWP No. 6594 of 1994 (Balwinder Singh v. State of Punjab) 1994(3) SCT 264(P&H)(DB) decided on 771995 by a Division Bench of which one us was a member and it has been held :-  "Thus, from the reading of sub-para 2 of para 39 of Full Bench judgment in Sher Singh's case and also from the decision of the Supreme Court in Jagdish Chander's case and also 1989(3) S.L.R.
665, it can safely be said that for invoking power of discharge from service under Rule 1221 of the PPR, there must be relevant material.
We are of the considered opinion that mere absence from duty on the ground of illness cannot be taken as a ground for invoking power of discharge from service under Rule 1221."
We may also notice a recent decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Corporal AK Bakshi and another, 1996(2) SCT 287 (SC) : 1996(3) S.C.C.
65.
Respondent AK Bakshi successfully challenged the High Court of Karnataka order of his discharge from service passed under Rule 15(2)(g)(ii) of the Air Force Rules, 1969.
The High Court held that discharge of the employee was based on misconduct and as no inquiry was held as per Rule 18 the impugned order was liable to be quashed.
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the High Court and held :-  "According to the High Court, the provisions of Rule 18 are attracted in cases where a person is discharged on the basis of the Policy for Discharge for the reason that the action for discharge has been taken on the basis of six punishments which have been imposed on him.
We find it difficult to endorse this view of the High Court.
The punishments referred to in the Policy for Discharge are punishments that have been imposed for misconduct under the relevant provisions of the Act and the Rules.
The Policy for Discharge envisages that in cases where an airman has been awarded such punishments six times, he is to be treated as a habitual offender and action for his discharge from service should be taken against him under Rule 15(2)(g)(ii) of the Rules.
This action for discharge is not by way of punishment for the misconducts for which he has already been punished.
The basic idea underlying the policy for discharge is that recurring nature of punishments for misconduct imposed on an airman renders him unsuitable for further retention in the Air Force.
Suitability for retention in the Air Force has to be determined on the basis of record of service.
The punishments that have been imposed earlier being part of the record of service have to be taken into consideration for the purpose of deciding whether such person is suitable for retention in the Air Force.
The discharge in such circumstances is, therefore, discharge falling under Rule 15(2)(g)(ii) and it cannot be held to be termination of service by way of punishment for misconduct falling under Rule 18 of the Rules.
We are, therefore, unable to agree with the High Court that termination of service on the basis of the Policy of Discharge does not constitute discharge under Rule 15(2)(g)(ii) but amounts to removal for misconduct under Rule 18 of the Rules."
From the proposition of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Jagdish Chander's case and by the Division Bench in Balvinder Singh's case (CWP No. 6594 of 1994), it is clear that if an action is taken for discharge from service under Rule 1221 on the basis of allegation of absence, it is incumbent upon the competent authority to give notice to the employee concerned and give him an opportunity to explain his conduct.
If in response to the notice a plausible explanation is submitted by the delinquent, then, the competent authority is duty bound to consider whether such explanation should be accepted or not and then form an opinion whether it would be appropriate to exercise the power under Rule 1221 or not.
12.
What has happened in this case is that in response to the show cause notice, the petitioner submitted reply dated 2031995.
In that reply, he pleaded that earlier periods of absence have been regularised one way or the other and then proceeded to raise various legal objections.
The petitioner did not plead that he had not absented from duty on six different occasions during the year 1993, on other six occasions in the year 1994 and on three occasions in the year 1995.
It is, therefore, evident that the petitioner has admitted his absence from duty.
If after taking into consideration these facts, the competent authority formed an opinion that the petitioner will not prove to be an efficient police officer, it cannot be held that the formation of opinion by the competent authority is arbitrary or is perverse.
It is also to be noted that on several occasions, the petitioner had absented from duty when he was given specific direction to do duty at a particular place.
In a disciplined force such act of the petitioner at the very threshold of his career could not be overlooked by the competent authority.
We, therefore, do not find any infirmity in Annexure P2.
13.
The contention of Shri Balhara that the impugned order should be quashed on the ground of violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and Rule 16 of the PPR is without substance.
In our opinion, when a specific rule exists authorising the competent authority to discharge a police official during first three years of his service, the exercise of this power on the basis of evaluation of the performance of the employee concerned cannot be held as illegal unless it is shown to be mala fide or patently arbitaray.
As a matter of fact, for exercising power under Rule 1221 of the PPR, the competent authority is bound to examine the record of the employee concerned before forming an opinion whether he would or would not make an efficient police officer.
In that process, consideration of past punishments cannot give rise to an inference that the order of discharge is founded on misconduct and, therefore, compliance of Article 311 of the Constitution and Rule 16 of the PPR is necessary.
This view of ours is fortified by the decision in AK Bakshi's case (supra).
14.
Challenge to the order Annexure P5 deserves to be disposed of shortly.
The exercise of power under Rule 1221 of the PPR is different than the one which vests in the competent authority under Rule 16 of the PPR and, therefore, the Deputy Inspector General of Police has rightly taken the view that the appeal filed by petitioner is not maintainable.
15.
We also do not find any substance in the argument of the learned counsel that the petitioner has been discriminated.
In support of the plea of discrimination, the petitioner has made a bald statement that the appeal of similarly situated employee has been allowed.
However, he has not chosen to produce the order passed in the cases of such other employee, the appeal filed by him and the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police on such appeal.
In the absence of such basic material, it is not possible for us to record a finding that respondent No. 2 has discriminated the petitioner vis-a-vis other similarly situated person.
Moreover, we are of the opinion that even if the Deputy Inspector General of Police, has accepted the appeal in the case of another person, the same cannot furnish basis for this Court to direct that the appeal of the petitioner should also be allowed.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.