MM Kumar.
J - The petitioner has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has prayed for grant of the following relief :  "i) a writ in the nature of mandamus of any other appropriate writ, order or direction for directing the respondents to grant the family pension alongwith arrears and penal interest @ 18% per annum from the date the amount due till its actual disbursement to the petitioner, who is son of Late Sh. Narain Dutt, Process Server.
ii) Further directing the respondents to give appointment to the petitioner, Sanjay Kumar only S/o Late Sh. Narain Dutt, Process Server on compassionate ground to mitigate hardships,"  The petitioner's father - Shri Narain Dutt was appointed as Waterman on 28.5.1975 in the court of Senior Sub Judge, Jind.
He was promoted on the post of Process Server w.e.f.
5111976, He died on 22.3.1979.
After about six months of his death, petitioner Sanjay Kumar was born.
Learned Senior Sub Judge, Jind, sent intimation regarding the death of Shri Narain Dutt to the Chief Secretary, Haryana with a copy to District and Sessions Judge, Jind and petitioner's mother.
After exchange of few letters, the Accountant General, Haryana on 151981 rejected the claim for family pension made by the widow of the deceased i.e. mother of the petitioner on the ground that the service rendered by the deceased employee Shri Narain Dutt was less than five years."
2.
Feeling aggrieved, the mother of the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2951 of 2000 claiming that she was entitled to family pension and her claim of that effect had been illegally rejected by the Accountant General, Haryana.
By an order dated 472000, a Division Bench of this Court dismissed the writ petition on the ground that she had already contracted a Kareva marriage with the younger brother of the deceased.
However, opportunity was given to the petitioner to claim family pension by approaching an appropriate forum for that purpose.
The observations of the Division Bench are as under :  "Consequently, this writ petition is dismissed.
As a matter of abundant caution, we may observe that if Sanjay Kumar son of Shri Narain Dutt considers that he is entitled to family pension, he is at liberty to approach an appropriate form (forum ?)
in that behalf."
3.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted representation dated 1572000 to the learned District and Sessions Judge, Jind claiming family pension and appointment on compassionate ground.
He pointed out that neither his mother who was now married to his father's brother nor any other family member has been given family pension or appointment on compassionate ground.
4.
Having failed to evoke favourable response, the petitioner has invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court for grant of relief to which a reference has been made hereinabove.
5.
The claim of the petitioner has been opposed by the respondents on the ground of delay and laches and also on the ground of res judicata claiming that Civil Writ Petition No. 2951 of 2000 filed by mother of the petitioner had already been dismissed on 472000 by this Court.
The respondents also averred that the petitioner is not entitled to family pension because late Shri Narain Dutt had rendered less than 5 years service.
6.
Shri RN Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 (for brevity, the scheme) as given in Appendix I of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II does not contain the requirement of 5 years service as a condition for grant of family pension and, therefore, indirect rejection of the petitioner's prayer is liable to be invalidated.
He invited our attention to Clause 4 of the Scheme and submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of family pension as of right.
Learned Deputy Advocate General argued that the Scheme envisages grant of family pension only after completion of 5 years, service and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
7.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
Clauses 3 and 5 of the Scheme, which have bearing on the petitioner's claim for family pension, read as under :  "3.
This scheme comes into force with effect from 1st July, 1964 and is applicable to all regular employees on pensionable establishment - temporary or permanent - who were in service on the 1st July, 1964, or are recruited thereafter.
4.
This scheme is administered as below :  (i) The family pension is admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement on or after the 1st July, 1964, if at the time of death, the refired officer was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
The Family Pension will not be admissible in case of death after retirement if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
In case of death while in service a Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break.
Note-1 : The term one year continuous service used in para-4(1) above is inclusive of permanent/temporary service in a pensionable establishment but does not include periods of extraordinary leaves, by service and suspension period unless that is regularised by the competent authority on or before completion of one year continuous service provided the deceased Government employee concerned immediately prior to his recruitment to the service or post was examined by the appropriate Medical Authority and declared fit by that authority for Government service.
Note-2 : In the cases of persons who were in service in composite State of Punjab prior to 1st November, 1966 and came over to Haryana State on or after 1st November, 1966, or those who have been recruited by the Haryana Government on or after 1st November, 1966, or who are transferred to the Haryana State from the Central Government or other State Governments and to those cases it had been agreed to count their previous service for pension, the family pension scheme would be applicable in the event of their death/retirement without putting in one year continuous service under the State Government : if their total service at the time of death (inclusive of service rendered under the previous Government) exceeds one year.
(ii) "Family" for purposes of this scheme includes the following relatives of the officers :  (a) wife, in the case of a male officer; (b) husband, in the case of a female officer; (c) minor sons; and (d) unmarried minor daughters.
Note-1 : (c) and (d) include children adopted legally before retirement.
Note-2 : Marriage after retirement is not recognised for purposes of this scheme.
Note-3 : A judicially separated wife/husband does not lose her/his legal status of wife/husband of the Government employee and is thus eligible for the benefit of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
(iii) pension is admissible :-  (a) in the case of widow/widower upto the date of death or remarriage, whichever is earlier;  and  (b) in the case of son/unmarried daughter until he/she attains the age of 25 years.
An analysis of the above reproduced clauses shows that :  "(a) the scheme applies to all regular employees who were in service on 171964 or recruited thereafter;  (b) family pension is available to the dependent or family of an employee who has died in harness and who had rendered one year continuous service without break;  (c) the expression "Family" has been defined to include even a minor son; and  (d) pension is admissible to a son of the deceased employee until the age of 25 years."
In the petitioner's case, all the four requirements are satisfied.
He is covered by the expression "Family" used in the Scheme.
His father - late Shri Narain Dutt had rendered about 5 years service as against the requirement of one year service.
As a matter of fact, the Scheme does not contain requirement of 5 years service as a condition to the grant of family pension.
Therefore, indirect rejection of the petitioner's claim for pension is liable to be nullified.
8.
The plea of the respondents that the writ petition is not maintainable on the principle of res judicata also lacks substance.
Firstly, the Division Bench while deciding the writ petition of the mother of the petitioner has itself granted permission to the petitioner to make a claim at the appropriate forum in that behalf.
Moreover, the earlier writ petition could not operate as a bar as it was filed by a different person than the present petitioner.
9.
In so far as the ground of delay and laches in filing the present writ petition is concerned, it is suffice to observe that in matters concerning pension/family pension, the cause of action is continuous one and delay and laches cannot be pleaded to defeat the cause of family pension/pension.
Moreover, it is unwarranted for the respondent-State to raise such an objection because the State is under a duty to release family pension/pension without forcing the petitioner or any of his family member to approach the Court.
10.
In so far as the petitioner's claim for compassionate appointment is concerned, we feel that ends of justice would be served by directing the respondents to consider and decide his representation within a period of six months because so far no decision has been taken by the competent authority to accept or deny his prayer.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to respondents 1, 3 and 4 to finalise the case of family pension of the petitioner within a period of four months from the date of submission/receipt of copy of this order.
The petitioner shall be entitled to arrears of pension from the period his mother contracted the Kareva marriage with his uncle.
He shall also get interest at the rate of 12 per cent on the amount, payable from the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. 8112000 till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner's claim for compassionate appointment shall be decided within six months from today.
Petition allowed.