ML Koul, J - The petitioner was a police constable and he was removed from service in pursuance to a duly conducted departmental enquiry, vide order dated 441994 passed by the Commandant, 3rd Commando Battalion, Phase-II, Mohali and confirmed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Commandos (Administration), Bahadurgarh (Punjab) who dismissed the appeal preferred by the petitioner vide his order dated 2121995.
2.
The brief facts of the case, on the basis of which a writ of certiorari for quashing the said orders has been preferred by the petitioner are narrated as under :-  That on July 08, 1993, the petitioner was directed to deliver the dak in the office of Assistant Commandant 3rd Commando Battalion.
When he was coming back to the office, on the way he subsequently fell ill and went to a doctor for treatment.
He informed the department about his illness and duly applied for the medical leave.
He reported back on July 25, 1993 and again on 26.7.1993 with the permission of the incharge went to the doctor for check-up.
On his explanation he was reinstated on August 6, 1993 with effect from July 25, 1993.
On 591993, he proceeded on two days leave but could not report on duty till 891993 because he fell ill and stayed at his house for treatment and he was diagnosed as a case of severe enteric fever and gastro-enteric ailment and ultimately on an enquiry conducted against him ex-parte, he was dismissed from service and the period of absence was ordered to be treated as leave without pay.
According to the petitioner, no show cause notice was ever served upon him.
Neither the copy of the enquiry report was supplied to him nor an opportunity of personal hearing was given before passing the impugned order.
3.
Written statement was filed by the respondents and the allegations of the petitioner were controverted, on the ground that the department was not informed about the illness nor the petitioner applied for leave on the medical grounds.
With regard to the earlier incident of absence, the petitioner was suspended on 1971993 and was reinstated on 681993.
The petitioner again proceeded on two days leave on 591993 and was to report for duty on 891993 but he did not come back and remained absent from duty upto 921994.
According to the respondents, the version made by the petitioner that he was ill is belied from the very fact that when he reported back on duty on 921994, he explained that his mother was ill, who remained under treatment and never explained that he personally was ill.  4.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and gave my thoughtful consideration over the record on the file.
5.
On the above premise it is found that the petitioner was dismissed from service under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The said rule for the purpose of convenience is given as under :-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
On the bare reading of the rule, it emerges that the dismissal from service shall be awarded after finding that the misconduct attributed to the delinquent is of gravest nature or there is a cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
This view has been taken in Mahipat Ex. Constable v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 337(P&H) : 1994(4) SLR (P&H) 311.
6.
The simple interpretation of the rule makes it clear that the authorities recording the finding of gravest act of misconduct or cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, while awarding the serious punishment of dismissal have to take into consideration or give due regard to the length of service of the delinquent and his claim for pension.
In the instant case the punishing authority or the Appellate Authority have not addressed themselves with regard to the length of service either specifically or impliedly.
No proof is available on the record even remotely to suggest that the Punishing Authority was alive to the fact of taking into consideration the length of service while awarding the punishment.
7.
In State of Haryana v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) SCT 718(P&H) : 1991(4) S.L.R.
82 (Punjab and Haryana), it has been held "that the gravest act, of course, is incapable of any strict definition.
The distinction has to be drawn by the punishing authority between misconduct and grave misconduct.
Misconduct should not be of an ordinary nature and it always has to be of serious nature.
The use of the word 'gravest' only means that it has to be of a superlative degree than what a particular act can just be described to be 'grave'.
The gravest act does not mean that the number of acts complained of should be more than one.
The use of the word 'act' in Rule 162(1) can be said to include a single gravest act of misconduct.
It has to be held in order to give effect to the legislative intendment that the word used in plural in rule 162(1) would be deemed to include the singular."
8.
The same view is contained in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand constable, 1992(1) SCT 123(P&H) : 1992(1) S.L.R.
174 (P&H).
In that case also it has been held that the word misconduct used in the rule has been analysed and the distinction has to be drawn between "misconduct", "simpliciter", and gravest misconduct.
It has also been held that the gravest act of misconduct while not being capable of being put in a strait-jacket or confined to a definition must, however relate to an action which is of the utmost gravity and grossly flagrant.
9.
From the above case law it emanates that the misconduct should be the matter of utmost seriousness when the delinquent police official is proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
10.
The purport of the legislative intention if carried forward for the purposes of taking action against a delinquent official provides that the Punishing Authority must come to the conclusion that a particular act of the police official was one of the gravest nature and the said authority is not to wait for the commission of a second act of gravest nature by the police official.
If the intention of the words gravest act of misconduct by a delinquent police official is construed that the gravest act should be more than one, then the police official would commit a heinous crime to contend that he does not fall within the mischief of rule 162(1).
In view thereof a single act of misconduct of gravest nature is good enough for invoking the aid of rule 162 (1) to award punishment of dismissal.
However, a single act or number of acts of misconduct of a police official must prove incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents referred to State of UP and others v. Ashok Kumar Singh & another, 1996(2) SCT 139(SC) : (1996)1 SCC 302 and contended that the Apex Court has held that "the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in modifying the punishment while concurring with the findings of the Tribunal on facts.
The High Court failed to bear in mind that the delinquent was a police constable and was serving in a disciplined force demanding strict adherence to the rules and procedures more than any other department.
Having noticed the fact that the first respondent has absented himself from duty without leave on several occasions, one cannot appreciate the High Court observation that his absence from duty would not amount to such a grave charge.
Even otherwise on the facts of the case, there was no justification for the High Court to interfere with the punishment holding that the punishment was not commensurate with the gravity of the charge" especially when the High Court concurred with the findings of the Tribunal on facts."
12.
The situation in the present case is different.
Here the petitioner has been dismissed from service without observing by the Punishing Authority that the act of the petitioner was of a gravest nature and on merits it was not proved that he was incorrigible and unfit for the police service.
The case law referred to by the learned counsel for the respondent does not have any bearing on the merits of this case for the fact that in that case the High Court had concurred with the findings of the Tribunal on facts, but held that the punishment was not commensurate with the gravity of the charge.
It was on that score that the Hon'ble Supreme Court reversed the finding and held that the High Court could not interfere with the punishment holding that the punishment was not commensurate with the gravity of the charge especially when the High Court concurred with the findings of the Tribunal on facts.
13.
In the instant case, the order of dismissal passed by the competent authority nowhere denotes nor is it found that the act of the police official for remaining absent for 172 days was an act of gravest misconduct and he was incorrigible completely and unfit for police service.
14.
No doubt the petitioner has remained absent and no proof whatsoever has been produced by him in his defence as to what were the compelling reasons which made him not to attend his duties for a period of 172 days but the fact that the proceedings have been taken ex parte and no defence has been raised by the police official to face the consequences shows that the authority could not dismiss him from service unless it was proved that he was incorrigible to be brought into proper jacket and was completely unfik for police service.
The competent authority has simply dismissed him from service holding that the petitioner was not interested to do the service and was not fit for police department as he cannot become an efficient police officer.
The order of the Punishing Authority does not conform to the stipulation of Rule 162(1) of the Police Rules and the authority recording the findings has not anywhere held that the act of the petitioner for remaining absent for 172 days was a gravest act of mis- conduct and he was incorrigible and completely unfit for police service.
15.
In the order the competent authority has also referred to the earlier incidents when the petitioner remained absent from service for some days but subsequently on enquiry he was reinstated and once he was reinstated and the punishment authority was satisfied that his absence was bona fide, that incident cannot be taken into consideration for the purposes of present dismissal.
16.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and both the orders passed by the authorities concerned contained in annexures P1 and P3 are hereby quashed and the case is sent down to the punishing authority to proceed in the matter a fresh from the stage of issuance of charge- sheet to the petitioner and to hold a fresh enquiry into the matter and then to pass an appropriate order in accordance with the law and rules applicable for the purpose.