Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has a Master's degree in Chemistry.
On September 20, 1983, he was selected and appointed as a Manufacturing Chemist with the Haryana Cooperative Sugar Mills Limited, Rohtak.
While working as such, the petitioner competed for the post of Taxation Inspector.
He was selected.
On April 18, 1990, he was offered appointment as an Inspector.
He resigned from the post of Manufacturing Chemist.
Vide order dated April 23, 1990, the petitioner's resignation was accepted w.e.f.
April 16, 1990.
He joined the post of Taxation Inspector.
The selection and appointment of Taxation Inspectors was challenged.
Ultimately, the matter was decided by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Krishan Yadav and others v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 581 (SC), Civil Appeal No. 726 of 1993.
The selection and the consequential appointments were quashed.
In pursuance to the order passed by their Lordships, the petitioner's services as Inspector were terminated vide order dated May 16, 1994.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a representation to the second respondent for his reinstatement on the post of Manufacturing Chemist.
A copy of one such representation is at Annexure P.7 with the writ petition.
Having failed to get any benefit, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner alleges that various persons who had resigned from different posts for joining as Taxation Inspectors have been accommodated against the original posts held by them.
The petitioner has referred to the decision of this Court in CWP No. 851 of 1999 wherein Mr. Dharam Pal - a Hindi teacher was ordered to be reinstated on his original post by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated April 6, 1999.
The petitioner has also produced on record a copy of the judgment in LPA Nos. 269 to 271 of 1992 wherein similar directions had been given by the Bench on December 19, 1994.
On these premises, the petitioner prays that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to reinstate him on the post of Manufacturing Chemist.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Managing Director of respondent No. 2.
It has been inter-alia averred that after the petitioner had resigned from the post, another person had been appointed on October 7, 1991.
Thus, it is claimed that the petitioner cannot be accommodated.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been inter-alia averred that two posts viz. of DM (Plan) and Affluent Supervisor are lying vacant.
Thus, the petitioner can be accommodated against one of these posts.
5.
Mr. Ramesh Hooda, learned counsel has submitted that the petitioner had worked on the post of Manufacturing Chemist for a period of almost seven years.
His work and conduct were satisfactory.
There is nothing against him.
On selection for the post of Taxation Inspector, he had worked on the post for about four years.
Thereafter, his services were terminated.
In this situation, the counsel prays that the respondents may be directed to adjust the petitioner on any suitable post which may be commensurate with his qualifications.
6.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
However, the basic objection raised in the written statement is that the post of Manufacturing Chemist has been filled up.
7.
The petitioner has made a specific averment in the replication that two posts are lying vacant.
One of these posts is of an Affluent Supervisor.
This replication was filed in August 2000.
The averments as made in the replication have not been controverted.
In any case, two different Benches of this Court have on earlier occasions, given directions for accommodation of the employees on the available posts.
Even while deciding LPA Nos. 269 to 271 of 1992, the Bench had observed that the candidates who were being deprived of their position may approach the "appropriate authority with a request to reconsider their claim for the posts which they had held before their appointment as Taxation Inspectors."
It was directed that "the appropriate authority will consider the same in accordance with law."
in the present case, it is clear that the petitioner had a Post Graduate Degree of M.Sc in Chemistry.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has not been even suggested that the petitioner's work and conduct were not satisfactory.
Still further, the petitioner has now become over-age for any civil post.
In this situation, the petitioner's claim for appointment on a suitable post deserves to be considered with sympathy.
8.
Resultantly, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction that the second respondent shall consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment against a suitable post keeping in view his academic qualifications and experience.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
If the post of Affluent Supervisor or DM (Plan) is still available, the petitioner's claim for appointment against that post shall be considered.
It is, however, clarified that on such appointment, the petitioner shall not be entitled to any arrears of pay.
No costs.
Ordered accordingly.