Arun B Saharya, Chief Justice - The main question raised in this appeal is whether case of the respondent was fairly considered for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in accordance with the Special Review instructions, contained in Army Headquarter's letter and 1061985, Annexure P-4.
By the impugned judgment dated 181991, this question has been answered in the negative in the writ petition filed by the respondent (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner).
Consequently, Annexures P-5, P-7 and P-10, have been quashed; and appellant Union of India has been directed to re-consider his claim for promotion in accordance with Annexure P-4, which is now the subject matter of challenge in this appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
2.
Relevant facts leading to filing of the appeal may first be noticed.
Petitioner was considered by the Selection Board for promotion to the rank of A/Lt.
Col as a fresh case on the basis of Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) up to and including 1983-84 during November, 1985; and, for the second time, on the basis of additional ACR for the year 1984-85, during December 1985.
Both the times, he was graded unfit.
Central Government, however, on his statutory complaint submitted in December 1985, expunged the Initiating Officer's adverse assessment in the ACR for the year 1978-79.
Consequently, for each of the said two chances, he was given Special Review during April 1987 and June 1987; but, he was again graded unfit vide Annexure P-3 and Annexure P-5 respectively.
In February 1988, when he could not make the grade for the third time, on consideration of further ACRs up to and including 1985-56, he was finally superseded and declared ineligible for promotion to the rank of Lt. Col. (Selection Grade) vide Annexure P-7.
His non-statutory complaint was rejected vide Annexure P-10.
His writ petition challenging all these orders has been allowed.
3.
In the impugned judgment, it is recorded that no written statement has been filed on behalf of the Union of India, and in this situation, the averments in the petition had to be treated as admitted.
On merits, the judgment is based upon the findings that in June 1987, at the time of `First Review', records only up to the year 1984-85 had been considered and report for the year 1985-86 was not taken into consideration.
Similarly, at the time of `Final Review' also, which was held in the year 1988, the last ACR taken into consideration was up to December 1985, whereas the report for the year 1986-87 should have been available by that time, which does not appear to have been taken into consideration.
Thus, arriving at the conclusion that the Selection Board did not take into consideration each time additional report covering the complete or part of the next reporting year and violated the rule embodied in Annexure P-4.
Further argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner that restriction on consideration of the claim of an Officer to just three chances for promotion was unlawful, also found favour.
But, this was not accepted as the basis for granting relief in the present case for the reason that no such plea had been raised in the writ petition.
4.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Union of India has assailed the impugned judgment on all counts.
Firstly, he contends that the Union of India did file an affidavit in opposition to the writ petition along with an application registered as CM No. 4195 of 1991 for placing it on record, but the same was erroneously turned down by order dated June 8, 1991.
Moreover, he argues that the law of pleadings in a suit would not apply in the case of a writ petition and in such a case records ought to be read for ascertaining the correct facts.
Next, on merits, he contends that consideration of merely an extract of paragraph 2 produced as Annexure P-4 has resulted in distortion of the system of `Special Review' laid down in Army Headquarters' letter dated June 10, 1985 and erroneous decision of the case.
Lastly, observations made about the restriction of three chances for promotion, on the basis of another Single Judge judgment in CWP No. 414 of 1988 decided on March 22, 1990, which has been reversed by Division Bench Judgment dated July 26, 1991 in LPA No. 900 of 1990, ought to be set aside.
5.
Before we proceed further with the discussion, it is necessary to advert to the instructions on the subject of `Special Review' laid down in Army Head-quarter's letter dated June 10, 1985, which has been produced by learned counsel for Union of India.
Aim of these instructions is to elucidate the policy of grant of Special Review under certain circumstances for promotion to the rank of A/Lt.Col.
and Acting Lt.Col.
An Officer is given three normal considerations for promotion to the next higher rank.
Under certain circumstances, inter alia, where change in overall record of service is made, cases for promotion are reviewed; and, such consideration, other than the three normal considerations, is described as a `Special Review'.
Provision for Special Review has been made in various contingencies i.e. selection for promotion (Paragraphs 1 to 10), restoration of seniority (Paragraph 11), drop in performance (Paragraphs 12, 13 and 14), re-grant of acting rank relinquished on disciplinary ground (Paragraphs 15, 16 and 17), re-grant of acting rank relinquished on medical ground (Paragraphs 18, 19 and 20) etc. For the present purpose of our discussion, however, instructions applicable to selection for promotion contained in paragraphs 1 to 10 would be relevant and the same are reproduced below :-  "Sena Mukhyalaya Sainik Sachiv Shakha/MS5B Army Headquarters Military Secretary's Branch DHQ PO New Delhi 110011 10 June 85 31526/P/MS5B Headquarters Southern Command Eastern Command Western Command  Central Command Northern Command Special Review Introduction (1).
One of the principal functions of MS Branch is to screen officers for promotion to the select rank of Lt Col and above.
For this purpose various Selection Boards are convened from time to time under the directions of the COAS.
Para 107 of Regulation for Army, 1962 Edition refers.
(2).
An officer is given three normal considerations for promotion by Selection to the next higher rank.
These are Initial Consideration, First Review and Final Review.
Initial consideration is given with all the reports up to and including the cut off year on record.
Cut off year refers to the reporting year of the last report, which is taken into account by the Selection Board while considering an officer for promotion to the next higher rank.
For each successive consideration i.e. First Review and Final Review, an additional report covering the complete or part of the next reporting year is a mandatory requirement.
Officers not approved in the Final Review are finally superseded and become ineligible for any further consideration for promotion by selection.
(3).
However, under certain circumstances, cases of officers for promotion may be reviewed under the direction of the competent authority, wherein the definite grading awarded to them in any of the considerations may either be annulled or changed to `Withdrawn' thus making them eligible for the grant of corresponding number of substitute considerations.
Further the competent authority may also order the re-grant of rank or reconsideration for promotion to these officers who relinquish their acting rank on disciplinary or medical grounds.
(4) Any such or other consideration, other than the three normal considerations, is known as a `Special Review'.
Aim (5).
The aim of this letter is to elucidate the policy on the grant of Special Review to the officers for promotion to the rank of A/Lt.
Col and A/Col.
Circumstances under which Special Review may be granted (6).
Special Review may be granted for the following reasons :- (a) Change in overall record of service.
(b) `Drop in Performance' after the officer has been approved for promotion by the competent authority.
(c) For the re-grant of acting rank of Lt. Col and Col, relinquished on administrative or disciplinary grounds under the provisions of Para 7 of Appendix `A' to SAI/1/S/74.
(d) For physical promotion of officers in low medical classification (LMC) who have already been approved for promotion.
Such considerations are known as "Special Review (Medical)".
(7) The procedure for granting `Special Review' is given in subsequent paras.
Change in Overall Record of Service (8).
An Officer is given normal consideration for promotion with the following material on record:- (a) All reports upto the cut-off year.
In case the officer is graded `Defer' in previous consideration(s), the last report with which he becomes Adequately Exercised (AE) will be taken into consideration (b) Details of Honours and Awards.
(c) Punishments and censures (recordable) operative at the time of grant of Special Review.
(9).
A change in overall record of service may occur due to any of the following reasons :- (a) Expunction of remarks including figurative assessment in any of the reports, which were considered by the Selection Board.
(b) Setting aside or remission of punishments or censures which were operative at the time of screening of an officer's case.
(c) Partial or complete setting aside of any report which were considered by the Selection Board.
(d) Availability of any new material related to the aspects in Para 8 above, which, for some reason, could not be presented to the Selection Board during the consideration of an officer's case.
(10) Procedure (a) An officer may be given a maximum of three `Special Reviews'.
The number of `Special Review' granted will be determined by the following two factors :- (i) The point of time at which the change in record of service has occurred.
(ii) Number of normal considerations already given to him at that point of time.
(b) An officer will be given a `Special Review' for each normal consideration already given to him after the point of time at which change in his record of service has occurred.
Example 1 at Appx `A' refers.
(c) Any consideration which is still due to the officer after the incorporation of the change in his record of service, will be given in the normal manner and will not be termed as `Special Review'.
Example 2 at Appx.
`A' refers.
(d) The competent authority to grant `Special Review' is as follows :- (i) Maj to A/Lt.Col-MS (ii) Lt.Col.to A/Col-COAS (e) MS 4 CR will be responsible for the incorporation of change in the record of service of the officer.
MS 5 will thereafter obtain the approval of the competent authority to grant the officer `Special Review(s)'.
(f) Once the approval of the competent authority has been obtained, the definite grading(s) awarded to the officer in the consideration(s) under question will be deemed to be treated as `Withdrawn' before the case is presented to the appropriate Selection Board for reconsideration.
(g) Each `Special Review' will be given with the same material on record as the corresponding normal consideration albeit with the incorporation of change in record of service and any punishment or censure (recordable and operative) which may have been awarded to him till the date of reconsideration as `Special Review'.
Example 3 of Apex `A' refers.
(h) The grading awarded by the Selection Board will be approved in the normal manner i.e. by the COAS for promotion to the rank of A/Lt.
Coll.
and by the Central Govt. for promotion to the rank of A/Col.
[emphasis added] 6.
It is pertinent at this stage to note that petitioner had extracted only paragraph 2 out of the above-mentioned letter, and produced it as Annexure P- 4.
Reliance upon only one paragraph out of its' proper context and omission of all the other paragraphs contained in the said letter, as would be evident from the following discussion, has led to complete distortion of the system of "Special Review" and erroneous conclusions in the present case.
7.
Petitioner's case as pleaded in paragraphs 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the writ petition, reads as follows :-  "(10).
That representation of the petitioner to the Government of India was not liked by the Army authorities.
When the said representation was being processed by the Government, Army authorities placed his case before the selection board and informed the petitioner that he has not made the acceptable grade for promotion to the rank of Lt. Col.
Selection grade by their letter dated 22nd April, 1987, Copy attached as Annexure P-3.
(11).
That as a matter of normal practice only One selection board, for each rank for promotion is held in a year.
For each successive consideration i.e., First Review and Final Review, an additional report covering the complaint or part of the next reporting year is a mandatory requirement.
(Relevant extracts from Army Headquarters, Military Secretary's Branch MS 5B letter No. 31526P/MS 5B dated June 10, 1985 are placed as Annexure P-4.
The petitioner was shocked and mystified to receive AHQ MS letter dated June 30, 1987, intimating him that he has not been placed in the acceptable grade for promotion to the acting rank of Lt. Col. selection grade.
(Copy of the said letter is placed as Annexure P-5).
(12).
That it is abundantly clear from the averments made in Paras 10 and 11, that Army Headquarters, Military Secretary has acted in a most arbitrary, illegal and unjustified manner.
Final Selection Board had no fresh material before it while considering case of the petitioner.
ACR for the year 1986-87 covering the period from July 1, 1986 to June 30, 1987 could neither have reached nor placed before the said selection board.
(13).
The respondents have acted manifestly malafide on getting the Second Review done exactly on the same material, on which the petitioner was rejected by the First Review Board vide their letter dated April 22, 1987, P- 3.
It was incumbent upon the respondents to place an additional ACR for the year 1986-87 before the Final Review Board to be held in 1987, otherwise selection on the same old material on which petitioner had already been rejected, had no meaning."
8.
Sum and substance of the averments in the petition, if treated as admitted, would undoubtedly mislead one to the conclusion that the material taken into consideration in the first instance, without additional reports covering the complete or part of the next reporting year, was again taken into consideration at the time of First Review and Final Review, and, that the Selection Board convened for Final Review had no fresh material before it.
9.
In Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque and others (1955 SCR 1104) Supreme Court has explained the scope of the writ of certiorari.
In Messrs Ghaio Mal & Sons v. State of Delhi and others, AIR 1959 SC 65, Supreme Court has emphasized upon the need to produce the entire record before the Court when rule is issued on application for certiorari.
It has been explained that the whole object of certiorari is to bring up the record for examination by the Superior Court so that the Court may be satisfied that the concerned authority has not acted beyond its jurisdiction and has exercised its jurisdiction within limits fixed by the law, and that non-production of the records completely defeats the purpose of such a writ.
In two Single Judge judgments of this Court in S. Avtar Singh Uppal v. The Inspector-General of Police, Chandigarh and others, 1966 Current Law Journal 318 and Gram Panchayat, Village Majesar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1967 PLR 397, it has been explained that in a civil writ case, what is required is a return to the rule, which is not a written statement in the nature of pleading as understood in Order VIII, Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and that return to the rule is the record itself.
The principle laid down in these two Single Judge judgments, we adopt and approve as laying down the correct law.
In the case of a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, even in the absence of written statement, averments made in the petition would not be taken as deemed admission, as postulated in the law of pleadings in a suit.
In a writ petition, the original record or written statement depicting correct facts on record must be produced and taken into consideration for proper decision of the case.
10.
Even otherwise, on perusal of the writ record, it appears that judgment was reserved after arguments of counsel for the petitioner had been heard on June 7, 1991 and the very next day CM No. 4195 of 1991 along with the written statement was filed by counsel for the Union of India.
In the interest of justice, for proper decision of the case, written statement filed on behalf of the Union of India, which brings out relevant facts in their proper perspective, ought to have been taken on record.
11.
Union of India, while refuting the averments made in the writ petition, has adequately explained the relevant facts in its written statement in the following terms :-  "(10).
That the contents of Para 10 of the petition are denied.
The petitioner's apprehension is misconceived and not born by the facts.
However, it is mentioned that the petitioner belongs to 1966 Batch and was considered by No. 4 Selection Board for promotion the rank of Lt. Col., as under:- (a) As fresh case during April, 1985 with up to and including ACR 1983-84 was graded `R' (Unfit).
(b) As a First Review case during December 1985 with up to and including ACR 1984-85 and was graded `R' (Unfit).
Consequent to setting aside of the Initiating Officers assessment in the ACR 1978-79 on his statutory complaint the petitioner was given Special Review as follows :- (a) Special Review (Fresh) during April, 1987 with cut off ACR 1983-84 and was grade `R' (Unfit).
(b) Special Review (First) during June 1987 with ACRs up to and including 1984-85 and graded `R' (Unfit).
(c) Final Review during February 1988 with ACRs up to and including 1985-86 and was graded `R' (Unfit).
It may be mentioned that at the relevant period during 1985 whenever a statutory complaint against ACR was pending, such officer's names were withdrawn from consideration till the finalization of complaint.
In the case of petitioner though he had submitted statutory complaint but the same was not received at the Army HQ before the meeting of the Selection Board, which considered petitioner during December 1985 as a First Review case.
However, subsequent to redress granted by the Government on his complaint, the petitioner was given Special Reviews as mentioned above.
Hence there is no anomaly in the decision card dated 22nd April 1987 as shown in Annexure P-3 attached to the petition.
(11).
That in reply to Para 11 of the petition, it is submitted that the petitioner was considered with fresh inputs in each subsequent consideration as per rules.
(12).
That in reply to Para 11 of the petition, it is submitted that the petitioner's cut off report for consideration as Special Review (Fresh) and Special Review (First) had to be the corresponding cut off report as were taken during his initial Fresh (April, 1985) and First Review (December, 1985) consideration.
Thereafter, the cut off report progressed to ACR 1985-86 at his Final Review consideration held during February 1988.
Hence, the petitioner's ACR for the year 1986-87 was not required to be part of his profile for consideration by No. 4 Selection Board at any time.
The petitioner was considered each time with additional fresh report as mentioned above.
(13).
That the contents of Para 13 of the petition are denied as explained.
However, it is reiterated that the petitioner was screened at his First Review with ACRs up to and including 1984-85 and Final Review with ACRs up to and including 1985-86."
[Emphasis added]  12.
Before we take up for discussion the case on merits, it would be apt to appreciate in the proper perspective relevant provisions made for `Special Review' in the above-mentioned instructions.
13.
`Special Review' is applicable to cases under certain circumstances, including promotion to the rank of Lt. Col. and above.
Paragraph 2, which alone in extracted in Annexure-F, recites the general principle of three normal considerations given to an officer for promotion by selection to the next higher rank.
It explains, what is meant by the three normal considerations for promotion.
These are described in Military parlance as : (i) Initial Consideration, (ii) First Review, and (iii) Final Review.
`Initial Consideration' is given with all the reports to and including the cut-off year on record.
Further, cut-off year is explained as the year of the last report, which is taken into account by the Selection Board while considering an officer for promotion to the next higher rank.
Second limb of this paragraph, proceeds further to emphasize that for each successive consideration i.e. `First Review' and `Final Review', and additional report covering the complete or part of the next reporting year is a mandatory requirement.
Thus, in other words, `Initial consideration' is given on the basis of all the reports up to and including A.C.R.
of the cut off year on record.
`First Review' and `Final Review' must be given on the basis of additional report covering complete or part of the next reporting year for each of these successive considerations.
Last part of this paragraph succinctly brings out the restriction that officers not approved even in the third normal consideration, which is described as the `final Review', are finally superseded and become ineligible for any further consideration for promotion by selection.
Thus, in our opinion, paragraph 2 is only a part of the `Introduction' to the system of `Special Review', which is actually laid down in paragraph 3 onwards of the said instructions.
The terms and conditions regulating the system of `Special Review' have been completely ignored and left out of discussion, resulting in erroneous judgment in the present case.
14.
It is apparent, on bare perusal of fact set out in the written statement filed on behalf of Union of India, change in record of service of the officer for the year 1978-79 attracted `Special Review' in accordance with the previsions made in paras 3 to 5 and para 6(a) of the said instructions.
So, the procedure prescribed in subsequent paras 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the said instructions had to be followed.
15.
Petitioner's case for promotion was taken up for `Initial consideration' in April 1985.
All his reports on records were taken into consideration up to and including A.C.R.
1983-84, which was the cut off year.
He was graded unfit.
`First Review', being the second normal consideration, on the basis of an additional report covering the next reporting year up to and including A.C.R.
1984-85, was given during December 1985.
This time also, he was graded unfit.
On each of these two occasions, adverse report for the year 1978-79 was on record.
It was only during December 1985 when the petitioner made the statutory representation, that the Initiating Officer's assessment in the adverse A.C.R.
1978-79 was set aside.
By that time `First Review' had already been done by the Selection Board.
Consequent upon the change in overall record of service, in terms of para 6(a), para 9(c) and para 10(a)(i), (ii), (b) and (g) of the said instructions, petitioner was given a Special Review for each normal consideration as mentioned in paragraph 10 of the written statement.
Thus, in view of change in A.C.R.
1978-79, `Initial consideration' of the case earlier done in April 1985, on the basis of the corresponding cut-off reporting year up to and including A.C.R.
1983-84, was taken up for Special Review (Fresh) during April 1987.
Similarly, the Second normal consideration, described in military parlance as `First Review' done in December 1985 with an additional report covering the next A.C.R.
up to 1984- 85, was the subject matter of Special Review (First) in June 1987.
Despite these two corresponding Special Reviews, however, he was still graded by the Selection Board `unfit' vide Annexure 3 and Annexure 5 respectively.
16.
Final Review, on the basis of the additional report covering the next reporting year 1985-86, though delayed on account of the intervening circumstances, was given during February 1988, which is not termed as `Special Review' in accordance with para 10(c) of the said instructions.
Since the officer was not approved in the `Final Review', he was declared ineligible for any further consideration for promotion vide Annexure P-7.
17.
Thus, first normal consideration as also the corresponding Special Review (Fresh) was done on the basis of reports up to the cut-off year 1983-84; the next successive consideration i.e. `First Review' and corresponding `Special Review' (First) on the basis of additional A.C.R.
1984-85; and the `Final Review' was given on consideration of yet another additional A.C.R.
for the year 1985-86.
The findings that each of the successive consideration was given on the same material and that A.C.R.
1984-85 and subsequent A.C.R.
1985-86 should have been taken into consideration for the First Review and the Final Review are erroneous and the same are set aside.
18.
Observation made in the impugned order judgment regarding restriction on consideration of the claim of an officer to just three chances for promotion, on the basis of the judgment of another Single Judge in Civil Writ petition No. 414 of 1988, decided on March 22, 1990, reads as follows :-  "Though the contention is not without merit yet I am not inclined to go into it in the present case, for the reason that no such pleas has been raised in the writ petition and the respondents are not even represented at the hearing of the case.
In the writ petition .........................." The said Single Judge Judgment was challenged in letters patent appeal and it has been reversed by judgment of the Division Bench dated July 26, 1991.
Since no plea to challenge the said restrictions had been raised in the writ petition, nothing more need be said about it.
In view of the foregoing discussion, impugned judgment dated 181991 is reversed, Civil Writ Petition No. 13927 of 1989 is dismissed, and the appeal is allowed.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.