Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner Ch.
Bansi Lal in this petition under Section 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the State of Haryana to release the salary, allowances and pension etcetera payable to him as admissible under the rules, being Leader of the Opposition.
2.
The claim of the petitioner is founded on the facts that he was elected as Member of Haryana Legislative Assembly on different occasions.
Lastly, he was elected as Member of the Haryana Legislative Assembly on 2522000 and continues to hold that status even now.
On 2471999 Haryana Vikas Party passed a resolution electing Ch.
Bansi Lal as leader of Haryana Vikas Legislative Party and consequently the Leader of the Opposition, the said party being the largest single party in the opposition.
17 Members of Legislative Assembly (M.L.As.
for short) passed this resolution.
Copy of the resolution was sent under the signatures of Mr. Mani Ram Godara M.L.A.
on the same date to the Speaker of Haryana Vidhan Sabha requesting him to accept Ch.
Bansi Lal as Leader of the Opposition.
3.
According to the petitioner the Speaker of Haryana Vidhan Sabha recognised Ch.
Bansi Lal MLA, leader of the Haryana Vikas Party, as Leader of the Opposition under Section 2(d) of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowance and Pension of Members) Act, 1975 with effect from 2571999.
The Speaker also directed that the Government should be informed accordingly.
The Government was informed by the Secretary in furtherance to the order of the Speaker.
The Governor of Haryana dissolved the Haryana Vidhan Sabha on 14121999 and, thus, the petitioner claimed the benefits under the provisions of the said Act and the Rules framed thereunder for the period 2571999 to 13.12.1999.
4.
This claim of the petitioner has been denied and disputed mainly on the ground that the petitioner was not declared as leader of the opposition in accordance with law and as such was not entitled to any relief prayed for.
Different replies have been filed on behalf of the Chief Minister, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Government of Haryana.
The Chief Minister while denying the allegations of personal grudge and vendetta against the petitioner has stated that, "unfortunately, the petitioner despite his long political career has failed to appreciate that in a democratic set up like ours difference of opinion an policies and vital issues relating to State/nation or criticism of each others view point based on sound and healthy reasons, cannot be termed as a deep-rooted enmity or personal vendetta."
The Speaker of Vidhan Sabha admits the fact that the petitioner was administered oath/affirmation as Member of the Haryana Legislative Assembly on 22.5.1996; was again elected on 2822000 and the notification in this regard was itself issued on 2822000.
It is stated on behalf of this respondent that the resolution Annexure P/1 was not passed by the Haryana Vikas Legislative Party but the same was passed by Haryana Vikas Party and only a typed copy of the resolution, duly attested by Shri Mani Ram Godara, then MLA was sent to Speaker Haryana Vidhan Sabha and as such there was no proper compliance of the rules governing the declaration or recognition of the leader of the opposition in the house.
The stand of the Government, as already noticed, is equally vague and main thrust of all the respondents is that there has been no appropriate compliance to the provisions of the Act and there was no proper recognition of the petitioner as leader of opposition in the house and the petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to any relief claimed for.
5.
In order to answer the precise question reference to the provisions governing the subject in the back drop of the above facts would be necessary.
Under Article 186 of the Constitution of India, the Speaker shall be paid such salaries and allowances as may be fixed by the Legislature of the State by law.
The Haryana Legislative Assembly so enacted The Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Act, 1975, hereinafter referred to as the Act, and as amended from time to time, to regulate the allowances and pension etc. as payable to the members of the Assembly.
Section 2(d) of this Act defines "Leader of the Opposition" as under :-  (d) "Leader of the Opposition" means the member of the Assembly who is for the time being recognised as such by the Speaker of the Assembly : 6.
Section 4(1) of the Act deals with the special allowances regarding pay and allowances etc. to the Leader of the Opposition in the House, and the same reads as under :  4(1) In addition to the allowances payable under this Act, the Leader of the Opposition shall be entitled to receive (a salary of eleven thousand rupees per mensem and a sumpatuary allowance at the rate as may be prescribed."
We may also notice that during the course of hearing, records were also produced by the State Government and Secretary of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
7.
Under Article 178 of the Constitution, every State Assembly is to choose a Speaker who will exercise the powers over the affairs of the House in terms of the constitutional provisions and any other law enacted by the State in that behalf.
As already noticed, according to the petitioner, he was elected as Leader of the largest Opposition party on 2471999 and copy of the resolution with a request for recognising Ch.
Bansi Lal as Leader of Haryana Vikas Legislative Party as Leader of the Opposition was sent to the Speaker.
The Speaker of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha, on 2571999, passed the following order :-  "I recognise Shri Bansi Lal M.L.A.
and Leader of Haryana Vikas Legislative Party as Leader of Opposition under Section 2(d) of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowance and Pension of Members) Act, 1975 w.e.f.
2571999.
An intimation to this effect be sent to the Government for providing necessary facilities as permissible under the Act ibid.
Ch.
Bansi Lal may also be informed accordingly.
Sd/- 25/7/1999.
Speaker."
8.
From the records produced before us it is further clear that the Under Secretary had written a letter on 26.7.1999 to the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana informing the decision of the Speaker to recognise Ch Bansi Lal as Leader of the Opposition in Haryana Vidhan Sabha with effect from 2571999.
This recognition by the Speaker and communication to the State Government remained effective till dissolution of the Legislative Assembly was ordered by the Governor on 16121999.
Neither it is pleaded nor the record produced before us shows that these two orders were ever recalled or rendered ineffective in any manner whatsoever.
9.
Leader of the Opposition is a person who has been recognised as such by the Speaker of the Assembly for the time being.
In other words, a person who is recognised by the Speaker as Leader of the Opposition, would be treated as such.
The power to recognise is solely vested in the Speaker.
The Speaker in exercise of his statutory powers had declared the petitioner as "Leader of the Opposition" in the House.
None of the objections now sought to be raised, in the written statements of different authorities find any place on the records produced before us.
Not only that, the order of recognition was passed by the Speaker in consonance with the provisions of the Act, but the same was duly intimated to the State Government by the Secretariat of the Assembly.
The State Government accepted the same and in fact never expressed any doubt and never acted to the contrary.
For the first time this stand is taken in the written statement filed before the Court by the respondents.
The objections taken in the written statements even otherwise are frivolous on the face of it.
10.
It is contended that the petitioner was not recognized as Leader of the Opposition by following due process.
No such process has been brought to our notice during the course of hearing.
There is no provision in the Act afore- referred which controls the discretion of the Speaker while exercising his power under Section 2(d) of the Act.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also placed on record the resolution dated 2471999.
This resolution has been signed by all the 17 M.L.As who were the Members of Haryana Vikas Legislature Party, admittedly the largest opposition party in the State Assembly.
This document shows the hollowness of the objections taken on behalf of the State and the Speaker now.
Attested copy of this resolution was also forwarded to the Speaker along with the letter dated 2471999.
11.
Under Articles 212 of the Constitution of India, the power of the Court to examine the validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State or the questions relating to the conduct of business of the Assembly and other allied matters are not subject to jurisdiction of the Court.
In other words the Court has a very limited jurisdiction to examine the validity or otherwise of such matters.
From the record it is apparent that the petitioner was elected as Leader of Opposition in the State Assembly in accordance with the provisions of the Act and basic principles of democratic system.
Even if there was an error, no steps were taken by any assembly including the Speaker to recall or revoke the order dated 2571999.
12.
On the basis of the record produced before us, without hesitation we conclude that objections now taken in the written statements by the respondents are factually incorrect and hold no ground in law.
In all fairness, the State must seriously ponder over the matter before attributing motive or non-adherence to the prescribed procedure by a constitutional functionary like Speaker of an Assembly.
Vague and indefinite pleas can never substantive plea of lack of inherent or procedural jurisdiction or non- adherence to the enunciated procedure.
Such challenge against constitutional authority has to be for compelling reasons and on plausible grounds.
All these factors are noticeably conspicuous by absence in the written statement filed on behalf of the State.
We are of the considered view that the State has compelled the petitioner to approach the Court entirety for insufficient reasons, that too, for such a trivial matter.
13.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow this writ petition with costs or Rs. 1000/- and direct the State Government to grant and release salary, allowances and pension payable to the petitioner in terms of The Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Act, 1975 and as available to the Leader of the Opposition in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha for the period 2571999 to 14121999.
Petition allowed.