Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
The learned Labour Court, vide its award dated 15121999, answered the reference in favour of the workman with continuity of service with 50% back wages from the date of demand notice i.e. 3131995.
This finding was recorded by the learned Labour Court, upon proper appreciation of evidence.
3.
The contention on behalf of the State is that it has been incorrectly noticed by the Labour Court that the workman was appointed on regular basis.
In fact, his appointment was made only for 80 days.
This expression cannot be permitted to defeat the case proved by the workman and for that matter proved by either parties to the lis.
The Labour Court has recorded a definite finding that no letter of appointment was issued.
No record was produced by the respondent.
Material findings recorded by the Labour Court reads as under:-  "........He was not appointed on regular or permanent basis and as such is not entitled to one month notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation.
However, when cross-examined, he admits that Ex. W1 was issued by the office.
Firstly, M/Rolls for the employment period of the workman in question as asserted by the workman has not been produced by the respondent for the reasons best known to it, through the workman, admittedly remained in the employment of the respondent.
Nevertheless, the workman has been able to produce the photostat copies of the M/Rolls mark A pages 1 to 9 indicating the continuous employment of the workman from 11294 to 31895.
The genuineness of these M/Rolls has not been questioned on the side of the management.
Therefore, considering the period of his continuous employment from 11294 to 31895, I hold that the workman cannot be justifiably retrenched otherwise than by compliance with the mandatory provisions of Sec. 25 F of the Act regarding one month notice or pay in lieu thereof and retrenchment compensation.
The order dt. 22.11.94 issued by the XEN clearly indicates that the workman was employed as Beldar in the pay scale of Rs. 770-1410 till further orders.
It does not envisage the employment of the workman for specific period or for any specific project.
The termination of services of the workman, if at all, is justified under the contract of employment us/s (oo) (bb) of the ID Act, the respondent has to place the materials on the record for specific project and for specific period which it has dismally failed."
4.
Once, the workman has completed the period of 240 days certain definite advantages accrues in favour of the workman in consonance with the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act and his services could not have been terminated in the present manner.
Admittedly, no retrenchment compensation was offered to him and even juniors to him were retained in service.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that there is delay of one year in serving the demand notice.
In view the principle laid down in case of Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Society Ltd & Another, 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : JT 1999(3) SC 38, where it has categorically held that delay per-se can not be ground for rejection of claim of a workman, there is force in the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner.
The delay is not of the kind that disentitles the workman from the relief claimed.
We find no merits in this petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.