RL Anand.
J - Four petitioners, fully described in the head-note of the writ petition, have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioners that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing them to give regular appointment to them.
Further it has been prayed by the petitioners that the documents Annexures P-10 to P-13, dated 1912000, vide which they were directed to undertake written tests and personality tests be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they are working as Counter Incharge (Training) for the last 8/9 years with respondent No. 2.
They have done their diplomas and certificate courses for the posts of Counter Incharge in the institutes run by the Haryana Tourism Corporation (hereinafter called the Corporation) and in support of this contention they have placed on record documents Annexures P-1 to P-4.
The petitioners allege that they were called for interview for filling the posts of Counter Incharge (Training) and thereafter they were selected and given appointment as Job Trainee or Practical Trainee in the field of Counter Incharge vide letters Annexures P-6 to P-9 According to the appointment letters, their training period was two years which could be extended for another six months.
The petitioners have successfully completed the period of two years of their training.
It was never extended and the petitioners were allowed to continue on the post of Counter Incharge by the Corporation.
So much so the respondents took full work of Counter Incharge from them and paid them the stipend of a trainee.
The grievance of the petitioners further proceeds that they along with other similarly situated trainees filed Civil Writ Petition No. 18474 of 1996 seeking regular appointment from the date they completed their training period successfully.
The writ petition was admitted for regular hearing.
The petitioners apprehending their termination orders moved a stay application which was allowed and the respondents were directed that the services of the petitioners will not be terminated till the disposal of the writ petition.
Thereafter, 139 posts of Waiters and 33 posts of Counter Incharge etc. were sanctioned by the Haryana Government in January, 1999.
The writ petition of the petitioners was allowed on 161999 by the Hon'ble Single Judge and (sic) against the advertised posts, if they are eligible for the same.
In the above terms, the appeal is disposed of."
4.
The grievance of the petitioners further is that the posts of Counter Incharge have not been advertised though the petitioners have received interview letters calling them for interview/personality test and written test to be held on 722000.
These letters are Annexures P-10 to P-13, which are sought to be quashed by the petitioners.
5.
Now the case of the petitioners is that the respondent-Corporation cannot call upon them to compete with other persons in the light of the orders passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench which gave the directions to the respondents to absorb the petitioners against the advertised posts if they are eligible for the same.
Since the petitioners are eligible for the post, therefore, there is no option left with the respondent-Corporation except to give regular appointment to the petitioners against the post of Counter Incharge.
With this backdrop of the facts, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and respondent No. 2 has contested the same.
The stand of this respondent is that in order to consider the petitioners for regular appointment, they were called upon to appear before the Committee on 722000 vide letters Annexures P-10 to P-13 in accordance with the criteria fixed for examining their suitability in compliance of the directions issued by the LPA Bench and also in compliance of the directions issued by the learned single Judge, who passed the order in COCP Nos. 481 to 486 of 1999.
The petitioners took a chance before the Selection Committee but could not succeed because of their getting much lesser marks than the qualifying marks and, therefore, now they cannot take a somersault by contending that the process of selection was unfair or uncalled for.
It is further the stand of the respondent No. 2 that the petitioners were appointed as on the Job Trainee in the field of Counter Incharge in the Corporation.
Their appointment was not against the regular-posts.
In January, 1999 the government granted permission for the creation of certain posts in various categories including that of Counter Incharge and ordered it to be filled up by selecting most suitable staff.
The advertisement was published in the newspaper.
Before any selection is made against the advertised posts, the Civil Writ Petition No. 18474 of 1996 filed by the petitioners and some other trainees of various categories seeking regular appointments on completion of their training was listed for regular hearing and the judgment was pronounced finally on 161999 and direction was given to the respondents to absorb all the petitioners except petitioner No. 21 against the advertised posts and opportunity was also given to the Corporation to fill up the remaining posts from the open market.
The Corporation filed an appeal before the LPA Bench which modified the order, already reproduced above by me in the earlier portion of this judgment.
It is the stand of the respondent that it is in its domain to prescribe the personality test and written test in order to judge the suitability of the candidates.
Since the petitioners had participated in the selection process and could not become successful, therefore, it is too late for them to ask for regular appointment.
With this broad defence, respondent No. 2 has prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
7.
A re-joinder was filed by the petitioners in which they have reiterated the averments of the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
8.
The parties have also placed on record certain documents.
9.
I have heard Mrs. Abha Rathore, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Mr. KK Gupta, Advocate on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
10.
It is a second round of litigation between the parties.
I will not be wrong if I say that this court has been left with the job to interpret the order of the Hon'ble Division Bench (LPA Bench), which earlier modified the order of Hon'ble Single Judge.
The operative portion of the order of Hon'ble Division Bench I have already quoted above.
The reading of the same would show that this order was passed with the consent of the parties and a direction was given to the Corporation to consider for absorption of the petitioners against the advertised posts if they are eligible for the same.
Meaning thereby that it was the mandate of the Hon'ble Division Bench for the Corporation to absorb the petitioners subject to their fulfilling the basic qualifications as per the regulations which are applicable for the post and against which the petitioners are seeking their regular appointment.
We all know that absorption totally have a different meaning and interpretation from the process of selection.
When the Hon'ble LPA Bench was pleased to pass the above quoted order with the consent of the parties, it was fully aware what the petitioners were asking for and what was the stand of the respondents.
Had the intention of the Hon'ble LPA Bench been that the petitioners were to again apply and undertake a test, here would have been no difficulty on the part of the Hon'ble Division Bench to make a mention of this condition in the order dated 3091999 itself.
The order has to be interpreted and implemented as per the wording of the order and this Court cannot incorporate the meaning from its own in the said order.
11.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent, however, invites my attention to Mukesh Bhai Chhotabhai Patel v. Joint Agriculture & Marketing Adviser, Government India, 1994(4) SCT 392 (SC) : 1995(2) Recent Service Judgments 175 and submits that the Government had the right and jurisdiction to prescribe the test for the post even by the executive instructions.
Moreover, the petitioners had participated in the process of selection and now they cannot take a somersault by placing reliance on the order dated 3091999.
The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 is not applicable to the facts in hand.
It was the case of regularisation of the temporary employees and the mandate of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court was that let the department may consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation in the light of the scheme framed by the department.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court was further pleased to observe in the said judgment that automatic regularisation is not known to law.
Here is a case with totally different prayer.
The petitioners virtually are asking for the implementation of the judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench through the present writ petition and in my opinion they could even ask for the same through a contempt petition.
Be that as it may the present writ petition cannot be defeated on the ground that the petitioners have not adopted the remedy of contempt.
The law Courts are supposed to advance the course of justice and not to scuttle it.
The point for determination before me is whether any right flows to the petitioners by virtue of the order passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench or not.
At the cost of repetition I may say that the Hon'ble Division Bench was pleased to direct the Corporation to consider the absorption and the only condition before doing so was that the petitioners should be eligible for the post in the matter or their qualifications and it is not the case of the respondent that the petitioners are not qualified.
12.
The counsel for respondent No. 2 has also invited my attention to another judgment Madan Lal & others v. The State of Jammu & Kashmir and others, 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) : 1995(2) SLR (SC) 209 in which the ratio of the judgment is that a candidate who takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview then, only because the result of the interview, not palatable to him, he cannot turn round and subsequently contend that the process of interview was unfair or Selection Committee was not properly constituted.
The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has been given in a different (contest ?).
If a person without prejudice to his vested right has appeared in the process of selection that does not mean that the right which had already accrued to him has been wasted or it has gone in to the winds by taking part in the selection.
In the modern times everybody wants to be vigilant about his rights lest there may no be estoppel against him.
The petitioners perhaps wanted to scuttle the possible defence of the respondents that they had not appeared in the selection process and, therefore, they cannot file the present writ petition.
Nobody wants to remain at the mercy of others or to adopt the policy of chance.
Be that as it may, as I stated in the earlier portion of this judgment that virtually the present writ petition is a sort of contempt petition or execution proceedings, therefore, I am of the considered opinion that the stand taken up by the respondent-Corporation in defeating the claim of the petitioners is highly uncalled for.
The respondent authorities had no other chance but to absorb the petitioners against the posts of Counter Incharge if they were otherwise eligible for the said posts as per the statutory qualifications laid down in the rules.
As a dying argument the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 submitted that the present writ petition is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties as the persons who have been selected have not been impleaded as a party.
This dying argument has no merit to stand.
The petitioners are challenging the action of respondent No. 2 when they have not complied with their own commitment of the consent which was given before the LPA Bench.
Be that as it may, holding that the action on the part of respondent No. 2 is unlawful and illegal when they have issued letters Annexures P-10 to P-13, I allow this writ petition of all the four petitioners and give directions to respondent No. 2 to give regular appointment to the petitioners to the posts of Counter Incharge.
The compliance of this order shall be done by respondent No. 2 within one month from the receipt of copy of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petiton allowed.