Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioner in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenges the admission of respondent No. 3 to the Elementary Teachers Training Course for the year 2000-2002.
2.
On 15th March, 2001, applications were invited for taking Entrance Test to the Elementary Teachers Training Course.
The Entrance Test was held on 15th April, 2001.
The result was declared on 12th May, 2001.
On the basis of the merit in the written test, interviews were held on 13.6.2001.
Out of total marks of 200, 180 marks were for the written test, while remaining 20 marks were fixed for interview.
Final result was declared on 22nd July, 2001.
Result of the candidates belonging to sports category was declared on August 4 2001.
The petitioner had applied under the sports category, on the basis of the sports gradation certificate issued to the petitioner by the competent authority.
According to the petitioner, he has secured 143 marks in the written test and thus was entitled to get admission not only under the sports quota but even under the general category, as the last candidate admitted to the general category had obtained 129 marks.
The petitioner made a representation to the respondent dated 11th August, 2001, copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/6, but of no consequences.
Thus, compelling the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply.
It was stated on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner had applied under the sports category and his application has been considered under that category alone.
It was not disputed that the petitioner had got 143 marks in the written test only.
However, it was stated that there were only two seats under the sports category and both these seats have been given to the sports persons who were possessing sports gradation certificate of a higher standard i.e. B category while the gradation certificate of the petitioner was of `D' category, as such, claim of the petitioner for the seat has rightly been rejected by the respondents.
4.
From the narrated facts, it is clear that the petitioner got 143 out of 180 marks in the written test on the basis of the result declared by the respondents on 12th May, 2000.
The petitioner, was shown in the general category at No. 3.
The petitioner claims to have performed well in his interview and even if he had been given zero marks in the interview, still he had got more marks than the last admitted candidate in general category.
It is also not disputed before us that the applicant who has been given admission under the general category to the Elementary Teachers Training Course has secured only 129 marks.
In other words, the merits of the last candidate admitted under the general category is much lower than that of the petitioner.
Once the petitioner's result was declared by the respondents themselves under the general category and he was ranking No. 3 in the general category, the respondents could not have rejected the claim of the petitioner on the basis of the fact that he had applied under the sports category, where he could not be given admission because of sports gradation certificate being of lower category.
A person from the reserved category, if comes in the ordinary merit is entitled to be given admission under the general category in order of merit first and then alone the seat under the reserved category can be filled up.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance upon a Division Bench judgment of this court in the case of Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H)(DB) : 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 510, where the Bench was dealing with the question as to the entitlement of the applicants claiming seats under the category of children/grand children of political sufferers having attained higher merits in the general category were entitled to seat under the general category or under particular reserved category for them.
The Bench held as under:-  "6.
The matter now stands finally settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(1) RSJ 1 wherein their Lordships of the Supreme Court after concluding that the reservation contemplated in clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution should not exceed 50 per cent, observed in paragraph 831 of the judgment, as under:- "In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16 (4) do not operate like a communial reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say, Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition field on the basis of their own merit, they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste; they will be treated as open competition candidates."
7.
"For the reasons recorded above, the Government instructions dated 19.10.1983 are hereby quashed.
It is directed that while granting admission against the reserved and unreserved seats, a common merit list of all the reserved and unreserved candidates should be prepared and then open seats filled up as per that merit list and if any candidates from the reserved category falls in that list he will be treated to have been admitted in the general Category.
After this is done, the reserved candidates should be granted admission in the order of their merit against the reserved seats.
This method would certainly avoid the anomaly that has arisen in the present case."
6.
We are in respectful agreement with the observation of the Hon'ble Division Bench.
In fact, the observations are in consonance with the principle enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
7.
In the present case, it is not disputed that the petitioner is much higher in merit in the general category and more particularly is much above in merit than the last candidate admitted to the course under the general category.
The principle is so well settled that it hardly calls for any further discussion in the case.
In any case, the respondents themselves declared the result of the petitioner on 19th May, 2001 under the general category and rightly so.
This cannot be said to be a mistake or error.
If the petitioner is entitled to get admission in the general category of his own merit, it will be unjust and unfair to deny him the seat in the general category on the reasoning that the petitioner is not entitled to seat in the sports category because he possesses sports gradation certificate of lower standard/category.
8.
We are of the considered view that the petitioner is entitled to get the seat in the general category on his own merit.
9.
As per the report of the Registry, the respondent No. 3 had duly been served.
He neither put in appearance nor filed any written statement despite opportunities.
It is contended on behalf of the respondents that there are nearly 2-3 candidates, who have secured rank No. 129 and respondent No. 3 is youngest in age and therefore, he has been placed at the bottom of the merit list in accordance with the terms and conditions of the brochure and the instructions of the government in this behalf.
Resultantly, admission of respondent No. 3 has to be cancelled.
Grant of seat to respondent No. 3 in preference to the petitioner who is a candidate of much higher merit is ex- facie arbitrary and discriminatory.
10.
For the reasons afore-said, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to grant admission to the petitioner under the general category seat in order of his merit.
If the seats are available and petitioner could be granted admission without disturbing respondent No. 3, the court would appreciate that course of action, but if for any reason whatsoever, that is not possible in accordance with the rules, then admission of respondent No. 3 shall be deemed to have been set aside by the court and consequently cancelled.
11.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.