Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners at some length.
2.
The principal contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Malpe Vishwanath Acharya and others v. The State of Maharashtra and another, 1998(2) Supreme Court Cases 1, it is contended that the relevant provisions, i.e., 12.1(IV)(B) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") have become obsolete and redundant and consequently are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In order to appreciate this contention, reference to the relevant rule 12.1(IV)(B) of the Rules would be appropriate which reads as under :-  "For the appointment and training of Deputy Superintendents of Police in the Punjab the following rules shall have effect :- 1.
Deputy Superintendents shall be appointed (a) by direct recruitment from among persons not already in Government service, (b) by the promotion of Inspectors.
IV: Promotion from the rank of Inspector shall be made by His Excellency the Governor after considering the recommendations of the Inspector-General of Police.
B: Not more than 20 per cent of the vacancies which occur will be filled by the direct recruitment; the remainder will be filled by the promotion of Inspectors."
4.
We are unable to appreciate the contention that the above rule offends in any form the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The protection available in terms of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is available to the persons, who are equally placed.
In other words, they are part of the same class.
The different and distinct provisions applicable to each of these classes cannot be said to be violative of principle of equality.
Furthermore, it is in the wisdom of the legislature to alter or amend laws as per the need of the times.
The court cannot sit in appeal over such legislative wisdom and direct the legislature to amend or frame law in a particular manner to regulate the terms of appointment of a particular class.
Hardly, a mandamus could lie for the purpose of legislative act.
5.
As far as the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court is concerned, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Apex Court enunciated the principle that where a provision has become arbitrary and unreasonable as a result of lapse of time and offenses the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, that would be a fit case for the concerned authorities to consider amendments.
In the present case, no element of arbitrariness and discrimination is introduced by mere lapse of time.
6.
No merit.
7.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.