RL Anand, J - By this judgment we dispose of L.P.A Nos. 1408 of 1989 (PGI Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT Chandigarh) and 1475 of 1989 (Kewal Krishan v. PGI Chandigarh and others) as both the Letters Patent Appeals have arisen from one judgment dated 2nd June, 1989 passed in C.W.P.
No. 3255 filed by the PGI Chandigarh against the award dated 24.6.93 passed by the Labour Court, Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh.
It may be mentioned at the first instance that the Labour Court while allowing the reference made at the instance of Shri Kewal Krishan modified the punishment awarded by the punishing authority and stopped four annual grade increments of Shri Kewal Krishan workman without cumulative effect and ordered for the reinstatement of the woman into service with full back wages.
The learned Single Judge further awarded punishment to the workman (Shri Kewal Krishan) by observing that he would not be entitled to the back wages upto the date of the enforcement of the award.
However, he would be entitled to the backwages from the date of filing of the writ petition.
Both the parties, i.e., the PGI as well as Shri Kewal Krishan were not satisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge and have come in the present two appeals.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Shri Kewal Krishan was appointed as a Clerk in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (for short 'the PGI') on 1121960.
On 141977 a sum of Rs. 7509/- was allegedly received by him.
Out of this amount a sum of Rs. 2400/- was entrusted to him by Dr. AN Gupta, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaeocology, which was received by way of donation from someone.
This amount of Rs. 2400/- was not deposited.
However, the rest of the amount collected on that day was deposited.
In a letter dated July 8, 1977 Shri Kewal Krishan workman allegedly admitted his fault and deposited the amount of Rs. 2400/-.
During the course of reconciliation of the amount credited in the State Bank of India, Medical Education Branch, Chandigarh, the shortage of Rs. 2400/- was detected.
Consequently, upon the discovery of the shortage, an inquiry under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, was initiated against him.
His explanation was called.
The reply submitted by the workman was not considered satisfactory, and he was charge-sheeted for the embezzlement.
The workman participated in the inquiry proceedings but the Inquiry Officer found him guilty of the charges levelled against him.
As a consequence, his services were ordered to be terminated.
The workman issued a demand notice and the matter was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
3.
The stand of the workman was that he never embezzled the amount.
Rather he was forced to deposit the alleged embezzled amount.
The defence taken by the workman was found weak by the Inquiry Officer, who held him guilty of the allegations.
The Labour Court while affirming the findings of the Inquiry Officer against the workman held that in view of the circumstances that the workman had put in a service of about 23 years and that he had also deposited the embezzled amount, the punishment of his termination from service was not proportionate to the charges levelled against him.
The Labour Court also held that the punishment awarded to the workman was highly excessive and harsh and by invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, it was ordered that four annual grade increments of Shri Kewal Krishan be stopped without cumulative effect with effect from the year 1977, which in the view of the Labour Court would meet the ends of justice.
4.
Aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court, the PGI filed C.W.P.
No. 3255 of 1983.
The learned Single Judge, however, held as follows:-  ".....
The litigation is going on since 1977, so it would be appropriate to exercise jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and to modify the Award of the Labour Court in the quantum of punishment.
In addition to the punishment awarded by respondent No. 1 to the workman, he would also not be entitled to the backwages upto the date of enforcement of the Award by respondent No. 1.
The workman-respondent would, however, be entitled to the backwages from the date of filing the present writ petition in this Court."
5.
We have heard Shri Arun Nehra, Advocate, on behalf of the PGI, and Shri RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, with Ms. Aarti Gupta, Advocate, on behalf of Shri Kewal Krishan-workman, and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
First of all we would like to dispose of L.P.A. No. 1408 of 1989 filed by the PGI and the main thrust of the argument of the learned counsel appearing for the PGI was that the Labour Court was not justified in invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and could not substitute its own punishment over the punishment which was awarded by the punishing authority and that the award given by the Labour Court suffers from irreparable vices.
It was also submitted that the case in hand was a case of embezzlement amounting to Rs. 2400/- on the part of the workman and his action in no manner could be justified and no lenient view could be taken in his case.
In short it was submitted that the punishment which was awarded by the punishing authority was not only adequate but could be the only punishment which could be awarded specially for Kewal Krishan- workman, who committed misappropriation and embezzlement while working in a public institution like the PGI  7.
On the contrary it was argued by the counsel appearing on behalf of Shri Kewal Krishan-workman that the Labour Court had rightly and properly exercised the jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and that the discretion which has been exercised on sound judicial principles should not be lightly interfered until and unless the High Court feels in the writ jurisdiction that the findings of the Labour Court were perverse.
In the present case the findings were not perverse.
Rather it was duly appreciated by the Labour Court that the workman had put in 23 years unblemished service in the PGI and the punishment awarded by the punishing authority was irrational, excessive and did not commensurate with the allegations and, therefore, it could not be lightly interfered.
The learned counsel further submitted that the learned Single Judge was not justified in further imposing the punishment on the workman by ordering that Shri Kewal Krishan-workman would also not be entitled to the backwages upto the date of the enforcement of the award, but would be entitled to the backwages from the date of the filing of the present writ petition.
In the opinion of the counsel the learned Single Judge while exercising the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India could not interfere or modify the findings of the Labour Court in the matter of punishment.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties we are of the considered view that both the L.P.As.
are devoid of any merit.
Under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act the Labour Court has the power to set aside the order of discharge, dismissal or termination and could direct reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit and can give such other relief to the workman, including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case may require.
A perusal of Section 11-A of Industrial Disputes Act would show that if the Labour Court is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it has the power to modify the punishment by relying on the materials on record.
The learned Labour Court studied the implications of these allegations.
It also took into consideration the extent of embezzled amount and also the factum that the embezzlement was of temporary nature because the workman has deposited the alleged embezzled amount.
The Labour Court also took into conderation the total period of service put in by the workman and his past record.
Once there is a proper appreciation of the evidence on the part of the Labour Court when it stopped four annual grade increments of the workman without cumulative effect, it was a reasonable punishment in lieu of the order of termination.
Also we are not interested to interfere in the findings of the learned Single Judge because Article 226 gives ample powers to the High Court to rescind or modify the punishment which had been awarded by the Labour Court.
The learned Single Judge had given cogent reasons in his judgment when he thought it proper not to remand the case to the Tribunal with a view to re-examine the question of quantum of punishment being an old matter as the litigation was going on since 1977.
We do not find any error of jurisdiction on the part of the learned Single Judge when he exercised his powers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and modified the award of the Labour Court in the quantum of punishment.
9.
In support of the appeal of his client and while attacking the judgment of the learned Single Judge Shri RS Mittal, learned counsel appearing for Shri Kewal Krishan-workman, relied upon two authorities of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Management of Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore v. Mohd.
Usman and another, AIR 1984 SC 321, and Jitendra Singh Rathore v. Shri Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd and another, AIR 1984 SC 976, and submitted that once the Labour Court after evaluating gravity of misconduct holding that punishment of termination is disproportionately heavy and reducing it to stoppage of increments by modifying the punishment awarded by the punishing authority, no interference could be plausible on the part of the High Court.
We have the occasion to go through both the authorities and find that both the authorities are distinguishable on facts.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has not laid down that in no circumstance the High Court while exercising the powers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India could interfere into the findings of the Labour Court when it has modified the punishment awarded by the punishing authority.
Rather the principle of interference has been recognised but only with a stipulation that there could be some important legal principle, as laid down in Management of Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore v. Mohd.
Usman and another, AIR 1984 SC 321.
The other authority, i.e., Jitendra Singh Rathore v. Shri Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd, AIR 1984 SC 976, is again distinguishable, because in the cited case the High Court did not record a finding that there was a loss of confidence of the employer and there was no indication in the judgment of the High Court as to how many years of service the employee had put in and how many years of service was still left under the Standing Order However, in the present case the learned Single Judge took that into consideration while modifying the award of the Labour Court and held that litigation between the parties was going on since 1977 and the workman had already put in 23 years of service and there was no propriety to remand the case to the Labour Court.
However, Hon'ble the Supreme Court did recognise that under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act a wide discretion has been vested in the Labour Court in the matter of awarding relief according to the circumstances of the case.
In the present case learned Single Judge did not substitute the punishment than the one awarded by the Labour Court.
10.
Our attention has also been invited by the Shri RSMittal to Management of Craigmore Estate, Kullakamby Post, Nilgiris Dist.
v. Labour Court, Coimbatore and another, 1981(2) Labour Law Journal 23; Shri Ganeshar Aluminium Factory C/o.
Jeewanlal (1929) Limited v. Industrial Tribunal, Madras and another, 1982(1) Labour Law Journal 159; and Management of Binny Limited v. Additional Labour Court, Madras and another, 1979(2) Labour Law Journal 280, and the consensus of all these authorities is that under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act the Labour Court while holding misconduct having been proved against the workman, when came to the conclusion that the punishment was disproportionate to the proved charges, had powers to reduce the punishment, as has rightly been done in the present case by the Labour Court when it stopped four annual grade increments of the workman without cumulative effect.
These authorities are helpful to us in adjudicating the controversy in the present two letters patent appeals.
11.
Shri Arun Nehra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the PGI, cited band of authorities of this Court as well as the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Jitendra Singh Rathore v. Shri Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd and another, AIR 1984 SC 976; The State of Haryana and others v. Amar Nath Bansal, 1993(4) SCT 734 (P&H) : 1993(4) Recent Services Judgments 427; Workmen of Bharat Fritz Warner (P) Ltd v. Bharat Frilz Warner (P) Ltd and another, 1990(2) S.L.R.
20; The Depot Manager, APSRTC Bus Depot, Warangal v. DS Rao and another,1995(7) S.L.R.
432; and M/s Hindustan Steels Ltd, Rourkela v. AK Roy and others, AIR 1970 SC 1401; and a judgment dated 1991988 in C.W.P.
No. 3788 of 1986 (Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh, and another), and vehemently submitted that the present is a case of loss of confidence on the part of the Management in the workman, who committed embzzlement to the tune of Rs. 2,400/- and in these circumstances the Labour Court was not justified in modifying the punishment by stopping four annual grade increments of the workman without cumulative effect.
He submitted that under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the High Court has the power to interfere in the finding of the Labour Court passed under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and that the learned Single Judge though exercised that power, had not interfered in the award of the Labour Court by restoring the punishment which was awarded to the workman by the Labour Court.
12.
We have the occasion to go through the citations relied upon by Shri Arun Nehra, learned counsel for the PGI, and we are of the opinion that there is no dispute with the proposition of law that the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can modify the punishment than the one awarded by the Labour Court.
However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that every case has its own facts.
With the introduction of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act the concept of penology has gone a sea change.
The learned Single Judge in his judgment had taken care of all the factors such as the length of service of the workman, the gravity of the allegations, especially the fact that the parties were litigating since 1977 and thereafter ordered that the workman would not be entitled to the backwages upto the date of the enforcement of the award, but would be entitled to the backwages from the date of the writ petition itself.
Once the discretion has been used in a proper manner by the learned Single Judge, it cannot be said to be perverse.
We are not inclined to interfere with the well reasoned judgment dated 2nd June, 1989.
13.
Resultantly, we do not find any merit in these appeals.
Thus we affirm the findings and observations of the learned Single Judge.
Both the appeals are dismissed with no order as to costs.