MM Kumar, J - This is a regular second appeal filed on behalf of the State of Haryana against the judgment and decree passed by the learned District Judge, Kurukshetra dated 741998.
The learned District Judge in his judgment has given declaration that the plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter to be referred as, `plaintiff') is entitled for interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of Rs. 35,851/- w.e.f.
1971 when the increments fell due and were wrongfully withheld by the defendants-appellants (hereinafter to be referred as, `defendants').
The learned District Judge also awarded the costs of litigation to the plaintiff.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the learned District Judge, the present appeal has been filed.
2.
The plaintiff was appointed as Craft Teacher on 13.8.1968 in the school run by the Panchayat Samiti under the control of Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Shahbad.
She was given regular grade somewhere in 1970.
However, from 1971 to 1976 her annual grade increments were not given for the reasons best known to the defendants.
The plaintiff made various representations and eventually served a legal notice on the Executive Officer of the Panchayat Samiti and her case was finalised on 10111991.
According to the settlement, the arrears of Rs. 35,851/- was to be paid in three instalments.
The last instalment was paid to her in the year 1994.
The plaintiff urged that the amount of five increments due to her was wrongly withheld without any rhyme or reason and she was entitled to interest.
She filed civil suit on 23.12.1995.
Her claim was decreed by the learned Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Kurukshetra and interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of Rs. 35,851/- was awarded from the date when this amount has become due till the actual date of payment.
3.
Dis-satisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the trial court, the defendants preferred an appeal before the learned District Judge, Kurukshetra.
Affirming the findings recorded by the trial court, the learned District Judge held as under :-  "After going through all aspects of the case, I am of the firm opinion that no case is made out for interference in appeal, for a number of reasons.
It cannot be lost sight that by accepting the claim of the plaintiff regarding the grant of five increments from 1971 to 1976, the defendants created a right in favour of the plaintiff to ask for interest on the delayed payment of these increments, which were illegally withheld by the defendants.
Nothing has come on record to show or suggest that these five increments for the period 1971 to 1976 were with-held on account of some penal order or that the plaintiff was not entitled to these increments.
From the facts and circumstances of this case, it becomes absolutely clear that defendants realising their mistake, which they have been committing ever since the year 1971 to 1976, in the year 1993 made the payment on the basis of affidavit and on the basis that arrears shall be paid to the plaintiff in three instalments.
This consent on the part of the plaintiff is no consent in the eyes of law, because under the law the plaintiff was entitled to the grant of annual increment on the due dates which fell in the years 1971 to 1976.
In view of the facts and circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the payment of arrears amounting to Rs. 35,851/- was not lawfully due to the plaintiff.
In these circumstances, while with- holding this amount for a number of years, the defendants used this amount for other purposes to the detriment of the plaintiff and now they cannot be allowed to take a plea that the plaintiff is estopped from filing the suit by her own act and conduct, under the garb of undertaking having been obtained from the plaintiff.
In my opinion, the learned trial Court rightly awarded interest at the rate of 12% per annum on this amount of Rs. 35,851/- from the date when this amount had become due till actual date of payment.
In these circumstances, finding no merit in any of the submissions of the learned Government Pleader as noticed in para No. 7 at page 5 of this judgment, I find no force in this appeal and dismiss the same, leaving the parties to bear their own costs."
4.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned District Judge, Kurukshetra, the State of Haryana has preferred the present appeal.
The only question which requires consideration in this appeal is as to whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim interest on the delayed payment of five increments which were wrongfully withheld from the years 1971 to 1976 ?
5.
I have heard Shri JP Dhull, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana for the appellants and with his assistance have perused the record.
6.
It is admitted fact that there was no justification for withholding the five increments of the respondent from 1971 to 1976.
Therefore, an illegality committed by the appellants was corrected on 10111991 when a liability of Rs. 35,851/- was conceded and the amount was paid in three instalments.
The last instalment was paid in 1994.
In these circumstances, I do not think that the findings given by both the courts below call for interference or suffer from any illegality.
7.
The question whether interest can be awarded on the delayed payment of pensionary benefits stands settled.
In the case of AS Randhawa v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) SLR 617 : 1997(3) SCT 468 (P&H)(FB) a Full Bench of this Court held that a writ petition for claim of interest on the delayed payment of pensionary benefits is maintainable and generally interest at the rate of 12% should be ordered unless there are circumstances warranting grant of higher rate of interest.
The principle for grant of interest on the delayed payment of pensionary benefits has been founded on the question whether pension could be claimed as a right.
It has been held to be a right to property under Article 300-A of the Constitution in a catena of judgments.
The Full Bench in AS Randhawa's case (supra) followed the Supreme Court judgments in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar and others, 1971 SC 1409; State of Punjab v. Iqbal Singh, 1976(2) SLR 525; State of Kerala and others v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356 and observed as under :-  "Thus, a right to pension has been held to be a right in property and till the Constitution (Forty Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978 was brought into force, property right was a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
After the enforcement of the said amendment property is no longer a part of fundamental rights and has been provided for as a constitutional right in Article 300-A and in terms thereof no person can be deprived of his property save by authority of law."
8.
The question whether the plaintiff was entitled to increments or not has to be considered by reference to the rules applicable to her service namely the Punjab Samities and Zila Parishad Services Rules, 1965 (for brevity, `the Rules').
According to Rule 3 of the Rules the service is to comprise the posts shown in Appendix `A' to the Rules.
Entry 29 of Appendix `A' deals with the post of Craft Teacher.
Rule 15 of the Rules provides that the Punjab Civil Services Rules (for brevity, C.S.R.)
would govern the service of the employees in matters not expressly covered by the Rules.
Rule 15 reads as under :-  "15(1) In matters not expressly covered by these rules or any other rules framed under the Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Act, 1961, the members of the Service shall be governed by the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules as amended from time to time in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the aforesaid Act and the Rules made thereunder : Provided that for words "Government" and "Government Servants" wherever they occur in the Punjab Civil Services Rules the words "Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, as the case may be", and "member of the Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zila Parishads Service" shall be deemed to have been substituted, respectively.
(2) The competent authority may construe the provisions of the rules referred to in sub-rule (1) above with such adaptations not affecting the substance thereof as may be necessary or proper in order to adapt them to the matter before such authority; are mitigating circumstances which may impel the Court to lower the rate of interest, the interest at the rate of 15 to 20% per annum can be awarded.
In so far as the legal aspect with regard to awarding of interest on delayed payment is concerned, it stands settled : Provided that if any doubt arises regarding the adaptations with which the said rules should be construed, the matter shall be referred to the Government and the decision of the Government on such reference shall be final.
Explanation :- Competent Authority means Executive Officer of the Panchayat Samiti in the case of Panchayat Samiti and Secretary, Zila Parishad in the case of Zila Parishad."
9.
There is no provision in the Rules for payment of increment and, therefore, the provision of C.S.R.
has to be examined.
According to Rule 47 of the CSR Volume I Part I an increment is ordinarily to be drawn as a matter of course, unless it is withheld.
Rule 47 of the CSR reads as under :-  "47.
An increment shall ordinarily be drawn as a matter of course, unless it is withheld.
An increment may be withheld from a Government employee by a competent authority if his conduct has not been good or his work has not been satisfactory.
In ordering the withholding of an increment, the withholding authority shall state the period for which it is withheld and whether the postponement shall have the effect of postponing future increments."
10.
It is thus crystal clear that the plaintiff was entitle under Rule 47 of the CSR to draw increment as a matter of course.
In certain cases of misconduct increments could also be withheld but the present case is not the one belonging to that category.
In those cases charge sheet is issued and after holding enquiry, then as a punishment the increments are stopped according to the provisions of Haryana Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
11.
There was thus no justification to withhold the five annual grade increments of the plaintiff.
The claim of interest by the plaintiff on those increments from the date they fell due is just and fair.
In my opinion, award of interest at the rate of 12% is on lower side as the action was patently against Rule 47 of the CSR However, I do not intend to interfere in the award of rate of interest to the plaintiff because no appeal has been preferred by the plaintiff nor any one has put in appearance on her behalf before me.
Therefore, there is no ground to interfere with the judgments and decree passed by the courts below.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.