RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions i.e. C.W.P.
No. 14412 of 2001, titled Roshan Lal v. State of Haryana and othersand C.W.P.
No. 14533 of 2001, titled Baney Singh v. State of Haryana and others, as in the opinion of this Court both the writ petitions can be disposed of by a judgment as common question of law and fact has arisen in both these writ petitions.
2.
For the purpose of facts, I am taking the same from C.W.P.
No. 14412 of 2001 : 2002(1) SCT 540 (P&H), Roshan Lal v. State of Haryana and others, in which the petitioner has made a prayer that directions be issued to the respondents to allow him to continue with the work against his place of posting unless the vacancy is needed for appointing regularly selected person of his category after exhausting all the vacancies of Workshop Instructor in the State of Haryana because the petitioner was selected on merit and appointed on daily wage basis against the regular sanctioned post on the recommendation of the selection committee constituted by the respondents themselves in view of the judgment of Polu Ram v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) RSJ 152 and Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) RSJ 708 and State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : JT 1992(5) SC 179.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was selected and appointed as Workshop Instructor on the recommendation of the Selection Committee on 1332000 for a period of three months but term was extended from time to time.
Last extension was given to the petitioner on 1682001 for a period of one month.
The petitioner started apprehending termination of his service with effect from 16.9.2001 because the similarly situated persons who were appointed on daily wage basis have been shunted out from the service and they have been replaced by another set of ad hoc/temporary employees in violation of the law.
Thus, the case of the petitioners in short is that till a regular employee is appointed the petitioners who were working on daily wage basis and who were appointed by the Selection Committee be allowed to be continued till regular selectees come.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and they have denied the allegations.
It is stated that in the Department of Technical Education Haryana regular appointments to Class III posts including those of Workshop Instructors are made on the recommendations of Haryana State Staff Selection Commission.
However, the Principals of the Government Polytechnics are authorised to engage the skilled staff on daily wages.
Since a regular Workshop Instructor was not appointed through the Haryana State Staff Selection Commission, the petitioner was engaged with the assignment in the workshop for assisting and for looking after the minor maintenance work.
Otherwiswe the petitioner does not fulfil the eligibility qualification for the post of Workshop Instructor.
He was engaged as stop-gap arrangement for assisting the Superintendent Workshop in the workshop training to the students and for looking after the day to day minor work of the institution.
The petitioner has not been issued any kind of appointment letter as he was appointed as stop-gap arrangement.
Moreover, the petitioner was discontinued with effect from 15.9.2001 on the arrival of qualified apprentice trainees, as per the Apprentices Act, 1961.
The petitioner was kept engaged as and when required during the tenure from 1332000 to 15.9.2001.
The two apprentice trainees diploma holders have been placed in Government Polytechnic for Women, Faridabad for a year under the Apprenticeship Act Scheme and after the sanction is approved by the BAT Kanpur.
Moreover, a Lab Attendant has also been transferred to Government Polytechnic for Women, Faridabad.
They are sufficient to serve the purpose.
As per the Apprentice Act 1961, the answering respondent is bound to keep any Diploma holder (fresher) if he applies.
The petitioner has neither qualified for the post nor appointed by following the due procedure and as such no right accrues to the petitioner.
A rejoinder was filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated his allegations made in the petition.
5.
I have heard Ms. Deepika Verma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Mr. Vijay Dahiya, AAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The short point for determination is whether any right accrues to the petitioner so as to continue till the regular selectee comes.
7.
Admittedly, no appointment letter of the petitioner has been placed on the record.
The petitioners also do not fulfil the eligibility qualification for the post of Workshop Instructor.
Their appointment was just a stop-gap arrangement.
It is the stand of the respondents that two apprentice training diploma holders have been placed in Government Polytechnic for Women, Faridabad for a year under the Apprenticeship Act Scheme after sanction is approved by BAT Kanpur.
Moreover, the Lab Attendant has also been transferred to Government Polytechnic for Women, Faridabad from other Government Polytechnic.
As per the Apprenticeship Act, 1961, the answering respondent is bound to keep any diploma holder fresher if he applies.
In this view of the matter there is no merit in the case of the petitioners who were just unqualified persons and they were appointed as a stop-gap arrangement.
In the preference of eligible persons to be appointed as Workshop Instructorsthe petitioners have no right to the post.
8.
Faced with this difficulty the learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon AIR 1976 SC 66, The Employees State Insurance Corporation and another v. The Tata Engineering and Co and submits that apprentice is not an employee within the meaning of Section 2(9) of the Apprenticeship Act, 1961.
The judgment is not helpful to the petitioner.
The ratio is that where under the terms and conditions of an agreement under which apprentices are engaged by a Company, they are mere trainees for a particular period for a distinct purpose and Company is not bound to employ them in their work after the training period is over the such apprentices cannot be said to be employed in the work of the Company or in connection with the work of the Company.
Moreover, when they are not given wages within the meaning of that terms as defined in section 2(22) of the Act.
The interpretation given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court was only a limited with regard to the Apprenticeship Act and with regard to the Employee State Insurance Act.
It is not applicable to the facts in hand.
In fact, the petitioners are being replaced by qualified persons either on appointment or on transfer.
9.
It was then submitted on behalf of the petitioner that since the petitioners have attained sufficient experience in the post, therefore, their services could not be terminated.
In support of his contention, the counsel for the petitioner relied upon AIR 1990 Supreme Court 371, Bhagwan Parshad v. Smt. Bhagwati Devi and others.
In my opinion, this judgment goes against the petitioner.
Firstly, it is not a case for equal pay for equal work.
Secondly, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to observe that initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different post is undoubtedly a factor which is to be reckoned with at the time of the initial entry into the service.
The petitioners were not qualified.
They were not possessing the requisite qualifications.
Hence they could not say that their services should not be dispensed with, with the arrival of the trained apprentices and with the transfer of qualified persons.
Moreover, in the said cited judgment, it was also observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that when daily rated workers were allowed to work for a considerable length of time in such a situation, it will be a hard and harsh to deny them the benefit of confirmation irrespective of the fact that they lacked the prescribed educational qualifications.
It will depend on facts of each case.
In the present case, the petitioners have not attained the sufficient experience as Workshop Instructors.
In this view of the matter, this judgment will also not come to the rescue of the petitioners.
10.
The counsel for the petitioner then relied upon JT 1992(5) SC 179 State of Haryana, and others v. Piara Singh and others and submitted that ad hoc or temporary employees cannot be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employee.
He must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
This is necessary to avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
The judgment is again not helpful to the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the present case, it is categorical stand of the respondents that trainees diploma holders have been employed in the institution for a year under the Apprenticeship Act Scheme.
Moreover, a lab attendant has also been transferred.
They are not ad-hocees.
In this view of the matter, the petitioners have no case.
Resultantly, this court is of the considered opinion that both the writ petitions are devoid of any merit and deserve to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.