SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner was working as Junior Engineer with the respondents.
He retired on 31121998.
Two charge sheets were issued against the petitioner on 29121998 and 30121998, annexures P/6 and P/7, respectively.
The first charge sheet includes the charge of not handing over the charge of the store of the section which resulted a shortage of store amounting to Rs. 61,782/-.
The second charge sheet includes the charge of not handing over the charge properly when he was transferred causing loss amounting to Rs. 378692.
The punishment orders are at Annexures P/8 and P/10.
By order annexure P/8, dated July 2, 1999, recovery of Rs. 378692 was ordered to be made while by order dated 26101999, annexure P/10, Rs. 61782/- alongwith interest was ordered to be recovered.
It is mentioned in the orders that the charge sheets were given to the petitioner but he has chosen not to file reply.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the amount could not be recovered after retirement and that though the charge sheets were given, no departmental enquiry was carried out.
The charge sheets were for enquiry against the petitioner, under rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
The rule envisages the enquiry before imposition of major penalty.
So far as minor penalty is concerned, the rule is Rule 8.
For imposing minor penalty, adequate opportunity of making representation is to be given.
2.
In the present case, the petitioner did not reply to the charges against him.
It may be noted that recovery of the pecuniary loss, caused by negligence or breach of orders, is a minor penalty provided at Sr. No. (1)(iv) in Rule 4 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, applicable to the State of Haryana.
It is also not disputed in this case that no departmental enquiry as provided for major penalty was carried out.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner having been retired, only rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II (as applicable to the State of Haryana) shall be applicable for recovering the amount for pension.
Rule 22(b) reads as under :-  "Rule 22(b) The Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if the pensioner is found in departmental or judicial proceedings to have been guilty of grave misconduct or to have caused pecuniary loss to Government by misconduct or negligence, during his service including service rendered on re-employment after retirement : Provided that :- (1) x x x (2) x x x (3) x x the Public Service Commission shall be consulted before final orders are passed."
4.
Learned counsel has cited the case of State of UP and another v. Shri Krishna Pandey, reported as 1996(3) SCT 418 (SC) : 1996(2) SLR 518.
In that case, the Supreme Court has held that in the absence of specific rule, disciplinary proceedings cannot be continued after retirement and proceedings for withholding of pension for negligence or causing pecuniary loss caused to Government can be initiated only if the same are initiated before the lapse of four years from the date on which the event of misconduct had taken place.
The rule under consideration before the Supreme Court was Rule 351-E applicable to the Civil servants of the State of UP This being so, it will not be proper to give benefit to the petitioner of the lapse of four years before which the proceedings were taken against the petitioner, as no such provision applicable to the present case is shown to me.
5.
Learned State Counsel has cited the cse of Gurbax Singh Bhamra v. State of Punjab, reported as 1996(1) SCT 606 (P&H) : 1996(1) RSJ 236.
It is also regarding Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules and the recovery from the petitioner, in that case.
This is a judgment of the Single Bench of this Court.
In that case, the plaintiff was charge-sheeted on the ground that he committed negligence by giving his personal key to the chest clerk.
In that case on receipt of reply to the chargesheet, an enquiry was initiated and the plaintiff was asked to make statement by the Investigating Officer and ultimately, the matter was dropped and instead of enquiry proceedings, an order for recovery was made holding the plaintiff liable for loss of the amount to the extent of 60%.
This was challenged.
It has been held that punishment of recovery is a minor penalty.
In that case, there was no attempt to disown factual aspect of the matter and hence the appeal was dismissed.
However, it can also be noted that the case has not discussed the effect of retirement of the government servant.
6.
There is a judgment of learned Single Judge of this Court, in the case of MS Bains v. The State of Punjab and others, reported as 1996(2) SCT 829 (P&H) : 1996(2) SLR 550.
In that case also, the petitioner was charge sheeted at the fag end of the service career and he challenged rule 22(b) making distinction between retiring Government servant and retired Government servant.
Learned Single Judge of this Court held that the purpose of the limitations on initiating inquiry against retired Government servant is to avoid unnecessary harassment to the pensioner and classification in Rule 22(b) between retiring Government employee and retired Government employee is valid.
7.
In the case of Gurbax Singh (supra), the matter was ultimately dropped and instead of enquiry proceedings, an order of recovery was made.
It was held by the learned Single Judge that there was no attempt to disown the factual aspect of the matter and the appeal was dismissed.
In the cse of MS Bains (supra) after the issue of charge sheet, reply was received and the matter was again examined and the Government took the decision to appoint an Enquiry Officer after giving personal hearing to the petitioner.
The petitioner, in that cse, had prayed for quashing of charge sheet and order relating to the appointment of Enquiry Officer for holding enquiry against the petitioner contending that there was delay.
8.
The position to be seen in the present case is that the petitioner was issued charge sheets under the rule providing for procedure for major punishment.
It is Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Service (P&A) Rules.
The enquiry was not carried out after the charge sheets were issued, though the petitioner did not reply to the charge sheets.
According to Rule 7(2), the delinquent is required, within a reasonable time, to state in writing whether he admits truth of all or any of the charges and to state his explanation for defence, if any, and if the competent authority is not satisfied with the explanation, may direct that enquiry shall be held against him in which evidence shall be heard on the charges whcih were not admitted.
9.
In the case of State of UP v. TP Lal Srivastava, reported in 1997(1) SCT 108, it has been held by the Supreme Court that if no reply to the charge sheet was submitted by the delinquent, the employer is not absolved of its duty to hold an ex parte enquiry.
It has further been held therein as under :-  "Since the respondent has avoided to submit the reply, he has foregone his right to submit his reply.
Nonetheless, the appellants are not absolved of the duty to hold an ex parte enquiry to find out whether or not the charge has been proved.
In the event of the Enquiry Officer finds that the charge is proved, he would submit his report to the disciplinary authority.
This disciplinary authority should communicate the copy of the enquiry report to the respondent and seek an explanation for the proposed action thereon.
If the respondent submits any explanation the same may be taken into consideration and appropriate order may be passed according to law.
Until then, the respondent must be deemed to be under suspension."
(emphasis supplied) In the present case, the respondents having resorted to the procedure for major penalty, could not impose the punishment of recovery from the petitioner, without holding any enquiry, on the ground that no reply was filed by the petitioner.
The petitioner cannot be faulted if he remained under the impression that enquiry would be carried out against him when he could have been (got ?)
chance to challenge the evidence led against him and lead his evidence, if necessary.
The petitioner is found guilty because he did not reply to the charge sheet.
The petitioner by the issuance of the charge sheet, was given the impression that the enquiry was to be held.
The respondents then could not absolve themselves from holding enquiry only because the enquiry was not required.
The question of interpretation of rule 22(b) would not arise in the present case at this stage, and it would have arisen only if the enquiry was held against the petitioner.
Moreover, the impugned orders of punishment, Annexures P/8 and P/10 do not stage the mode of recovery.
10.
As a result, this petition deserves to be allowed and it is hence allowed.
The impugned orders of recovery and the appellate orders annexures P/8, P/10, P/14 and P/15 respectively are set-aside.
The respondents are, however, at liberty to proceed with the enquiry from the stage it was dropped.
Petition allowed.