GS Singhvi, J - This is the second round of litigation forced upon the petitioners on account of refusal of the respondents to allow him to take examination of the MBBS 1st Professional Course and allow him to appear in the 1st and 2nd Semesters Examinations being held by the respondents.
2.
The petitioner who belongs to a reserved category being a ward of ex- serviceman competed for admission to the MBBS Course.
He secured good marks so as to become entitled to be admitted against the seats reserved for wards of the ex-servicemen.
However, on account of a totally faulty implementation of the policy of giving admission to the candidates, the petitioner was deprived of admission.
He filed C.W.P.
No. 11136 of 1994 in this Court and sought a mandamus to the effect that the respondents be directed to give him admission against the reserved seat and also that the meritorious candidates belonging to reserve category should be given admission against the general seats.
His writ petition came to be decided on 24101994 along with C.W.P.
No. 11053 of 1994 (Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) 1995(2) SCT 65(P&H).
The Court accepted the plea raised by the petitioners and directed the official respondents to first make admissions against the general seats and then against the reserved seats.
The Court further held that if a candidate belonging to reserved category gets admission against the general seats on the basis of his over-all merit, he shall not be treated to have been admitted against a reserved seat.
This order was challenged in Special Leave Petitions No. 616 to 621 of 1995.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court dismissed the Special Leave Petitions on 1741995 after giving notice to the parties and hearing their counsel.
3.
In the meantime, the petitioner was admitted at SRT Medical College, Amba Jogai on the basis of his merit in All India Competition.
He studied in that College upto 2051995 and thereafter joined at Government Medical College, Amritsar on the basis of the admission given to him by the Principal of the said College vide letter No. 15406.
For the purpose of translating his admission at Medical College, Amritsar into reality the petitioner got himself released from SRT Medical College, Amba Jogai.
After joining the Medical College, Amritsar, the petitioner has regularly prosecuted his studies and has attended 100% theory and practical classes and has completed his entire course of studies.
The petitioner has averred that notwithstanding this, now the authorities of the College have declined to accept his application form for the 1st and 2nd semesters examination.
These examinations were to be held in the month of November and December, 1995.
The petitioner says that this decision has been taken by the respondents on the ground that he has not completed the requisite period of studies in the Medical College, Amritsar.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the decision taken by the respondents on the ground that he cannot be made to suffer due to the illegal action taken by the respondents in denying admission to him when it was due to him and that in any case he has already completed the course by studying at SRT Medical College, Amba Jogai and his admission to MBBS Course at Medical College, Amritsar should be treated as continuing with the admission given to similarly situated persons.
4.
The respondents have opposed the writ petition on the ground that the petitioner has not completed 18 months of studies and 75% attendance in theory and practical classes so as to become eligible to appear in the 1st and 2nd semester examinations as per the provisions contained in the Guru Nanak Dev University Calender, 1991 Volume-II.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioner got admission at Medical College, Amritsar only on 2651995 and he does not have any right to appear in the 1st semester examination or 2nd semester examination without completing the course.
The respondents have relied on letter dated 19101995 written by Prof. and Heads of the Department of (sic), Biochemistry and Physiology of the Medical College, Amritsar to support their assertion that the petitioner has not completed the required attendance and the duration of the course.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the percentage of the lectures are required to be calculated with reference to the date of admission of the candidate and not from the commencement of the course and if that is done, the petitioner would be deemed to have completed the requisite course of studies and attended the requisite percentage of the classes (theory and practical).
6.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner should not be penalised for the fault of the respondents because even after the judgment of the High Court dated 24101994, the respondents took seven months to give admission to him and they did not comply with the High Court's order for this long period.
7.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for respondents 1 to 3, argued that the requirement of study for 18 months and 75% attendance has to be rigorously enforced for medical education and there should be no dilution of the standard because that would be injurious to the larger public interest.
Mrs. Tuli contended that even though the petitioner may have got admission to the course under the Court's order, he cannot be permitted to appear in the examination without fulfilling the condition of eligibility prescribed in the University Calender.
8.
In view of the uncontested facts, namely, that the petitioner was entitled to be admitted against the seats reserved for wards of ex-servicemen and the respondents unlawfully denied admission to the petitioner for a period of almost one year, we have now to see whether the respondents are justified in denying permission to the petitioner to appear in the examination on the ground that he did not complete 18 months course and 75% attendance.
9.
In view of the fact that the action taken by the respondents in not properly implementing the policy of reservation, it cannot but be said that the respondents were responsible for depriving the petitioner of his right to be admitted to MBBS Course on the basis of merit secured by him at the competitive examination.
If the respondents had acted in accordance with the constitutional provisions, the petitioner would have been admitted as early as in July, 1994.
Even after the acceptance of his writ petition by the High Court on 20101994, it took almost seven months to the respondents to issue order for admission of the petitioner.
This being the position, we are of the opinion that the respondents cannot deny permission to the petitioner to appear in the 1st and 2nd semesters examinations by raising a spacious plea that the petitioner has not completed 18 months course and has not attended 75% theory and practical classes.
In our opinion, once the High Court declared that the implementation of the policy of reservation was faulty, the declaration of the High Court would relate back to the date of the filing of the writ petition which the petitioner had done as early as in July, 1994.
The delay of three months in the decision of the writ petition and subsequent delay occasioned due to the fact that respondents or some others had approached the Supreme Court will not in any manner operate to the deteriment of the petitioner.
With the dismissal of the Special Leave Petitions by the Supreme Court, the declaration granted by the High Court will stand revived and would relate back to the date of the filing of the writ petition and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be treated to have not completed 18 months course.
In regard to the requirement of 75% attendance of theory and practical classes also, we are of the opinion that the respondents cannot take advantage of their own wrong in preventing the petitioner from attending the theory and practical classes till 2651995.
It would be mockery of justice if the petitioner is penalised and prevented from appearing in the examination merely because for a long period the respondents unlawfully deprived him of an opportunity to attend theory and practical classes.
10.
We may also make a reference to a Division Bench Judgement of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 9489 of 1994 decided on 1991994 (Parminderjeet Singh v. Punjabi University, Patiala etc.) in which a similar point has been examined by this Court in the light of the provisions contained in the Calender of the Punjabi University, Patiala.
Petitioner-Parminderjeet Singh was initially admitted in ANM Magadh Medical College, Gaya.
He joined the said College on 1891991.
In the process of re-allocation, Parminderjeet Singh was allocated to Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot and there he joined on 22111991.
His eligibility to appear at the 1st Professional Examination was questioned by the University on the ground that he did not complete 18 months course.
In C.W.P.
No. 16071 of 1992, the High Court directed the respondents to allow the petitioner to take his First Professional Examination.
Result of the examination qua petitioner- Parminderjeet Singh was withheld during the pendency of the writ petition but he was permitted to appear in the Second Professional Examination of the MBBS Course.
However, while allowing this writ petition on 2751993, the Court directed the University to declare the result and to promote the petitioner to 2nd Professional Course if he had passed in the 1st Professional Examination.
Once again, the petitioner-Parminderjeet Singh was denied permission to appear in the examination of Second Professional Course.
The claim of the petitioner was opposed by the University on the ground that the petitioner had not completed 18 months of course as required by the University Calender.
Reliance was placed on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Punjab and others v. Suchintan and others, 1993(3) SCT 276(SC) : JT 1993(3) SC 727 and of this Court in Jagdeep Singh v. The Punjabi University, Patiala, 1994(2) SCT 451(P&H)(DB) : 1994(2) RSJ 67, and Sajila Sultana v. Panjab University, 1991(2) RSJ 317 and on an order dated 29.7.1994 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 905 of 1994 (Rajinder Kumar v. Punjabi University, Patiala).
This Court examined the provisions of the University Calender and referred to various judgments on which the learned counsel for the University had placed reliance and held as under :-  "Another important aspect of the matter, which deserves to be noticed, in so far as the petitioner is concerned, is that in his previous petition being Civil Writ Petition No. 16071 of 1992, this Court has categorically held that the petitioner was entitled to appear in the First Professional Examination held by the University in January, 1993.
While doing so, the learned Single Judge has taken note of the fact that the other similarly situated candidates, who too have not completed the requisite course, were allowed to appear in the First Professional Examination.
The order passed by the learned Single Judge in the previous writ petition of the petitioner has become final for want of challenge before a Division Bench of the Supreme Court.
It took almost ten days to the University to declare the result after announcement of the order by this Court and another ten days to the college to allow the petitioner to prosecute his studies for the Second Professional MBBS Course.
Once the Court held the petitioner to be eligible for the First Professional Examination, it is logical to hold that the University was in error in refusing the petitioner to appear in the First Professional Examination which commenced in January, 1993.
The University cannot, in our opinion, now take up the defence and come forward with the plea that the petitioner got admission in the Second Professional MBBS Course after a gap of almost two months besides other candidates whose result had been declared in April, 1993.
But for the illegality earlier committed by the respondent-University, the petitioner too would have appeared in the examination without any order from the Court and his result would have also been announced with other candidates.
In that eventuality, there would have been no occasion for the University to question his eligibility."
(emphasis supplied).
11.
On our opinion, the ratio of the judgment in Parminderjeet Singh's case (supra) is fully applicable to the case of the petitioner and we find no reason or justification in the action of the respondents to deny permission to the petitioner to appear in the 1st and 2nd semesters examinations.
Accordingly, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondent-University to permit the petitioner to appear in the 1st and 2nd semesterd examinations of the 1st Professional MBBS Course.
If the petitioner has already appeared in the examination on the basis of interim order passed by this Court, his result shall be declared.
In case he is found to have passed the examination, the respondents are directed to admit the petitioner to the next course and give him all benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.