DS Sinha, J - Heard Shri Parvej Alam Ansari, holding (brief) of Shri H.K.
Singh, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner and Shri KM Sahai, learned Standing Counsel for the State of UP, representing the respondents.
2.
The petitioner, who retired as Block Development Officer of the State of UP on 30th June, 1995, has not been granted retiral benefits for the period commencing from 1st January, 1996, hitherto.
Long back, to be precise, on 31st October, 1995, he approached through his letter for the grant of the retiral benefits.
Later on, the moved representation dated 12th January, 1996 before the respondent No. 3.
A copy of this representation is to be found on record as Annexure 5 to the petition.
Neither the letter nor representation was responded to.
3.
The petitioner, therefore, moved before the respondent No. 3 by representation dated 30th March, 1996, a copy of whereof is Annexure 6 to the petition.
This representation too went unheeded.
Thereafter, the petitioner moved representations dated 3rd June, 1996, 8th July, 1996, 7th September, 1996 and 21st September, 1996, copies whereof are Annexures 7, 8, 9 and 10, respectively.
On these representations also the concerned authorities turned deaf ears.
4.
Eventually, the petitioner approached this Court through instant writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
5.
On 9th January, 1998, while entertaining the petition, the Court, on the request of learned Standing Counsel who had accepted notice on behalf of the respondents, granted four weeks time for filing counter-affidavit.
No counter-affidavit was filed.
Again, 14th July, 2000, on the request of the learned Standing Counsel, the court granted one more and final opportunity to the respondents and granted two weeks' and no more further time for filing counter-affidavit.
6.
The office report dated 31st July, 2000 recorded on order-sheet, indicates that no counter-affidavit has been filed.
Learned Standing Counsel does not dispute this position.
Under the circumstances the Court is left with no choice but to proceed on the assumption that the averments made in the writ petition are correct.
7.
From the averments made in the writ petition, undisputed position that emerges is :  That the petitioner retired on 30th June, 1995 as Block Development Officer; That the requisite formalities for the grant of retiral benefits had been completed by the petitioner; and That the retiral benefits which the petitioner may be entitled have not been granted hitherto.
8.
It cannot be gainsaid that the grant of retiral benefits to an employee of the State is not a matter of grace or charity.
Indeed, he is entitled to retiral benefits as a matter of legally cognizable and judicially enforceable right.
Instant case is a sad commentary of the inaction on the part of the respondents, on account of which the petitioner has been deprived of his lawful dues despite his repeated approaches to the concerned authority.
9.
On the facts and circumstances, notice above, in the opinion of the Court, the stage has arrived for intervention by this Court.
10.
In the result, the petition succeeds and is allowed.
The respondents, jointly and severally, are directed to settle the claim of the petitioner in respect of his retiral benefits and ensure the payment of all the dues to him within a period of three months, to be computed from today.
Shri KM Sahai, learned Standing Counsel for the State of UP in whose presence this order has been passed shall communicate to the respondents promptly.
Petitioner shall also produce before the respondents a certified copy of this order as early as possible.
However, it is made clear that the respondents shall not wait for production of a certified copy of this order by the petitioner and shall initiate action on the information received by them through Shri KM Sahai, learned Standing Counsel of the State of UP  11.
Certified copy of this order may be given to the learned Counsel appearing for the parties within a week, on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.