Y Venkatachalam, J - Invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners herein have filed the present writ petition seeking for a writ of certiorarified mandamus, to call for the records of the first respondent in connection with GOMs.
No. 685 dated 26121989 and to quash the portion of the Order dated 26121989 which discriminated between inter- caste married couples married before 2491986 and to direct the second respondent to forward the names of the petitioners for the purpose of employment and for such further or other orders.
2.
In support of the writ petition, the petitioners herein have filed an affidavit wherein they have narrated all the facts and circumstances that forced them to file the present writ petition and requested this Court to allow the writ petition as prayed for.
Per contra, on behalf of the respondents, a counter-affidavit has been filed rebutting all the material allegations levelled against them one after the other and ultimately they have requested this Court to dismiss the writ petition for want of merits.
3.
Heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties.
I have perused the contents of the affidavit and the counter-affidavits together with all other relevant material documents available on record in the form of typed set of papers.
I have also taken into consideration the various points raised by the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties during the course of their arguments.
4.
In the above facts and circumstances of the case, the only point that arises for consideration in this case is, as to whether there are any valid grounds to allow this writ petition or not.
5.
The brief facts of the case of the petitioners as seen from the affidavit are as follows :  The second petitioner herein is the wife of the Ist petitioner.
She belongs to Hindu Adi-Dravida which is a Scheduled Caste and her husband the first petitioner in a Christian.
They got married on 30.7.1979 under the Special Marriages Act and the same has been duly registered under the said Act.
Their inter-caste marriage has been recognised by the Government of Tamil Nadu as seen from the letter of congratulation dated 2541986.
The 2nd petitioner herein has registered in the Employment Exchange Anna Nagar and her registration Number is W/1563/83, X0130 on 15111983 and the same has been renewed till date.
The first petitioner also has registered with the same employment exchange and his registration No. is F/7538/82, X0150 and the said exchange has been duly informed of their inter-caste marriage which has been entered into the record.
It is her case that under GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2491986 by an amendment, inter-caste marriage couple where one of the spouses belongs to SC/ST were brought into the list of priority categories for the purpose of forwarding their names for employment.
But inspite of the fact they were couple married inter-caste, the concession was not extended to them and hence they wrote to the 2nd respondent on 811999 seeking the said priority.
But the letter dated 2331990 they have been informed that the said concession will enure only to those couples married after 1221988 and not for those couples married earlier to the said date.
According to the 2nd petitioner herein she had a short spell of employment on a temporary basis in city Civil Court, Madras through the employment exchange.
It is contended by the petitioners herein that the impugned Government order No. 685 dated 26121989 is liable to be quashed in so far as it fails to extend the priority concession to inter-caste married couples married prior to 2491986.
The said impugned order is challenged by them on the grounds that the impugned Government order is violative of Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution of India and that the impugned order discriminates between those couples married inter-caste prior to 2491986 and those married after 2491986 which is not a reasonable classification and also that the cut off date of 2491986 is not a rational criteria and is not based on any intelligible differentia which has rational nexus between the objective sought to be achieved GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2491986 and in this regard it is also contend by the petitioners that the impugned order denied equal opportunity in public employment.
It is also their grievance that they were 35 years and 40 years respectively at the time of filing the writ petition and that therefore any further delay in securing employment will cause irreparable hardship to them.
Their case is that if the priority concession had been extended to them, they would have been employed by now and they would not be hit by age bar.
Hence this writ petition.
6.
In the counter-affidavit filed by the respondents inter alia, it is contended by them that as per the orders of the Government issued in GOMs.
No. 685, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department, dated 26121989, priority for inter-caste marriage is to be given to those couples who got married or on after 2491986, the date of issue of GOMs.
No. 939, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department dated 2491986.
Therefore in view of the fact that the petitioner's inter-caste marriage took place prior to 2491986 she is not eligible for priority for inter-caste marriage.
According to the respondents priority for inter-caste marriage is only a welfare measure introduced by the Government and it is necessary to prescribe certain eligibility conditions when such concessions are extended by the Government to certain sections, as otherwise, the concession itself is liable to be misused and will not reach the target groups.
Therefor, according to them, this concession has been made available to all the inter-caste marriage couples who married on or after 2491986.
Therefore it is contended by them that this order is neither discriminatory nor it denies equal opportunity in public employment, as alleged, and that there is also no question of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in this case.
It is contended by them that the details about her inter-caste marriage have not been recorded in her records, at the Employment Exchange.
It is their categoric contention that priority for inter-caste marriage could not be given to her as such priority is made available only to couples who got married on or after 2491986, the date of issue of GOMs.
No. 939.
Further this is as per the orders issued by the Government in GOMs.
No. 685, dated 26121989.
According to them, by means of a referral made by the Employment office, she had got a placement as `Examiner' in the city Civil court, Madras for 2 brief spells from 1281987 to 30.9.1987 and from 5101987 to 31.22.1987.
Further according to the respondents it cannot be stated that Government order in regard to giving priority to inter-caste marriage couples discriminates between these couples who got married prior to 2491986 and those who got married on or after 2491986, that giving priority to inter-caste marriage couples is only a welfare measure adopted by the Government, and that it is necessary to prescribe certain eligibility conditions when such concessions are extended by the Government to certain sections.
Otherwise, the concession itself is liable to be misused and will not reach the target groups.
Further, according to them, the first Government order relating to giving priority for inter-caste marriage couples was issued on 2491986 under GOMs.
No. 939 Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department and that therefore the concession has been made available to all inter-caste married couples who married on or after 2491986 and that therefore this order cannot be said to be discriminatory and it also does not deny equal opportunity in Public employment as alleged.
Therefore, it is prayed by the respondents that in the said circumstances of this case, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed as devoid of merits.
7.
Having seen the entire material available on record and from the facts and circumstances of this case and also from the claims and counter claims made by the rival parties, the following are the admitted facts in this case : The petitioners herein are husband and wife.
The wife viz., the 2nd petitioner herein belongs to Hindu Adi-Dravida which is a Scheduled Caste and her husband, the Ist petitioner herein is a Christian.
They got married on 871979 under the Special Marriage Act and the same has been duly registered as required under the said Act.
That apart their inter-caste marriage has also been recognised by the Government of Tamil Nadu as seen from the letter of Congratulation dated 2541986.
Both the petitioners herein have registered their names with the same exchange and they have been renewing the same.
According to them the said exchange has been duly informed of their inter-caste marriage which has been entered into the records.
As per GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2491986, by an amendment, inter-caste marriage couples where one of the spouses belong to SC/ST were brought into the list of priority categories for the purposes of forwarding their names for employment.
Their grievance is that inspite of the fact that they were couple married inter caste, the concession was not extended to them.
It is also admitted in this case that the second petitioner herein had a short spell of employment on a temporary basis in city Civil Court, Madras through the employment exchange.
Whereas it is contended by the respondents that as per orders of the Government issued in GOMs.
No. 685, dated 26121989, priority for inter- caste marriage is to be given to those couples who got married on or after 2491986, the date of issue of GOMs.
939 dated 2491986 and that in view of the fact that the petitioners' inter-caste marriage took place prior to 2491986 she is not eligible for priority for inter-caste marriage and also that priority for inter-caste marriage is only a welfare measure introduced by the Government and it is necessary to prescribe certain eligibility conditions when such concessions are extended by the Government to certain sections, as otherwise the concession itself is liable to the misused and will not reach the target groups and that therefore this order is neither discriminatory not it denies equal opportunity in pubic employment as alleged and also that there is no question of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in this case.
8.
Having seen the records in this case, it is clear that the petitioners herein got married as early as in 1979.
Only after their said inter-caste marriage they have registered their names in the Employment Exchange i.e., in the years 1983 and 1982 respectively, whereas for the first time the concession was granted by GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2481986.
It is clearly mentioned in the said GO that the Director of Employment and Training has suggested that priority may be accorded to inter-caste marriage couples where one of the spouses belongs to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe for the purpose of nomination through Employment Exchange and that they may be assigned priority II(iii) as laid down in the Government Order first read in the GO and that the Government, after careful consideration directed that Priority Group II(I) as laid down in the Government order read above may be assigned to the inter-caste marriage couple where one of the spouses (not their children) belongs to the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe for sponsoring through Employment Exchange.
Thereafter, by virtue of GOMs.
No. 53 dated 1221988, further clarification was made in their regard to the following effect :  "The Inter-caste Marriage Couples should register their names in the Employment Exchange within the time limit of two years along with the community certificate from an officer not below the rank of Tahsildar and the Marriage document Registered in the office of the Registrar of Marriages."
Thereafter, the Director of Employment and Training has sought clarification (1) whether the time limit of two years of registration with Employment Exchange has to be reckoned from the date of marriage or from the date of registration of Marriage with the registration Department, and (2) whether the inter-caste marriage couple who registered their marriage a few years prior to the issue of Government order third read above and also eligible for the priority concession without reference to the time limit of two years.
The Government after careful consideration passed the following orders :  1.
The priority concession in sponsoring the inter-caste marriage couple should be available to those couples who have married after issue of orders in the Government order second read above, (It is significant to note that the GO referred to GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2491986).
2.
The time limit of two years prescribed in the Government order third read above shall be reckoned from the date of marriage of the inter-caste marriage couple.
3.
The inter-caste marriage couples should register their names in the Employment Exchange within two years to avail the priority concession of sponsoring their names by the Employment Exchanges.
The time limit has been prescribed in February 1988, even though orders for giving priority concession were issued in September 1986.
The time limit of two years shall be applicable to those inter-caste married couples also whose marriage took place between 2491986 and 1221988 from the date of issue of such order i.e., 1221988.
Thus from the above it is clear that the impugned GOMs.
No. 685 dated 26121989 is not the first GO where the concession was restricted to those couples whose marriage (inter-caste) took place on or after 2491986.
But in the said impugned GO previous GOMs.
No. 53 dated 1221988 and GO 939 dated 2491986 have been clarified.
But originally in GOMs.
No. 939 dated 2491986 alone such restriction has been made.
But that has not been challenged in this writ petition.
Only the subsequent GOMs.
685 dated 26121989 has been challenged herein.
That apart, it is significant to note that such concession was first introduced only in the year 1986 whereas the marriage of these petitioners took place as early as in the year 1979.
Further as seen from the impugned GO, even the marriages that took place a few years prior to the issue of the Government order have not been considered by the Government for this concession.
That being so, for a marriage that took place about 7 years prior to the said GO the petitioners herein cannot make a claim.
Further in this case it has rightly been contended by the respondents that this giving priority to inter-caste marriage couples is only a welfare measure adopted by the Government and it is necessary to prescribe certain eligibility conditions when such concessions are extended by the Government to certain sections.
Otherwise, the concession itself is liable to be misused and will not reach the target groups.
Further it is also significant to note that fixing of such restrictions and time limit for concessions like this is the policy matter of the Government concerned.
Thus, the first Government order relating to giving priority for inter-caste married couple was issued on 2491986 under GOMs.
No. 939, Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department and that therefore the Concession has been made available to all inter-caste married couples who married on or after 2491986.
Therefore as rightly contended by the respondents this order cannot be said to be discriminatory.
Hence I am of the clear view that the GO impugned in this writ petition is in order and valid and there is no need for any interference with the same in this writ petition.
9.
In support of their case the petitioners rely on the following decision :  D.S.
Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130 : 1983 Lab IC 1 wherein it has been held thus :  "Classification in revised pension formula between pensioners on the basis of date of retirement specified in memoranda is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 and the same being severable, beneficial part is retained and made applicable to all pensioners."
But, in this case the concession has been granted only to the marriages that took place only on and after a particular date and not to the marriages that took place prior to the said date.
Therefore in such circumstances the above said decision is not helpful to the petitioners herein.
10.
So also on behalf of the respondents the following two decisions were relied on :  1.
Chandravadanam v State of Tamil Nadu, 1999(2) CTC 127 wherein it has been held that `Merits and Demerits of policy decision taken by Government cannot to tested by court.'
2.
Union of India v. MV Valliappan, AIR 1999 SC 2526 wherein it has been held that in Hindu Undivided Family De-recognition of Partial Partition by Section 171(9) is not beyond legislative competence and the hardship not a ground to assail legislative competence.
That being so, both the said decisions squarely apply to the facts of the present case and support the stand taken by the respondents in this writ petition.
11.
Therefore for all the aforesaid reasons and in the facts and circumstances of the case and also in view of my above discussions with regard to the various aspects of this case and also in the light of the above decisions discussed above, I am of the clear view that the petitioners herein have failed to make out any case in their favour and that therefore there is no need for any interference with the GO impugned in this writ petition.
Thus the writ petition fails and the same is liable to be dismissed for want of merits.
12.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Consequently WMP.
19633/92 also is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.