JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner applied for admission to MTech.
course in response to the advertisement issued by the Punjab University dated 12.9.1999.
A perusal of the said advertisement shows that "admission will be on the basis of the entrance test".
2.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioner unhesitatingly stated that merit of the candidates was determined not only on the basis of the written test, but also on the basis of the interview and academic qualifications.
As per merit determined in the manner aforementioned, the name of the petitioner figured at Serial No. 4 in the waiting list amongst the general category candidates.
The petitioner did not make any grievance against the position assigned to her and did not apply for admission to MTech.
course irrespective of the aforesaid decision.
3.
Another candidate, namely, Ramesh Kumar Sharma approached this Court by filing CWP No. 15048 of 1999, wherein he challenged the merit list prepared by the respondent-university, by asserting, that admission in MTech.
course was to be based only on the marks obtained in the entrance test and the marks of the interview as also for academic qualifications could not be added thereto.
4.
This Court while deciding CWP No. 15048 of 1999 found that the action of the respondent-university was not in consonance with law, wherein it had taken into consideration the material other than the marks obtained by the candidates in the entrance test, to determine the merit of the candidates.
Learned counsel for the petitioner could not make any submission which could persuade me to differ with the conclusion drawn in the said decision.
In the instant case, admission granted to Ramesh Kumar Sharma, respondent No. 4 who was the petitioner in CWP No. 15048 of 1999 has been challenged.
5.
Having allowed CWP No. 15048 of 1999 on 2552000, this Court did not consider it appropriate to set aside the admissions already made keeping in view the fact that half of the period of the course has since expired.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, this Court on perusal of record found that Ramesh Kumar Sharma who filed CWP No. 15048 of 1999 had obtained the highest marks in the entrance test i.e. 55 marks.
It was, therefore, that rather than requiring the university to admit any other candidate, this Court chose to allow admission to said Ramesh Kumar Sharma, who had approached this Court alone, without upsetting the admission already made.
6.
In the instant case, admission granted to Ramesh Kumar Sharma, respondent No. 4 who was the petitioner in CWP No. 15048 of 1999 has been challenged.
7.
Alongwith the written statement filed by the respondents in the instant case a compilation of the material of the selected candidates had been appended as Annexure R-1.
A perusal of the same shows that said Ramesh Kumar Sharma was awarded 55 marks in the entrance test.
Had the petitioner in the instant case been awarded highest marks in the entrance test than said Ramesh Kumar Sharma, her claim for admission could have been considered.
She was, however, awarded 38 marks in the entrance test.
Consequently, no injustice had been done to the petitioner while allowing admission to said Ramesh Kumar Sharma.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no merit in this petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.