ML Singhal, J - Rattan Singh joined Food and Supplies Department of State of Punjab on 26572 under the control of Director Food and Supplies, Punjab.
He remained in service till 311091 when he was retired on attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years.
In 1988, he was placed under suspension and he along with some other officials of the department of Food and Supplies was charge-sheeted vide charge sheets dated 26.12.88 and 22689.
In the year 1990, he was reinstated during the tendency or the inquiry.
He gave reply to the charge sheets.
Shri SS Ghuman, Deputy Director, Food & Supplies, Jalandhar was appointed as inquiry Officer.
Inquiry Officer submitted inquiry report on 15591.
He filed objections to the report of inquiry Officer when he was in service.
Till 311091, no action was taken against him and he was retired on attaining the age of superannuation on 311091.
He was not retained in service after 311091 for completion of any inquiry of disciplinary proceedings against him.
Vide order dated 14.11.91, Director Food and Supplies, Punjab ordered de novo inquiry on the same charge sheet.
Shri PS Mand was appointed as new Inquiry Officer.
He was replaced by Shri RS Kahlon, Deputy Director, Food and Supplies, Jalandhar vide order dated 18.5.92.
Rattan Singh challenged the action of Director, Food and Supplies in ordering de novo inquiry on the same charge sheet in Civil Court at Gurdaspur.
Sub Judge, Gurdaspur gave him injunction restraining the holding of de novo inquiry against him.
Order of the court was served on the defendants and the inquiry proceedings were stopped.
Director, Food and Supplies again vide order dated 5194 appointed Shri SS Ghuman, Deputy Director, Field, Patiala as Inquiry Officer for conducting de novo inquiry.
In the order, it was observed that Shri Ghuman is being appointed as Inquiry Officer as per order of the Court.
Rattan Singh filed suit for declaration against the State of Punjab/Director, Food & Supplies, Punjab challenging the order dated 5194 passed by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab appointing Inquiry Officer for holding inquiry under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 against him and some other employees.
By way of consequential relief, he claimed permanent injunction restraining State of Punjab/Director, Food and Supplies Punjab from proceeding against him under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules and also restraining them from conducting any inquiry/disciplinary proceedings against him.
It was alleged in the plaint that de novo inquiry is not permissible under the rules.
Inquiry Officer has already disclosed his mind and the plaintiff has raised serious objections regarding his findings and conduct during the inquiry proceedings.
Plaintiff apprehends injustice at his hands.
According to Rules, inquiry can be remanded for clarification on any point and that too with reasons.
Fresh order of de novo inquiry cannot be passed.
Plaintiff had already disclosed his defence.
De novo inquiry is nothing but filling up of the lacunas in the inquiry.
Order is mala fide.
It was passed only to deprive the plaintiff's legal right.
No disciplinary action can be taken against a person, who has retired from service.
After 31/10/91, no inquiry can be ordered against him.
According to rules, department cannot take cognizance of such stale events, which were more than four years old when he retired.
2.
Defendant State of Punjab contested the suit of the plaintiff.
No de novo inquiry was ordered against the plaintiff.
Inquiry was remanded to the Inquiry Officer for further evidence, if any, as per the order of the Court dated 17.11.92, which reads as follows :-  "Ex-parte injunction is granted in favour of the plaintiff to the effect that defendants are restrained from conducting de novo inquiry against the plaintiff.
However, defendants are competent to remand the already conducted inquiry for further evidence, if any."
3.
No fresh inquiry was started against the plaintiff.
Action can be taken against an employee even if he has retired for misconduct committed by him during his service career.
In supersession of order of government dated 25893 issued vide endorsement No. E-4(i)-93/1693 dated 6.9.1993 the case was remanded to Sh. SS Ghuman, Deputy Director, Head Office, Chandigarh vide order dated 5194 for considering the points raised by the plaintiff and other delinquents.
Further action will be taken on receipt of the report from the Inquiry Officer.
No cause of action has arisen to the plaintiff.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were tramed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration on the facts as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to injunction as prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the impugned order dated 5194 is illegal, null and void ?
OPP 4.
Relief.
5.
Vide order dated 9496, Civil Judge, Junior Division, Gurdaspur decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 5194 passed by the Director, Food and Supplies is illegal and null and void qua the plaintiff and that defendants would restrain themselves from conducting any inquiry against the plaintiff in pursuance of order dated 5194 Ex. P3, in view of his findings, that when by virtue of order Ex. P3 dated 5194, plaintiff was retired from service and when it was not mentioned that he will be retained in service till the completion of the inquiry.
It was found that no inquiry was competent after one's retirement when no order had been passed that he will continue in service till the inquiry was completed notwithstanding he had reached the age of superannuation.
6.
State of Punjab went in appeal against the judgment and decree dated 9496 passed by the trial Court.
Appeal was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur.
7.
Still not satisfied, State of Punjab has knocked the door of this Court through this Regular Second Appeal.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
9.
Learned State counsel submitted that there was no de novo inquiry contemplated against the respondent-delinquent.
Only the inquiry already conducted was remanded, in view of Rule 9.1 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, Shri SS Ghuman, Deputy Director, Quality, Head Office, Chandigarh was directed to consider the points raised by the delinquent official and submit his report.
It was submitted that retirement shall have no effect on disciplinary proceedings, which were pending against the plaintiff since before his retirement.
It was submitted that when the plaintiff was retired, Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab passed the following order on 14.10.91 :-  "Shri Rattan Singh son of Teja Singh, Inspector, Food and Supplies, Gurdaspur is, hereby, retired from the government service w.e.f.
311091 afternoon after attaining his 58 years age of superannuation."
10.
Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that there could be no inquiry against the respondent when he had retired on attaining the age of superannuation on 311091.
It was submitted that on 5194 i.e. when the impugned order was passed by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab.
He was no longer in government service and as such no inquiry could be ordered against him.
Government employee in rule 2(d) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 means any person appointed to any Civil Service or post in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab.
Punishing authority means the authority competent under these Rules to impose on a government employee any of the penalties specified in Rules 5.
Learned counsel for the respondent drew my attention to Walaiti Ram Gupta, Sectional Officer and v. Punjab State and another, 1997(5) SLR 555 : 1997(4) SCT 230 (P&H) where it was held that no action could be initiated against those, who had already retired from service under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The State Government has the right to withhold or withdraw pension or part of it in respect of an event which took place within four years before institution of disciplinary proceedings for withholding pension.
Learned counsel for the respondent has drawn my attention to State of Punjab v. Khemi Ram, AIR 1970 SC 214 where it was held as follows :-  "There can be doubt that if disciplinary action is sought to be taken against a Government servant it must be done before he retires as provided by the said rule.
If a disciplinary enquiry cannot be concluded before the date of such retirement the course open to the Government is to pass an order of suspension and refuse to permit the concerned public servant to retire and retain him in service till such enquiry is completed and a final order is passed therein."
He drew my attention to Mukhtiar Chand Dhir v. The State of Punjab and others, 1982(1) SLR 889 where it was held that the petitioner was not retained in service in order to complete any enquiry instituted against him and rather enquiry against him, while he was in service, was ordered to be dropped and on that basis not only was the suspension order withdrawn but he was allowed to retire and on reconsideration the Government thought of instituting an enquiry under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, which indisputably is a disciplinary action and as a measure can only visit a delinquent Officer yet in service.
Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, Part 1 is studded in the rules relating to pensions.
Under rule 22, recoveries from pensions can be made and the Government has reserved the right of withholding or withdrawing the pension or any part of it if the pensioner is convicted of serious crime or be guilty of grave misconduct.
There is an elaborate procedure prescribed therein how such object can be achieved.
Here apparently, the provisions of rule 22 aforesaid were not employed and rather, disciplinary action was sought to be taken against the petitioner under the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
11.
In Mukhtiar Chand's case (supra) departmental proceedings had been initiated against him on 11.7.73 at a time when he stood retired from service and it was held that no disciplinary proceedings could have been initiated against him after he had attained the age of superannuation and when he was relieved and retired from service w.e.f 4/1/72 and the order of suspension was superseded.
No disciplinary inquiry could thus be initiated against the plaintiff-respondent after he had retired under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 for imposition of major penalty.
For the reasons given above, this appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.