Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Karamjit Singh, petitioner, has filed this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India with the following prayer :-  "(i) to call the record of the case for the kind perusal for this Hon'ble Court.
(ii) a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to permit the petitioner to appear in the examination of remaining papers of 4th semester which examination have been started from 761999.
(iii) to issue any other appropriate writ, order or direction which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
(iv) service of notices upon the respondents be dispensed with.
(v) filing of certified copies of annexure P/1 and P/2 may kindly be dispensed with.
(vi) Cost of the writ petition may be awarded in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.
It is further prayed that the respondents be directed to make arrangements to take paper dated 761999."
2.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 i.e. Institute and the Board had contested the claim of the petitioner, as according to them the petitioner had not complied with the basic requirements and regulations governing the academic courses of the Institute.
The petitioner, however, was permitted to take examination under the orders of the court.
The Hon'ble Division Bench of this court, vide its order dated 861999, had directed that the petitioner will be permitted to take the Fourth Semester examination subject to further order of the court.
Thereafter the writ petition was admitted for hearing before the Hon'ble Single Bench.
The matter came up for hearing on different dates.
3.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for respondents No. 1 and 2 stated that under the orders of the court the petitioner also appeared in the Fourth Semester examination.
Prohibition under the relevant rules is that a candidate cannot take Fourth Semester examination till he/she clears the First Semester examination.
However, the petitioner has already cleared First Semester examination by taking supplementary examination and has also appeared in the Fourth Semester examination.
As such this writ petition has become infructuous and the same may be dismissed accordingly.
4.
Consequently, this writ petition is dismissed, the same having become infructuous, without any order as to costs.
The petitioner is obviously obliged to comply with the rules of the Institution in regard to further examination and if he is denied for the same, he is entitled to fresh cause of action not covered within the ambit and scope of this writ petition.
In view of the above, CM No. 7784 of 2000 does not survive for consideration and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.