VK Bali, J - Smt. Dropti Devi and Santosh Kumari, petitioners in CWP No. 1431 of 1980 and Smt. Sneh Lata, petitioner in CWP No. 818 of 1980 successfully staked their claim for regularisation in service on the dint of policy decision taken by the Punjab Government vide order dated May 3, 1977 as also Rule 14 of the Punjab Education Service, Class - III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the `Rules of 1955') inasmuch as petitions filed on their behalf were allowed by learned Single Judge vide judgment dated November 1, 1991.
It is against this order of learned Single Judge that present appeal bearing No. 361 of 1992 has been filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent by the State of Punjab, only against judgment recorded in CWP No. 1431 of 1980.
2.
As mentioned above, no appeal has been filed against the judgment arising from CWP No. 818 of 1980 but it is the facts of that case which were taken into consideration while deciding the two writ petitions by a common order, as mentioned above.
3.
The bare minimum facts, which are identical in both the writ petitions and that need necessary mention, reveal that after passing matriculation examination from the Board of Secondary Education, Rajasthan, Sneh Lata petitioner passed JBT course in the year 1967 conducted by the Registrar, Department of Education, Rajasthan.
In the year 1968 she also passed Punjabi upto Matric from the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
On the basis of the qualifications, referred to above, she came to be appointed as Basic Trained Teacher in Government Primary School, Bulawi vide letter dated October 30, 1975, Annexure P-1, on adhoc basic.
Insofar as petitioners, Dropti Devi and Santosh Kumari, in CWP No. 1431 of 1980 are concerned, they also, after passing Matriculation Examination, passed their JBT examination from Rajasthan State and Himachal Pradesh and they came to be appointed as JBT teachers on adhoc basis on November 3, 1973 and December 4, 1973 respectively.
The Government, vide its decision dated May 3, 1977 decided to regularise the services of adhoc employees, who fulfilled the requirement of completion of one year's service on March 31, 1977.
It is not disputed that as per the policy decision, as referred to above, an adhoc employee, who had completed one year minimum service as on September 30, 1980 had to fulfil the other conditions inclusive of basic or minimum educational qualifications required for the post on which his services were to be regularised.
It is also not disputed that by virtue of the same very instructions, it was further provided that the case of such ad hoc employees, who had completed three years' service on September 30, 1980 and had satisfactory record of service, but who did not fulfil other conditions with regard to qualification, age or mode of their initial appointment were also to be considered for regularisation in relaxation of the aforesaid conditions if the departmental service rules, applicable to those employees, may provide for relaxation.
On the day when the case of petitioner came up for consideration for regularisation in service, admittedly she had completed five years' service.
Despite that the plea of the petitioner for regularisation was rejected vide orders dated February 2, 1980.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner staked claim for regularisation in service.
4.
The only ground on which the appellant-State contested the cause of the petitioner was that she did not possess the requisite qualifications required for the post under contention, namely, two years JBT Training Course.
It has been pleaded in the written statement and so argued by learned counsel for the appellant that the prescribed qualifications for the post of JBT Teachers is Matric with two years JBT Training Course and in Punjab JBT Training is for two years.
It has further been pleaded that the certificate of JBT Training of other States has been declared equivalent to JBT but has been recognised by the Punjab Government as equivalent to two years training Course of Punjab State.
To support this plea, a copy of the letter of the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Punjab, Education Department, issued vide memo dated May 9, 1960 has been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-I On the basis of the Memo Annexure R-I, it has further been pleaded that the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate or similar diploma granted by any other State or any Institution would be equivalent to JBT Training Certificate of Punjab Education Department provided the following two conditions are fulfilled :-  (i) It has been awarded after two years' training; (ii) In the event of being awarded by any institution, it is recognised by the State Govt. within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
5.
Learned Single Judge, relying upon the Government policy decision dated May 3, 1977 which was supplemented by another set of executive instructions dated October 28, 1980 as also rule 14 of the Rules of 1955, held that the case of the petitioner had to be considered for regularisation in relaxation of the requirement of minimum educational qualifications prescribed and inasmuch as rule 14 of the Rules of 1955 in terms provides relaxation, impugned order rejecting the case of petitioner for regularisation, was set aside and a direction was issued to the respondent to regularise the services of the petitioner in view of the earlier policy decision/instructions.
6.
Mr. Dhillon, learned Additional AG, Punjab, vehemently contends that the basic qualification for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher in Punjab is that one must be matriculate with two years JBT Training Course and this essential qualification of passing two years JBT Training Course could not be relaxed either by the policy decision of the Government dated May 3, 1977, or for that matter, even by the instructions of the year 1980.
7.
Before we might proceed to deal with the contention of learned counsel for the appellants, noted above, we called upon the learned Additional AG, Punjab, to substantiate his contention with regard to two years JBT Training Course being essential qualification under statutory rules for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher.
As he was not in a position to assist the court on this crucial issue, Secretary, Department of Education, Punjab, with record, was also asked to attend the court.
During the course of arguments, spanned over two days, when even the Secretary, Education Department, Punjab, was also present, nothing at all could be brought to the notice of the Court from where two years JBT Training Course might have been provided as an essential condition for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher.
Inasmuch as no rules, regulations or instruction, specifying two years JBT Training Courses as essential qualification for the post of JBT teacher, were shown to us, we had even at our own end, seen the Punjab Education Code as well.
From there too, learned counsel for the appellants could not point out anything that might throw light on the issue involved in this case.
8.
As before the learned Single Judge, so also before us, reliance has been placed upon Annexure R1 alone.
We shall discuss the instructions, Annexure R-1 separately.
At this stage, it is relevant to mention that it has been the case of the petitioners in both the writ petitions that besides completing more than five years service, their work and conduct throughout had been satisfactory and further that the conditions of service of the JBT Teachers in Punjab were governed by 1955 Rules.
The educational qualifications prescribed for the post under contention under the said Rules in Matric with Training in Basic Education and further that a person seeking appointment to the post of JBT teacher has to pass Punjabi upto Matric.
It has, thus, been the case of petitioners that they answered the qualifications provided under the statutory rules.
Clause (c) of Rule 4 of the Rules of 1955, reads thus :-  "(c) In the case of appointment to a post specified in Column 2 of Appendix `B', he/she possesses the qualifications specified in column 3 against each post provided that for special reasons to be recorded in writing any person not possessing the requisite qualifications may be appointed to any of these posts for a period of three months subject to the condition that he may be retained longer or appointed permanently in the event of "his acquiring" the requisite qualification before the expiry of the said period.
9.
In Appendix `B', for the post of Basic Training Teacher (JBT), the essential qualifications provided are matric with basic training.
It is significant to note that training in Basic Education by virtue of Appendix `B' of Rule 4(c) of 1955 Rules, does not mention any degree, diploma or certificate in Basic Education nor does it, even by stretching the words mentioned therein, specify minimum duration of basic training.
All that, thus a candidate must possess is certificate of matriculation and must have training in Basic Education.
It is not disputed during the course of arguments that all the petitioners by virtue of obtaining certificates in Basic Education, had necessarily to have training in Basic Education.
Nothing at all with regard to minimum qualification could be added to the statutory rules of 1955 which came into being by virtue of proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Reference may be made to judgment of Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Shamsher Jang, 1972 AIR SC 1516.
In view of the position of law, as discussed above, no occasion at all arises to place reliance upon Annexure R-1, which, as referred to above, are only instruction and further in no way deal with laying down of basic or minimum qualifications for the post under contention.
10.
Instructions dated May 9, 1960, Annexure R-1 deal with recognition of basic education Degrees/Diplomas, awarded by those institutions which are not located in Punjab.
Under Para 2 of the instructions, Annexure R-1, it has been mentioned that the JBT Training Certificate or similar diploma granted by any other State Public Government or any institution situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government, will be equivalent to the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate of Punjab Education Department provided the following two conditions are fulfilled :-  (i) It has been awarded after two years training; (ii) In the event of being awarded by any institution, it is recognised by the State Govt. within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
11.
It has further been mentioned in para No. 3 that if any such certificate/diploma has been awarded after a period of Training which may be less than two years but has been recognised by the State Government concerned, the holder thereof will be eligible for appointment as teacher under the Punjab Government if he/she passes two years course examination of the Punjab Government Education Department even though privately.
It appears, it is from para 3 of the instructions, Annexure R-1 that an endeavour has been made to show that for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher, one has to pass two years course Examination of Education Department, Punjab, which may be passed even privately.
Mr. Dhillon, even after trying his best, has not been able to explain the apparent anomaly in the instructions, Annexure R-1.
Para 3 talks only of equivalence.
JBT Training certificate or diploma granted by the State other than the State of Punjab and which certificate or diploma is recognised within the jurisdiction of that particular State, would be treated equivalent to the JBT Training course from the Punjab Education Department, even if it is awarded by other State, after two years' training.
Equivalence of the Punjab training can be brought about only if one passes two years course examination from the Punjab Education Department, which Mr. Dhillon, on the instructions of the department and Education Secretary, says can be done only by regularly attending the course.
There seems to be apparent anomaly in making the certificate/diploma of other State equivalent with that of Punjab Education Department.
Even after granting equivalence, one has to further study for two years in an institution in Punjab and pass the certificate/diploma, as the case may be, from the Punjab Education Department.
12.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that from the statutory rules, it cannot be read that one has to have two years certificate of JBT Training for appointment to the post of JBT Teacher in Punjab.
Assuming it to be so, we find nothing wrong in the judgment of learned Single Judge that the said basic qualification in case of person, who had remained posted on ad hoc basis, could be relaxed under the Rules of 1955.
Rule 14, which deals with relaxation, reads thus :-  "Where the Government is satisfied that the operation of any of these rules causes any undue hardship in a particular case, it may by order, dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subject to such conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner".
13.
All that could perhaps be argued by the Additional AG, Punjab was that if the provisions of Rule 14 were to be applied and the case of the petitioner favourably considered, it is possible that some condition might have been imposed and that being so, it is a case which needs to be remitted to the concerned authorities to reconsider the regularisation of the petitioner.
Even though, this could be the contention of the learned State Counsel, who was not urged so, but we have, on our own, thought over the same and are of the view that it could be possible for the concerned authorities to impose some conditions while ordering regularisation and may be, the court could not straightaway order regularisation and as such the matter has to be remitted to the concerned authorities to reconsider the matter.
We are, however, of the view that it would be too iniquitous at this stage to adopt the said course.
A period of 27 years has gone by when the petitioners came to be appointed.
By now, the petitioners must have to their credit experience of 25 years and whatever conditions might have been imposed by the concerned authorities, in our view, would not go beyond experience of 27 years.
It would, therefore, be unnecessary at this stage to impose any condition upon the petitioners.
14.
In view of what has been said above, these appeals are dismissed leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeals dismissed