Swatanter Kumar, J - Both these writ petitions have been filed by the petitioners praying for a common relief on the same facts that the respondents be directed to admit the petitioners to the Two Years Elementary Teachers Training Course in view of their merit and qualifications.
The petitioners who are residents of Punjab and had cleared 10+2 or examinations of equivalence, desirous of pursuing their further studies in Elementary Teachers Training Course, hereinafter referred to as ETT Course, applied for appearing in the entrance test to the said course in terms of the brochure published by the Director of the State Council of Educational Research and Training, Punjab, in the year 1998.
It is stated that there are 12 such District Training Institutes in Punjab which are imparting two years training in ETT.
The respondents issued an advertisement on 10121998 inviting applications for admission in the said course in each District Institute.
All the 11 petitioners had applied and they were issued Roll Numbers.
The entrance test for this course was held on 721999, the result of which was declared on 1.3.1999.
Upon declaration of the result the petitioners were not successful and were not admitted to the course of ETT.
2.
The petitioners have argued that there were computer errors and manipulation in the entrance test and the result prepared there-upon, which has caused serious prejudice to their interests, resultantly they should be granted admission.
The following factors have been mentioned and were impressed upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners, in support of his submission :-  a) That some candidates who had applied for admission but did not take the entrance test for one reason or the other even received the result cards showing their marks in different papers of the entrance test.
The name of Ms. Neelam with Roll No. 3003869 has been mentioned.
b) The respondent have failed to adhere to the ratio of 50 : 50 seats of male and female as postulated in terms of the prospectus and the Full Bench judgment of this Court titled as Swaranjit Singh and another v. The State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) P.L.R.
691 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(FB).
c) Unfair means have been used to help some group of candidates to clear the entrance test.
3.
Upon notice the respondent filed a short reply.
They controverted the above said allegations.
In relation to Ms. Neelam it was stated that she did not appear in the entrance examination but some other female candidate namely Meena Kumari had appeared under that Roll Number and had signed the answer sheet.
Meena Kumari had only secured 99 marks out of 200 under that Roll number and as such the result was declared though it may not relate to Neelam.
It was further stated that ratio of 50 : 50 male and female candidates had been duly maintained by the authorities concerned except where seats were in odd numbers.
Thirdly it is stated that the candidates were made to sit in the entrance test strictly as per their Roll Numbers on the seats allocated to them in various rooms in seriatim.
4.
In terms of Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Swaranjit Singh (supra) the respondents are required to adhere to the terms and conditions of the brochure strictly and maintain the ratio of 50 : 50 in the case of female and male candidates.
No details have been furnished by the petitioners in this regard.
The respondents have denied this allegation and provided a due explanation in consonance with the conditions of the brochure where-ever there was variation in the ratio of male and female candidates because of reservation in accordance with the brochure.
It must be noticed that despite various opportunities and the matter being pending before the Court for a considerable time, the petitioners chose not to file any rejoinder.
For this reason, I have no cause to disbelieve the version put forward by the respondents that they have not violated the prescribed condition of the brochure in relation to the ratio of male and female candidates.
5.
As far as the case of Neelam is concerned, again the petitioners have not filed any rejoinder/replication to controvert the averments made in the counter.
Neelam might have attempted to take an advantage by sending somebody else to appear in the entrance test in her place.
No fault can be found with the administration in this regard.
Since a candidate actually appeared against the Roll Number allotted to Neelam and described her name as Meena Kumari and signed so, it might have gone un-noticed that at that stage.
The said candidate did not secure any marks and now Ms. Neelam might have given affidavit at the asking of the petitioners to take advantage of the situation.
The respondents cannot be held responsible for this error to the extent that the Court should go to the extreme of setting aside the result and even giving admissions to the petitioners herein.
6.
The third argument raised on behalf of the petitioners is also without any substance.
During the course of hearing even admission forms of the candidates were produced with other records which clearly shows that the candidates, named by the petitioners in the petition were made to sit strictly in order of allotted seats.
The Roll Numbers had been awarded to the candidates in the order in which the forms of the respective candidates were received by the respondents.
In other words it was not for the respondents to allocate Roll Numbers, but allocation of roll numbers depended upon the date and time when the admission form of the candidate was received by their office.
This is merely an after-thought of the petitioners and has been raised for the purposes of raising an issue without any basis.
7.
In view of the above discussion, I have no hesitation in rejecting all the three arguments raised on behalf of the petitioners for setting aside admission of the candidates who have been granted admissions as a result of ETT Entrance Examination-1998.
One most pertinent fact which has come on record is that the last male candidate in general category who has been granted admission to the course has secured 144 marks out of 200 and the last female candidate admitted to the course has got 142 marks out of 200.
None of the petitioners have admittedly secured higher marks than the last candidate admitted to the course in their respective categories.
Even on this ground alone, the petitioners would be entitled to no relief, whatsoever.
Merit is the sole criteria for admission to such competitive course and having failed to clear the entrance test by attaining higher merit, the petitioners cannot be permitted to turn back and challenge the procedure in which they participated without protest and objection.
The reasons given by the petitioners in the petition lack material particulars and have no basis, whatsoever, as is clear from the reply filed by the respondents.
8.
Furthermore, last but not the least, it must also be noticed that the course was for a period of two years from the year 1998.
Major part of the course has already gone by and few months remain for the candidates who were granted admission in 1998 to complete their course.
Even on this ground the petitioners will have to be denied the relief even if they were otherwise entitled to.
At this stage it may be appropriate to refer the judgment of this Court in the case of Ashu Kamboj v. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology and others, CWP No. 16030 of 1999, decided on 1722000, where it was held as under :-  "Learned counsel appearing for the institute argued that even if the petitioner had a case on merit, he cannot be granted admission at this late stage of the course.
He places reliance upon the judgment of the State of Uttar Pradesh and others v. Dr. Anupam Gupta, JT 1992(4) 422 : 1992(2) SCT 292 (SC) and a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) R.S.J.
512 in support of this contention.
It is clear that the course had started in the year 1999.
The last date for admission, as declared in the brochure, was July, 1999.
The course had started in August, 1999.
The first semester has already concluded and, in fact, first semester was over on 1st December, 1999.
In these circumstances, I have no hesitation even in accepting the contention pleaded on behalf of the respondent-institute."
For the reasons afore-stated, I find no merit in these petitions.
The same are dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.