Arun Kumar Goel, J - Petitioner questions the appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of Senior Technical Assistant by first two respondents, with a further direction to both of them to consider the petitioner for the post of Senior Technical Assistant and not to make any appointment to the said post without considering his case.
2.
Facts of this case are within very narrow compass which are by and large admitted by respondents 1 and 2.
Applications were invited for the post of Senior Technical Assistant, Sericulture, RHRS, Udheywalla.
The qualification prescribed for this post was M.Sc.
Zoology/Entomology with 55% marks and experience in Sericulture.
Petitioner admittedly possessed this qualification and accordingly he applied for the post.
Vide memo dated 5th December, 1995 issued by respondent No. 2, 11th December, 1995 was fixed as date for interview at 11 AM in the Camp Office of the University at Railway Road, Jammu.
3.
Further claim of the petitioner in this writ petition is that respondent No. 3, who has been appointed to the post of Senior Technical Assistant, did not possess the requisite qualification and also he did not receive any intimation regarding the interview in question.
In support of his latter plea, it is the case of the petitioner that the time was too short because the letter of interview (Annexure RII) copy of which is attached with the reply of respondents 1 and 2, was issued by respondent No. 2 on 5121997.
10th December, 1995 was a holiday.
Thus it gave only four days.
In this behalf it is also the case of the petitioner that though he had given the address of his native village, this interview letter (Annexure RII) was posted to some address at Jammu.
4.
While by and large admitting the facts pleaded in the petition, it is the case of respondents 1 and 2 that the letter of interview (Annexure RII) was sent to the petitioner at the askance of his faternal (maternal ?)
uncle at the address as detailed therein of Jammu.
Here it may also be worthwhile to notice that both the respondents admitted that the selected candidate is M.Sc.
having no experience in Sericulture, whereas petitioner has got the necessary experience.
5.
The matter came up before the Court on 13th May, 1997 and on this date amongst other things it was ordered as under :  "In the circumstances, registry is directed to put private respondent No. 2 on special notice informing him that the writ petition challenging his selection would be disposed of at the admission stage finally and he be required to make arrangements for representation and defence, if any.
Petitioner is also required to take necessary steps to associate with the service of this respondent.
In the meanwhile, official respondents shall be at liberty to file any rejoinder to the petitioner's supplementary affidavit, if so advised."
6.
Office record shows that respondent No. 2 is presumed to be served by raising presumption of service because registered notice sent to him was not received back either served or unserved.
Fact remains that respondent No. 3 did not appear in the Court and the matter is being heard in his absence in view of the order of Court dated 13th May, 1997, reproduced hereinabove.
7.
In this case a very strange situation is there because respondents 1 and 2 by necessary implication admitted that respondent No. 3 did not possess the necessary qualification prescribed for the post in question.
But with a view to justify their action of having selected the said respondent, have made an attempt to justify it by stating that he did not have chance to work in Sericulture for gaining experience.
Further it is pleaded that in terms of SRO 126 of 1994 dated 2861994 relaxation is to be resorted to such candidates who belong to reserved categories.
In this background it is pleaded by the official respondents that respondent No. 3 was selected against the post in question in response to Annexure P3 being a scheduled tribe candidate.
This stand of the University appears to be totally untenable, firstly this is a case of single post and it cannot be reserved.
This question is by now settled and reference can be made (1998) 4 SCC 1 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC), Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh v Faculty Association & others, and other connected cases.
8.
Second reason for not accepting this plea is that even if it may be assumed for the sake of argument that single post could be reserved for a reserved category, it had not been so notified and admittedly this was not done as is evident from Annexure P3.
For ready reference said notification is reproduced herein below :  "Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agri.
Sciences & Tech.
Camp Office Railway Road, Jammu-Tawi-180004 NOTIFICATION Applications are invited on plain paper with complete biodata (date of birth, education qualifications, experience etc.) for the post of Sr. Technical Assistant Sericulture, RHRS, Udheywalla.
Candidate should be M.Sc.
Zoology/Entomology with 55% marks and experience in Sericulture.
Applications complete in all respects should reach office of the Deputy Registrar Establishment & Academic SKUAST Camp Office Railway Road, Jammu within 10 days from the date of publication.
Those who have already applied, need not repeat.
Sd/- Dy.
Registrar E/A" 9.
In the face of above legal and factual position, it is very unfortunate that respondents 1 and 2 have instead of fairly admitting their mistake and having thereafter taken steps to rectify the same, on the other hand have made an attempt to perpetuate the illegality committed by them for reasons best known.
10.
There is another ground which needs to be mentioned here for deprecating the action of respondents 1 and 2 in the present case.
The Selection Committee which made recommendations in favour of respondent No. 3 vide Annexure RIV, also appears to have made the recommendation in the following terms :  "Only one candidate Mr. Shafiq Ahmad s/o Mohammad Karim attended the interview.
Biodata of the two candidates is kept alongside.
The committee has assessed that Sh. Shafiq Ahmad s/o Sh. Mohammad Karim R/o Bodasan Balla Tehsil/Distt.
Rajouri who possesses the requisite qualification as a suitable candidate for the post of STA (Seri.)
at RHRS, Udheywalla in prescribed scale.
The candidate will be appointed for a period of 3 months and further extension shall be on recommendation of I/C Sericulture and I/C RHRS, Udeywalla."
(Underlining supplied) 11.
It is not understand as to how it is observed by the Selection Committee that respondent No. 3 possessed the requisite qualification for the post in question advertised vide Annexure P3.
This further makes the action of making selection of respondent No. 3 extremely doubtful actuated by reasons other than those of merit.
However without saying anything further the matter is left here only.
Thus it is obvious that respondent No. 3 was not qualified to have been selected to the post in question and is held accordingly.
Now coming to the question of firstly not serving the notice upon the petitioner at the address given in his application and sending it through his so-called faternal (maternal ?)
uncle at Jammu as well as notice being highly insufficient and inadequate.
Petitioner has categorically stated in the application dated 27.4.1997 and the supplementary affidavit attached with the said application that he has never asked the university authorities or to Shri JN Gupta that the interview card be sent at the address of said Shri JN Gupta instead of his village address as detailed in the application.
There is no rebuttal to this affidavit of the petitioner on behalf of any of the respondents.
That being so this court has no hesitation in accepting the plea of the petitioner that at no point of time he had ever authorised respondents 1 and 2 to send his interview card at the address "C/o JN Gupta at Jammu" instead of his village address as given in the application and this plea is also upheld.
12.
Now coming to the reasonableness of the time from the date of Annexure RII, the interview letter as well as the date fixed for the said purpose.
It is not understood as to what was the hurry which compelled the respondents not to give enough notice to the candidates like petitioner to appear for the interview.
Nothing has been brought on record from contemporaneous official record to prima facie show that Annexure RII had in fact been despatched.
This fact could be demonstrated from the despatch register by placing the relevant extract with its reply.
Nothing had been done.
Court cannot lose sight of the fact that keeping in view the time taken in routine by the postal authorities for ordinary letters ranging from a minimum of 4 to 7 days, it was not expected that even if the petitioner had given his Jammu address as alleged by the respondents, the interview letter would reach him before the date fixed.
Again the action of respondent-University does not appear to be either fair or proper muchless in accordance with the principles of fair play.
As an autonomous authority, action of respondent No. 1 as well as of its functionaries, respondent No. 2 have to be tested on the touchstone of reasonableness and fair play, which it has failed to come up to in the present case.
By issuing interview letter with such a short notice, respondents 1 and 2 have not acted reasonably and, in fact, their action is totally arbitrary and unjust.
Therefore on this basis it is held that petitioner was not called for interview by respondents 1 and 2 though he was eligible being fully qualified in terms of Annexure P3 reproduced hereinabove.
13.
So far as the plea of respondents 1 and 2 that it was the petitioner who had asked respondent 1 and 2 to send his interview letter care of Shri JN Gupta at Jammu, this fact is not supported from the record.
It may be worthwhile to mention here that there is no affidavit in support of the reply filed by the said respondents.
It hardly needs to be mentioned that in pleadings in a writ petition there is no evidence and the pleas of the parties are supported by affidavits which need to be sworn and verified in accordance with law.
In the absence of a legal and valid affidavit it is not possible to appreciate, muchless accept, the plea of a party, respondents 1 and 2.
This Court is of the view that affidavit had purposely not been filed by respondents 1 and 2 because they were well aware that it will not be possible for both of them to support their actions as noted hereinabove in the background of this case.
Respondents 1 and 2 could have supported their this plea by filing the affidavit of Shri JN Gupta or atleast could have controverted the supplementary affidavit filed by the petitioner, that is also not the case here.
That being so, the plea of respondents that the petitioner did not appear in spite of issuance of Annexure RII dated 5.12.1995 cannot be upheld.
14.
In view of the aforesaid discussion this writ petition is allowed and the appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of Senior Technical Assistant is hereby quashed and set aside as he was ineligible in terms of Annexure P3 on the date when he was interviewed and consequently selected to the post of Senior Technical Assistant.
It is further ordered that respondents 1 and 2 will interview the petitioner by fixing a date for the said purpose and if found suitable would appoint him to the said post.
Respondents 1 and 2 will also pay the costs of this petition to the petitioner which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.