VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 16121991 whereby services of the petitioner as Principal were dispensed with.
2.
Respondent No. 1, Managing Committee of SMDRSD College, Pathankot, is a society duly registered under the Societies Registration Act and is managing the college commonly known as SMDRSD College at Pathankot (hereinafter referred to as the College).
The College is a recognised and government aided educational institution receiving 95% aid from the Punjab Government.
It is affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (in short, the GNDU).
3.
In the year 1969, petitioner was appointed as lecturer in Political Science.
He continued to work as such upto March, 1984, when the Principal of the College namely KL Saggar was placed under suspension and petitioner vide order dated 2331984 was asked to officiate as Principal.
Petitioner continued to officiate as Principal, when vide order dated 171989, he was promoted as such on ad-hoc basis.
Vide letter dated 20121989, petitioner was appointed as Principal of the College w.e.f 20121989 on probation for one year.
His appointment was subject to the approval of GNDU and DPI (Colleges) Punjab, Chandigarh (in short, the DPI).
Vide letter dated 12111990, his period of probation was extended w.e.f.
20.12.1990 to 19121991.
It has been alleged in the petition that when the petitioner went to college to join his duty on the morning of 17.12.1991, he was not allowed to enter the college gate.
He learnt from the lecturers in the college that in the attendance register, against his name a cross has been put and note in red ink has been made that his services have been dispensed with w.e.f 16121991.
Petitioner has alleged that no order in this regard was communicated to him.
He then approached the GNDU and also the DPI It was from the university that he managed to get copy of letter dated 17.12.1991 written by President of Managing Committee of the College, that petitioner's services have been dispensed with w.e.f.
16121991 (AN).
Copy of the letter has been annexed to the petition as Annexure P-16.
It may also be noticed that letter whereby services of the petitioner have been dispensed with has been annexed as R-4.
The order dispensing with the services of the petitioner is being impugned in this petition on the ground that the same is against the provisions of Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974 (in short, the 1974 Act) and the rules framed thereunder and also the rules and regulations framed by GNDU as contained in its Calendar, Vol. II.
The order is also being impugned on the ground that the same has been passed due to mala fide of respondents 4 to 7.
4.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 1, 2 and 4.
Respondents 5 to 7 have filed short affidavits.
In their written statement, respondents 1, 2 and 4 have taken the preliminary objection that the College is a minority institution run by Sanatan Dharmees who are religiously and linguistically in minority in the State of Punjab and, therefore, no writ petition is competent and maintainable.
Respondents have asserted that even assuming that provisions of the 1974 Act are applicable to the answering respondents, the 1974 Act itself provides the remedy of an appeal and revision to DPI and further to the College Tribunal as constituted under the said Act.
On merits, it has been stated that petitioner's services have been dispensed with during the period of probation on the ground that his work and conduct was not found satisfactory and as such, provisions of Sections 3 to 5 of the 1974 Act are not applicable.
Respondents have averred that when petitioner was promoted on 171989, vide Annexure P-3, it was done without following the procedure.
No selection committee was constituted to consider the claim of the petitioner, nor were the nominees of the GNDU to which the College is affiliated or the nominees of DPI, associated with the selection.
Subsequently, a Selection Committee was constituted to consider the claim of the petitioner along with various others, and the petitioner was selected.
Letter dated 20121989 was issued, appointing the petitioner as Principal on probation w.e.f.
20121989 subject to the approval of GNDU and DPI Petitioner never felt aggrieved against this order and, thus, cannot be permitted to agitate the matter at this stage.
Respondents have denied the other averments made in the writ petition and thus, have submitted that order dispensing with the services of petitioner is legal being innocuous which causes no stigma and has no penal consequences.
Respondents 5 to 7 have denied the allegations of mala fide alleged against them.
5.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate, for the respondents has raised a preliminary objection that the College being a minority institution, no writ petition is competent.
He contended that since the grievance of the petitioner is that he has completed the statutory period of probation and has become permanent on the expiry of probation period and on that account, termination of his services amounted to dismissal from service which penalty could not be imposed unless the same was approved by the DPI under Section 4(1) of the 1974 Act, he should have approached the DPI for the necessary relief instead of approaching this Court.
In answer to this submission, Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate, for the petitioner, has contended that the College is recognised and government-aided, receiving 95% aid from the Government and affiliated to GNDU and, therefore, the writ petition has rightly been filed in this Court.
6.
It is not in dispute that the College is a society duly registered under the Societies Registration Act and is recognised and government-aided receiving 95% aid from the Government and affiliated to GNDU It is also not in dispute that educational institutions established and administered by Sanatan Dharmees who are religiously linguistic in minority in the State of Punjab, have the protection of Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
The relevant provisions of the 1974 Act which are necessary for the decision of preliminary, objection raised by counsel for the respondent, are as under:  "Section - 3 :  Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank not to be ordered except after inquiry :  No employee shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
Section - 4 :  Procedure to be observed before dismissal and removal:  1.
The penalty of dismissal or removal from service shall not be imposed unless the same is approved by the Director.
2.
Where after the inquiry referred to in section 3, it is proposed to impose the penalty of dismissal or removal from service the proposal shall be referred to the Director alongwith the relevant record and intimation about the proposal having been so referred shall be sent to the employee concerned also simultaneously.
3.
The employee may, within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the intimation referred to in sub-section (2), make a representation against the proposed penalty to the Director, who may, after examining the record and giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing, give his approval to the imposition of the proposed penalty of dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, or refuse to give approval if the proposal is found to be mala fide or by way of victimisation or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
4.
Any party aggrieved by an order of Director under sub-section (3) may file an appeal to the College Tribunal which may, after giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may deem fit."
Section 3 prohibits dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of a teacher without reasonable enquiry.
Under Section 4, the teacher can be dismissed or removed with the approval of DPI It also provides for an appeal to the College Tribunal.
In SMDRSD College Society, Pathankot v. The Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1988(1) S.L.R.
229, it was held by DV Sehgal, J (as he then was) that the provisions of Section 4 of the 1974 Act in their application to an educational institute established and administered by a minority based on religion or language is ultra vires Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
However, the provisions of Section 3 of the 1974 Act and Rule 3 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Rules, 1978 (in short, 1978 Rules), which regulate the procedure for imposition of penalty of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, were held to be regulatory measures providing protection to the employees against any arbitrary action and, therefore, in no way infringe Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
In Guru Nanak Khalsa High School, Sector 30-B Chandigarh v. The Chandigarh Administration and others, 1987(2) SLR 176, DV Sehgal, J, while examining sub-sections (2), (4), (5) and (6) of Section 3 of Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969, (as applicable to Union Territory, Chandigarh), held that order of dismissal from service passed by the management of an educational institution established and administered by a linguistic or religious minority cannot be made subject to the approval or confirmation of an officer of the State Government.
It was also held that educational institutions established and administered by linguistic or religious minority which are protected by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, cannot be made to surrender the fundamental right of this protection on the mere ground that they receive grant-in-aid from the Government.
A Division Bench of this Court in Managing Committee of the Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Jullundur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) S.L.R.
415, on analysis of Article 30(1) of the Constitution and after relying upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in IS Azeez Basha and another v. The Union of India etc., AIR 1968 SC 662, Lilly Kurian v. Sr. Lewina and others, AIR 1979 SC-52 and The All Saints High School etc. etc. v. The Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and others etc., AIR 1980 SC 1042, held that the State or any other authority under the garb of adopting regulatory measures cannot interfere in the administrative autonomy of the institution.
If any authority starts interfering with the management of the institution it would amount to blatant interference which is violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution and would be wholly inapplicable to the concerned institution.
In that case, the order passed by the DPI was held to be an interference by an outside authority evidently taking away the disciplinary power of Managing Committee of the institution and thus, was quashed being violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
During the course of arguments, some doubt in regard to correctness of decision in Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Jullundur's case (supra) was raised, when reference was made to decision of this Court in Rakesh Trikha v. S.M.D.R.S.D.
College, Pathankot and others (L.P.A. No., 294 of 1993) wherein the L.P.A.
Bench after having referred to Division Bench judgment in The Managing Committee of SMDRSD College Society, Pathankot v. Shri KL Saggar, 1992(1) SCT 220 (P&H) : 1992(1) RSJ 372 observed that "the Division Bench of this Court has clearly observed in the appellate order that the view of the learned Single Judge holding Section 4 to be violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India was not correct."
However, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate for respondents, has fairly conceded that Division Bench in KL Saggar's case (supra) has not held that view taken by the learned Single Judge is incorrect.
It is apparent from a reading of para 9 of the judgment that the matter was left open to be agitated in an appropriate proceeding.
In Rakesh Trikha's and KL Saggar's cases (supra), judgment of the Division Bench in Kanya Mahavidyalaya's case (supra) was not brought to the notice of the learned Judges.
Till date, the principle as laid down by Division Bench in Kanya Mahavidyalaya Jullundur's case holds the field.
In view of this, the contention of Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram that for the redressal of his grievance, petitioner may be asked to approach DPI (Colleges) Punjab under Section 4 of the 1974 Act, cannot be accepted as that would amount to an interference by an outside authority taking away the disciplinary powers of the institution.
He then referred to some of the judgments of this Court whereby the case of eight lecturers of this very colleges have been referred to DPI under Section 4 of the 1974 Act.
The orders referred to by the counsel were passed on the concession given by the counsel opposite and cannot be cited as binding precedent.
No amount of consent or acquiescence can make provision of the statute applicable to a subject when application of it is violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India.
Counsel, however, does not dispute the jurisdiction of this Court to go into the legality of the order dispensing with the services of the petitioner.
This concession has rightly been given by the counsel in view of observations made in Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Jullundur's case, which may be noticed as under :-  "This institution is affiliated with Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, and the State provides financial grant to the institution to the extent of 95 per cent of the deficit.
The institution being affiliated with the University, the institution has to follow the statutory measures regulating educational standard and efficiency imposed by the University.
Clause 14 of the University Calendar adopted provisions of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1974, as part of the regulatory provisions.
Similar circumstances were before Supreme Court in Manmohan Singh Jaitla v. Commissioner, Union Territory, Chandigarh and others, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 364.
In that case, Guru Nanak Khalsa High School was an aided school receiving 95 per cent of its expenses as grant from the Government.
Services of the Head Master as well as of a Drawing Teacher were terminated by the Management of the institution.
The Head Master and Drawing Teacher filed a writ challenging their removal from service.
A similar objection was taken that the school being a private institution is not amenable to writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
Repelling this objection, the Supreme Court inter alia held that the aided school receiving 95 per cent grant from the public exchequer and whose employees have received the statutory protection under the Punjab Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1969 and which is subject to the regulations, would certainly be amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
It was observed that the financial assistance of the State to meet financial expenditure of the institution would afford the indication of the institution being impregnated with governmental character.
The dictum laid down by the Supreme Court in this judgment squarely covers the facts of the present case and we hold that the writ petition filed by Smt. Santosh Puri is maintainable."
On merits, Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner, has contended that petitioner was promoted as Principal in July, 1989, vide Annexure P-3 and continued in service upto 16121991.
Petitioner has rendered continuous and uninterrupted service for more than two years and as provided under Section 2-A of the 1974 Act and Regulation 3 of the GNDU Calendar, petitioner would be deemed to be confirmed and his temporary service was to count towards confirmation.
Thus, according to him, petitioner could be removed after following the procedure laid down in the 1974 Act.
He has termed the order dispensing with the services of the petitioner as violative of provisions of the Act, rules and regulations of University calendar.
On the other hand, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate, has contended that services of the petitioner have been dispensed with within the period of probation on consideration of his work and conduct, and the order being innocuous cannot be interfered with by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties, it is necessary to notice the pleadings relevant to the arguments raised in this regard.
Petitioner in para No. 3 of the writ petition has stated that he continued to work as lecturer in Political Science upto March, 1984, when the then Principal, KL Saggar, was placed under suspension and as a consequence thereof, the petitioner was appointed to officiate as Principal vide order dated 2331984.
Petitioner has averred that he continued to work as Principal in an officiating capacity, when he was promoted as Principal on ad hoc basis vide order dated 171989.
In para No. 4 of the petition, petitioner has averred that on 20121989 he was given another letter wherein it was stated that he has been appointed a Principal w.e.f.
20121989 on probation subject to the approval from GNDU and DPI In answer to these pleadings, respondents in their written statement have stated that the promotion of the petitioner vide order dated 171989 was without following the procedure; that no selection committee was constituted to consider the claim of the petitioner nor were nominees of GNDU to which the College is affiliated or the nominees of the DPI were associated with the selection, and consequently, both these Authorities did not approve the appointment of the petitioner as Principal.
Subsequently, a selection committee was constituted to consider the claim of the petitioner along with various other persons.
Petitioner was selected and was issued letter dated 20121989 appointing him as Principal w.e.f.
20121989 subject to the approval of GNDU and the DPI In the replication filed to written statement, this assertion has not been denied.
When the petitioner himself has stated in his petition that he was promoted as Principal on ad hoc basis (emphasis supplied) vide order dated 171989, counsel cannot be permitted .to say that petitioner's appointment as Principal was made on regular basis vide order dated 171989.
The petitioner has to remain bound by his pleadings and cannot be permitted to take different stand unless pleadings in this regard are allowed to be amended.
Admittedly, no selection committee was constituted when the petitioner was promoted ion ad hoc basis.
His ad hoc period from 171989 to 20121989, when he was selected by a duly constituted selection committee, cannot be counted towards the period of probation.
The period of probation of two years would start when he was selected and regularly appointed.
In this regard, Section 2-A of the 1974 Act, and Ordinances 1.2 and 31 in Chapter 11 of the GNDU Calendar, Volume III, 1986 edition, may be noticed:  "Section 2-A : Period of Probation  An employee appointed against a vacancy likely to exist for more than one year shall remain on probation for a period of one year which may be extended from time to time :  Provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed two years."
Ordinance 1.2 : Procedure for appointment :  (A) The appointment of a college lecturer will be made by a Selection Committee consisting of the following members :  (a) The Chairman of the Governing Body of the College or his nominee ........... (Chairman);  (b) A nominee of the Vice-Chancellor who should be an expert in the subject;  (c) The Principal of the College;  (d) A representative of the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, Chandigarh;  (e) One subject expert to be detailed by the DPI (C) Punjab;  Note : No selection shall be considered valid unless atleast one representative of the DPI (C) is present.
Recommendations of the Selection Committee shall be subject to the approval of the DPI (Colleges) and the Vice Chancellor of the University.
(B) The appointment of a college Principal will be made by a Selection Committee consisting of the following members :  (a) The Chairman of the Governing Body of the College ........... (Chairman);  (b) One nominee of the Vice-Chancellor;  (c) One person to be appointed by the Chairman of the Governing Body of the College out of a panel of ten persons prepared by the DPI (C), Punjab; and  (d) The Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab or his representative.
Note : The recommendations of the Selection Committee shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Instructions (C), Punjab, Chandigarh and the Vice Chancellor of the University.
Ordinance 31 : The employee will ordinarily be appointed on one year's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work is found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Managing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in the absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period, in no case, will be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment."
The afore-mentioned provisions clearly stipulate that appointment of the college lecturer shall be made by a Selection Committee consisting of Chairman of the Governing Body of the College or his nominee; a nominee of the Vice Chancellor who should be an expert in the subject; Principal of the college; a representative of the DPI (Colleges) Punjab, Chandigarh, and one subject expert to be detailed by the DPI (C) Punjab.
Note to Ordinance 1.2 provides that recommendations of the Selection Committee would be subject to the approval of DPI (Colleges) and Vice Chancellor of the University.
Ordinance 31 provides that every college lecturer would be appointed on one year's probation and confirmed if his work is found to be satisfactory.
It is further required that the Managing Body has to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period as to whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended.
In absence of such a notice, the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
It is also provided that the probationary period cannot be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment under any circumstances.
Section 2-A of the 1974 Act provides that maximum period of probation shall not exceed two years, where appointment is likely to exceed for more than one year.
There is no dispute with the proposition that temporary service of an employee has to be counted towards his/her probationary period, provided he/she is appointed after following the procedure prescribed for regular appointment.
But this proposition cannot be made applicable to the case of the petitioner.
Counsel are unanimous that the post of Principal became available only w.e.f.
171989 when KL Saggar who had earlier been suspended, on his superannuation would have retired.
According to the case set out in the petition, vide order dated 171989 petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis.
No selection committee was constituted to consider the claim of the petitioner vis-a-vis others and it was only on 20121989 that he was appointed as Principal after following the procedure as provided under Ordinance 1.2, by a duly constituted selection committee.
Two years probationary period was to come to an end on 19121991, but before the period could have expired, services of the petitioner were dispensed with vide order dated 16121991.
The services of the petitioner having been dispensed with during the period of probation, no enquiry as contemplated under Section 3 of the 1974 Act was necessary.
The Managing Committee of the College, in law was competent to dispense with the service of the petitioner during the period of probation as provisions of Section 3 of the 1974 Act are not applicable to a probationer.
A Division Bench of this Court in Kartar Singh v. Director, Public Instruction, Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1980(2) S.L.R.
843, has held that provisions of Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the 1974 Act are not applicable to the case of a probationer.
Counsel for the petitioner cannot derive any help from decision of this Court in Managing Council v. Ranjit Singh, 1993(2) SCT 762(P&H) : 1993(2) S.L.R.
485, SN Pasricha v. State of Haryana, 1989(4) S.L.R.
72, and Gurdish Saini and ors. v. GNDU Amritsar through its Registrar and ors., 1994(2) SCT 423 (P&H) : 1994(2) R.S.J 72.
In Ranjit Singh's case (supra), termination of services though was allegedly made during the period of probation, but it was found that the same was passed after two years of service including the period spent on post on temporary basis.
However, in the instant case, petitioner on his selection by a duly constituted selection committee was appointed as Principal on 20121989 and his period of probation was extended vide letter dated 1211990, w.e.f.
20121989 to, 19121991.
Before the period of probation could have come to an end, his services were dispensed with.
In SN Pasricha's case (supra), termination of services of the employee was set aside, having been passed for extraneous considerations.
In Gurdish Saini's case (supra), the appointment of the petitioners therein was initially made on temporary basis against substantive vacancies.
It was approved by the DPI as well as by Vice Chancellor of the University.
After the petitioners therein had worked for more than two years, the college sought approval of the university for the appointment of the petitioners by treating them on probation with effect from the date of their appointment.
This proposal was declined by the university and another effort made by the college in this respect met the same fate.
The action of the university was held to be contrary to Ordinance 31 in Chapter 11 as the petitioners therein, by force of' Ordinance, after expiry of period of two years, were deemed to have been confirmed.
It may be noticed that in Gurdish Saini's case, initial appointment was made by a duly constituted selection committee and had been approved by the Vice Chancellor of the University.
In the present case, initial appointment of the petitioner was on ad hoc basis and he was appointed only for the first time on 20121989 when he was selected by a duly constituted selection committee.
9.
Counsel for the petitioner then contended that order dispensing with the services of the petitioner is wholly mala fide.
Counsel referred to some of the averments made in the petition and replication to contend that respondent No. 4 is in the habit of getting all lecturers and Principals on probation/officiating basis.
Services of eight lecturers were terminated during the period of their probation.
Since the petitioner had given certificates of good conduct to these lecturers, they challenged their termination in this Court and obtained an interim stay.
Respondent No. 4 started pressing the petitioner to make recommendations in back date for the termination of their services.
On petitioner's refusal, his probation period was extended on 12111990 and thereafter the petitioner was asked to make recommendations in back date.
The petitioner was forced to write letters recommending the termination of eight lecturers and under coercion the same were procured.
Respondents in their written statement and short affidavits have denied that services of the petitioner have been dispensed with on account of mala fide of respondents 4 to 7.
It has been submitted that the Managing Committee of the College comprises of 30 members.
The current members of the Committee are 28 in number, out of which, four are related to respondent No. 4.
With regard to termination of services of the lecturers, it has been submitted that their services were terminated during the period of probation on the recommendations made by the petitioner.
With regard to dispensing with the services of the petitioner, respondents have averred that the Managing Committee of the College resolved to dispense with the services of the petitioner as Principal in meeting held on 311.1991.
Pursuant to this decision, Jaimal Singh, Superintendent of the College, served the orders along with cheque of up-to-date salary to the petitioner, in his office on 16121991 in the afternoon.
Petitioner came to the college on 17.12.1991 and took away various records of the college which were in his custody, including the official letters from the GNDU The College per force had to write to GNDU to send it the duplicates of all correspondence with the college from January, 1991 onwards as the same was removed by the petitioner.
Copy of letter to this effect has been attached as R-5.
Thus, what emerges is that apart from saying that respondents 4 to 7 have ganged up against the petitioner or his services have been dispensed with because he was asked to recommend the termination of services of lecturers, which he didn't do in the first instance, but when his probation period was extended he agreed to make recommendations as desired, nothing more has been alleged.
Respondents have denied these allegations.
As to when certificates of good conduct or recommendations with regard to termination of services of the eight lecturers were given or made, are the disputed questions of fact which cannot be gone into by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In this view of the matter, the order impugned cannot be quashed on the ground that it has been passed on account of mala fide.
10.
Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner, lastly contended that the work and conduct of the petitioner always remained satisfactory.
He urged that the order dispensing with the services of the petitioner is illegal as there is no material on the basis of which it has been passed.
He referred to messages given by respondent No. 4 as contained in the prospectus issued by the College wherein work of the petitioner has been praised.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents referred to paras 13 and 18 of the written statement to submit that the work and conduct of the petitioner was not found satisfactory during the period of probation.
It was for this reason that initially, the period of probation was extended.
Petitioner was present in the meeting of the Managing Committee when decision was taken wherein the defects in his work and conduct were pointed out by the members of the Managing Committee.
Even the University has commented adversely on the work and conduct of the petitioner.
Before the Vice Chancellor of the University, petitioner himself admitted his failure to maintain discipline during the course of university examination.
On account of this failure and inability on the part of the petitioner, three papers of the university examinations were cancelled and the students were compelled to take examination at Gudaspur.
Each student also had to pay an additional amount of Rs. 225/- as fresh admission fee.
As many as 123 students of the college have been debarred for use of unfair means during the course of these examinations.
Mr. Patwalia contended that Prof. ML Sharma who had taken over from the petitioner, was the Centre Superintendent.
The Unfair Means Committee constituted by the University had passed strictures against Prof. Sharma as there were allegations that Prof. Sharma had written down the solution of question No. 1(c) in manuscript and caused it to be circulated amongst the candidates concerned.
He, thus, contended that petitioner at no stage was involved or a party to the use of unfair means in the examinations.
A reading of Annexure P-17 indicates that the Committee found it difficult to record a categoric finding in respect of these allegations for and against Prof. Sharma, and accordingly asked the university to probe the matter in detail.
In any case, the competency and fitness of Prof. Sharma is not in question here.
What is in question is as to whether there was any material on the basis of which the Committee found that the work and conduct of the petitioner was not satisfactory.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was Controller of Examinations.
The overall responsibility to conduct examinations was of the petitioner.
He has not denied the averment of the respondents that the university had commented adversely on his work and conduct, and before the Vice Chancellor of the university, petitioner himself admitted his failure to maintain discipline during the course of university examinations.
Thus, it cannot be said that there was no material or the material placed before the Managing Committee, was inadequate or insufficient to assess the work of the petitioner as not satisfactory.
Otherwise too, the satisfaction of the employer about the work and conduct of his employee is entirely personal to the employer and it is he who can opine about the same.
It is not the province of the Courts to ordinarily go behind that view arrived at within the four corners of his right to do so.
A Full Bench of this court in Guru Nanak Dev University v. Dr. (Mrs.) Iqbal Kaur Sandhu and others, AIR 1976 P&H 69, has held that "To our mind, it is entirely erroneous to consider the matter of the satisfaction of the employer about the work and conduct of his employee as if it were a lis betwixt them in which each side must marshal up his facts and arguments in extenso and then a speaking and rational order be recorded for holding whether the work was satisfactory or otherwise.
Unless binding authority says to the contrary, we are on record to hold that satisfaction in these cases is the personal satisfaction of the employer.
The learned Judge was, therefore, in error in requiring and wanting details of factual material and each instance of unsatisfactory work and conduct as a condition precedent for the employer to arrive at an overall appraisal about the work and conduct of the probationer.
We are firmly of the view that it is unnecessary and even dangerous to induct any such novel or nebulous concept in a matter so essentially simple as the satisfaction, or otherwise of an employer, qua the work of his employee."
Thus, the last contention too is devoid of any merit.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.