GS Singhvi, J - These appeals are directed against the order dated 1551989 by which the learned single Judge allowed C.W.P.
No. 6687 of 1986 filed by RN Attri (respondent No. 1 herein) and quashed the appointment of Gurdip Singh (appellant In LPA No. 1940 of 1989) on the post of Tourist Officer with a direction that the case of the writ petitioner be considered for promotion.
2.
The facts on which there is no controversy between the parties are that respondent No. 1-writ petitioner joined service in the Tourism Department of Punjab in September, 1964 on the post of Guide-cum-Clerk.
Later on, he was posted as Reception Officer.
By an order dated 1451980, Director Cultural Affairs, Archaeology and Tourism Department, Punjab appointed him a Tourist Officer on ad hoc (basis) for a period of six months and posted him at Tourist Information Centre, New Delhi because the incumbent of the post, namely, Shri Anoop Singh was not attending duty.
After six years and three months, the Director, Tourim, Chandigarh issued order Annexure P-2 dated 2981986 and posted respondent No. 1 as Reception Officer at Tourist Information Centre, Chandigarh.
Simultaneously, he posted Gurdip Singh as Tourist Officer at Tourist Information Centre, Amritsar.
Respondent No. 1 protested against the order dated 2981986 and submitted that in the garb of transfer he cannot be reverted from the post of Tourist Officer.
He also challenged the appointment of Gurdip Singh as Tourist Officer on the ground that he was not eligible to be appointed.
He also claimed regular appointment on the post of Tourist Officer by promotion.
Having failed to elicit any response from the concerned authorities, respondent No. 1 filed C.W.P.
No. 6687 of 1986 for quashing of the order dated 2981986 by which Gurdip Singh had been appointed as Tourist Officer.
He also prayed that a mandamus be issued directing the official respondents to regularise his appointment as Tourist Officer in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab.
In the writ petition, he averred that Gurdip Singh did not possess the qualifications prescribed for appointment on the post of Tourist Officer and, therefore, his selection and appointment should be declared as nullity.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents (appellants in LPA No. 291 of 1990), it was averred that after expiry of the period of six months stipulated in the order dated 1451980, the tenure of ad hoc appointment of the writ petitioner was not extended and he continued to work as Reception Officer.
They further averred that Gurdip Singh had been appointed after interviewing the candidates sponsored by the Central Placement Committee/Employment Exchange and in the absence of statutory rules.
Still further, they averred that even though Gurdip Singh had only passed BA with Geography, the collective decision taken by the Selection Committee to recommend his name did not call for interference by the Court.
4.
In the written statement filed by Gurdip Singh, it was averred that he had been selected for appointment as Tourist Officer by a duly constituted Selection Committee and the petitioner does not have the locus standi to question the same.
The learned Single Judge quashed the appointment of Gurdip Singh by making the following observations :-  "I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the case law cited at the bar.
Admittedly, there are no statutory rules for filling up the post in question.
According to the State Government, the practice has been that 60% of vacancies were filled up by promotion and 40% by direct recruitment.
Since there were three vacancies for post, two were filled up by promotion whereas the third one which had fallen vacant because of the absence of Shri Anup Singh was filled up by direct recruitment, according to the return of the State Government.
In the present case, the decision of the State Government to fill up the post by direct recruitment appears only with the purpose of favouring respondent No. 3 otherwise there were many other candidates also who were eligible and any one of them could be selected for the post.
In this context, the allegation of the petitioner in para 11 of the writ petition that all this was done at the instance of respondent No. 4-Shri Kuldip Singh, who was also one of the members of the departmental selection committee also becomes pertinent.
There is no explanation whatsoever why respondent No. 3 alone was found suitable for the post when he even did not fulfil the requisite qualification.
The petitioner has even alleged tampering of the record at the instance of respondent No. 4.
The very fact that respondent No. 3 has been selected arbitrarily shows that it was only to deprive the petitioner promotion to the post, otherwise there was nothing in the way of the State Goverment to fill up the post by promotion in the absence of any statutory rules.
It has been admitted in the return filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 that respondent No. 3 was not eligible for the post.
Thus, the appointment of respondent No. 3 being arbitrary is liable to be quashed."
Shri Ashutosh Mohunta, counsel for appellant-Gurdip Singh and Shri Rupinder Khosla, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab argued that the State Government had the absolute right to devise appropriate mode for recruitment on the post of Tourist Officer and as the selection of Gurdip Singh was not contrary to any statutory rule, the learned Single Judge was not justified in nullifying the same.
They further argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge to consider the case of the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 for promotion is totally unwarranted because even as per the stand taken by the respondents in C.W.P.
No. 5048 of 1988, the post against which Gurdip Singh had been appointed was to be filled by direct recruitment.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions of the learned counsel.
There cannot be any doubt that the State has the exclusive prerogative to frame rules or issue executive instructions for regulating recruitment to the civil posts and other posts falling within its purview and also to lay down the conditions of service of the persons appointed in connection with the affairs of the State but it is also well-settled that after having framed the rules or having issues executive instructions on the subject, the State, its functionaries and agencies are bound to act in accordance with such rules and/or instructions and any deviation from the same would ordinarily attract the charge of arbitrariness and violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In matters relating to public employment, such deviation would result in violation of Article 16 as well.
6.
In Amarjit Singh Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 984, a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question as to whether the government could deviate from the administrative instructions issued by it for determination of the inter se seniority of the Officers of the Provincial Civil Medical Services and Public Health Services.
While upholding the right of the State to issue administrative instructions in exercise of its executive power, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Now, it is true that clause (2)(ii) of the memorandum was in the nature of administrative instruction, not having the force of law, but the State Government could not at its own sweet will depart from it without rational justification and fix an artificial date for commencing the length of continuous service in the case of some individual officers only for the purpose of giving them seniority in contravention of that clause.
That would be clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The sweep of Articles 14 and 16 is wide and pervasive.
These two Articles embody the principle of rationality and they are intended to strive against arbitrary and discriminatory action taken by the State; where the State Government departs from a principle of seniority laid down by it, albeit by administrative instructions, and the departure is without reason and arbitrary, it would directly infringe the guarantee of equality under Articles 14 and 16."
7.
In Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "The condition of eligibility was that the person submitting a tender must be conducting or running a registered IInd Class hotel or restaurant and he must have at least 5 years experience as such and if he did not satisfy this condition of eligibility, his tender would not be eligible for consideration.
This was the stand or norm of eligibility laid down by the 1st respondent and since the 4th respondent did not satisfy this standard or norm, it was not competent to the 1st respondent to entertain the tender of the 4th respondent.
It is a well settled rule of administrative law that an executive authority must be rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its actions to be judged and it must scrupulously observe those standards on pain of invalidation of an act in violation of them.
This rule was enunciated by Mr. Justice Frankfurter in Vitarelli v. Seaton, (1959) 359 US 535 : 3 L Ed 2d 1012 where the learned Judge said :- "An executive agency must be rigorously held to be the standards by which it professes its action to be judged.....
Accordingly, if dismissal from employment is based on a defined procedure, even though generous beyond the requirements that bind such agency, that procedure must be scrupulously observed.
.......
This judicially evolved rule of administrative law is now firmly established and, if I may add, rightly so : He that takes the procedural sword shall perish with the sword."
This Court accepted the rule as valid and applicable in India in AS Ahulwalia v. State of Punjab, (1975) 3 SCR 82 : AIR 1975 SC 984 and in subsequent decision given in Sukhdev v. Bhagatram, (1975) 3 SCR 619 : AIR 1975 SC 1331, Mathew, J, quoted the above-referred observations of Mr. Justice Frankfurter with approval.
It may be noted that this rule, though supportable also emanating from Article 14, does not rest merely on that Article.
It has an independent existence apart from Article 14.
It is a rule of administrative law which has been judicially evolved as a check against exercise of arbitrary power by the executive authority."
8.
In the light of the propositions laid down by the Supreme Court, it is to be seen whether the appointment of Gurdip Singh was legal and justified.
There is no dispute between the parties that for the purpose of filling up the post of Tourist Officer, the department had sent requisition dated 2271986 to the employment exchange indicating therein that the candidate must possess the qualification of Graduate from recognised University with History and Punjabi pass up to Matric standard.
It is also not in dispute that at the time of consideration of his candidature, Gurdip Singh was having the qualification of MA with Geography and not BA with History.
It is, thus, clear that he was not eligible to be considered for selection for appointment as Tourist Officer.
Notwithstanding this, he was considered by the Departmental Selection Committee and recommended for appointment and that illegality was compounded by the Director, Tourism by issuing order dated 2191986 appointing Shri Gurdip Singh as Tourist Officer.
In view of this, we have no hesitation to hold that the learned Single Judge has rightly quashed his appointment on the ground that he was not eligible to be considered for appointment as Tourist Officer.
9.
However, we find some merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that the learned Single Judge could not have directed the consideration of the case of the writ petitioner for promotion and it should have been left to the discretion of the government to devise appropriate mode for making appointment on the post of Tourist Officer.
In our opinion, in the absence of statutory rules, it was open to the State Government to take appropriate policy decision for making appointment on the post of Tourist Officer by direct recruitment or by promotion and by issuing a writ under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the learned Single Judge could not have curtailed the discretion of the government with the direction that the case of the writ petitioner be considered for promotion.
10.
In the result, the appeals are dismissed subject to the direction that the State Government shall be free to take appropriate policy decision in regard to the mode to be adopted for recruitment on the post of Tourist Officer.
We hope that instead of continuining with the policy of ad hocism of taking different decisions at different points of time, the State Government will initiate exercise for framing rules for recruitment on the post of Tourist Officer and other posts in the department and then make appointment in accordance with the prescribed mode.
Appeals dismissed.