Arijit Pasayat, C.J.
- Both these Original Petitions are interlinked.
Correctness of the common judgment passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Ernakulam Bench (in short `the Tribunal') is under challenge.
Petitioners had filed Original Applications before the Tribunal (No. OA 367 of 1997 by petitioner TK Kurian and OA No. 536 of 1997 by petitioner Gopakumar) questioning the selection of Elsy.
K.O.-respondent No. 2 in OP No. 13597/98 and VS Sunil-respondent No. 4 in OP No. 16082/98 respectively.
Tribunal disposed of the two Original Applications filed before it by the petitioner in OP No. 16082/98 and one TG Minimol by a common judgment dated 271998.
On the same day, OA No. 367/97 filed by the petitioner in OP No. 13597/98 was also disposed of.
2.
Dispute relates to the selection to the post of Extra Departmental Packer (in short `the EDP').
As the judgments impugned contain common conclusion, at the request of the learned counsel for the parties, both the Original Applications were taken up.
Petitioner VA Gopakumar challenges the selection made on 1741997.
Petitioner TK Kurian takes the stand that he is working since 2.12.1996.
As he was not called for the interview along with the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange, he moved OA No. 324/97 and tribunal directed to consider his candidature also.
So far as Gopakumar is concerned, his interview was held on 7.4.1997 and for Kurian interview was held on 1031997.
According to them, the selection was made on the basis of the marks secured by the candidates at the SSLC Examination.
There was no interview held and there was no scope for assessing relative merits.
It is their stand that in view of the existing instructions, selection could not have been made only on the basis of the marks secured at the SSLC examination.
In any event the basis of selection was stipulated to be merit and, therefore, there was no rationale for basis of selection.
It is further stated that since they were already continued on the basis of selection already made, their non-selection is prima facie illegal.
Learned counsel for the respondents in this case submitted that after having participated in the selection process, it is not permissible for them to raise a dispute.
3.
The main plea advanced by the official respondents is that the rules called the `Method of Recruitment' found in Section III of Swamy's "Compilation of Service Rules for Extra Departmental Staff in Postal Department" read with "the Posts and Telegraph Extra Departmental Agents (Conduct and Service) Rules.
1964" found in Section II of the same compilation do not specifically prescribe any oral interview or award of marks separately at the interview for the post of EDSV or ED Packer.
They have stated that the applicants, along with other candidates, were called for the purpose of production of original documents to prove age, education and other qualifications and for the first respondent to verity the overall suitability of the candidates.
Since the successful candidates were found to be otherwise suitable, and to possess more merit, having secured higher marks in the SSLC than the applicants, they were selected in preference to the applicants.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Selection Committee cannot enlarge the scope of the method of selection fixed by the concerned authorities.
Merely because there was some participation in the process of selection that cannot create an estoppel and if the process of selection is vitiated, the same can be questioned.
Reliance was placed on the two decisions of the Apex Court in Radhey Shyam Singh v. Union of India, 1997(1) SCC 60 : 1997(1) SCT 627 (SC) and Rajkumar v. Shakti Raj, 1997(9) SCC 527 : 1997(2) SCT 76 (SC).
Additionally, it is submitted that executive instructions cannot give power for selection.
The present set of service rules and executive instructions relating recruitment have been questioned on the ground of lack of authority.
5.
The Service Rules holding the field and the instructions on `Method of Recruitment' are valid executive instructions issued under Article 73 read with Article 77 of the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short `the Constitution') and they hold the field regulating the service conditions of the ED Agents including the method of their recruitment.
Till the statutory rules are framed under Article 309 of the Constitution, these executive instructions along with the general and supplementary administrative instructions issued by the competent authorities will continue to be valid.
6.
Essentially we are called upon to decide whether the assessment of relative merits, as done by the Selection Committee, was fair.
It is fairly accepted that no interview has been prescribed specifically for the purpose of selection by the Director General of Posts (in short `DG (Posts)').
Where the process of selection is fair, the Court cannot substitute its own views for the desirability of having another test which may have given scope for better assessment.
Where the selection is fair and reasonable, it would not be permissible to nullify the selection on the ground that some other method could have been adopted.
Learned counsel for the petitioners stress on the desirability of having an interview to assess the merit.
The weight to be given to interview/test depends upon the requirement of the service to which recruitment is made, the source material available for recruitment, the composition of the Interview Board and several like factors.
Ordinarily, recruitment to public services is regulated by rules made under the provisions of Article 309 of the Constitution.
If the Courts try to redetermine the appropriate method of selection and the relative weight be attached to the various tests, that would not be permissible.
Where oblique motive is involved, then only Court can interfere.
(See Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, 1981(3) Serv LR 56).
A pass in SSLC was clearly stated to be a preferential qualification in the advertisement made for the purpose of selection.
Therefore, the Selection Committee was perfectly within its limit to take the marks secured at the SSLC as the guiding factor.
7.
Law is fairly well settled that candidates who have appeared for an interview or test or subjected to the process of selection cannot question the legality of the process.
The exceptions have been laid down in Radhey Shyam Singh, AIR 1997 SC 1610 and Rajkumar cases 1997 Lab IC 2088 (supra).
We need no to go into the question whether an estoppel came into operation, in view of our conclusion that there was nothing erroneous in the method of selection as adopted.
So far as the plea relating to Selection Committee enlarge the scope of instructions is concerned, the plea is equally without any substance.
It is settled law that members of the Selection Board or for that matter, any other Selection Committee do not have the jurisdiction to lay down the criteria for selection unless they are authorised specifically in that regard by the Rules made under Article 309.
It is basically the function of the rule making authority to provide the basis for selection.
(See Dr. Krushna Chandra Sahu v. State of Orissa, 1995(6) SCC 1 : 1995(4) SCT 560 (SC)).
What the Selection Committee did was to adopt method of selection on the preferential qualification.
No specific mode of selection has been indicated in the instructions.
Taking into account the nature of the job for which selection was made, the criteria for selection was fixed.
This is not a case where any new modalities were adopted beyond the stipulation made by the concerned authorities.
We do not find any merit in these Original Petitions and they are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.