BP Sharma, J - The present application has been filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India praying therein to issue a writ of ceretiorari quashing the order of the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali, vide letter No. 1592/78 dated 25th of October, 1978, by which the petitioner was dismissed from service.
The petitioner also further prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to reinstate the petitioner in police service on the post of constable, the post which was held by him at the relevant time.
He has also prayed for other consequential benefits regarding payment of dues etc.  2.
The case of the petitioner, in brief, is like this :  Petitioner was appointed as a constable in the Bihar Police after competing the test held at Daltonganj Police Line and joined his duties on 3rd of August 1965, petitioner worked as a matter (member ?)
of Palamau District police force for about one year and thereafter he was sent for training to Constable Training School, Nath Nagar, Bhagalpur.
After completing his training, he was transferred to Dhanbad District Police and in March, 1973, petitioner was transferred from Dhanbad District Police to Vaishali District Police where he worked till 9th May, 1977 to the satisfaction of his superior authorities.
On 10th of May, 1977, petitioner had gone to his home village after taking six days of compensatory leave which was granted to him by the then Sergeant Major, Vaishali Police Line.
While the petitioner was at his village home, he fell seriously ill and was unable to join his duties.
Therefore, after expiry of his leave, on 14th of May, 1977, petitioner sent an application under Certificate of Posting to the Sergeant Major, Vaishali for extension of his leave by ten days, petitioner attended the local Doctor for treatment who examined him and advised one month's rest and prescribed treatment for his ailment.
On 21st May 1977, petitioner sent an application to the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali under registered post requesting him for grant of leave for one month.
During the period the petitioner was under treatment.
He was again advised for a further one month's rest.
So, the petitioner on 12th June, 1977 also sent an application to the SP, Vaishali under registered post with a copy of Medical Certificate for further extension of leave for another one month from 12th June, 1977.
The copy of this petition (application ?)
is Annexure-2.
Further on 12th July 1977, petitioner again sent an application to the respondent No. 5, SP Vaishali, for further extension of leave in view of the advice of the attending Doctor along with medical certificates.
Petitioner had also sent a separate application to the SP Vaishali for payment of his salary.
The respondent No. 5 issued a letter to the petitioner vide Letter No. 1253 dated 1st July, 1977 intimating the petitioner that his subsistence allowance has been stopped from 1st July, 1977 and he further directed the petitioner that if he was actually suffering from illness, he should immediately appear before the Civil Surgeon, Palamau for medical check-up.
This letter is Annexure-3.
Petitioner stated that he had not received any order of suspension and the petitioner came to know about the so-called suspension through the above-mentioned letter of the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali.
In response to the aforesaid letter, the petitioner presented himself on 13th August, 1977 before the Civil Surgeon, Palamau for his medical examination who, after examining the petitioner, found that the petitioner was suffering from Peptic Ulcer Syndrome and recommended for further treatment for four weeks with complete rest.
The Civil Surgeon sent a letter to the respondent No. 5 vide his letter No. 1607 dated 22nd August, 1977 intimating him about the petitioner's physical condition.
Xerox copy of this letter is Annexure-4.
On 23rd August, 1977 petitioner sent an application under registered cover to the respondent No. 5 for extension of his leave for four weeks as advised by the Civil Surgeon, Palamau.
This letter is Annexure-5.
Further, on 20th September, 1977, petitioner again appeared before the Civil Surgeon, Palamau for his further check up and the Civil Surgeon, after examining the petitioner, advised him further rest for three weeks and intimated about it to the respondent No. 5, vide his letter dated 20th September, 1977, written in continuation of his earlier communication.
Petitioner also sent a separate application on 21st September, 1977 to the respondent No. 5 praying therein for extension of leave of three weeks, as advised by the Civil Surgeon.
This letter is Annexure-6.
Petitioner, after completion of three weeks, appeared before the Civil Surgeon on 11th October, 1977 for examination and the Civil Surgeon advised a further rest of three weeks and sent a due intimation to the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali, respondent No. 5, through letter dated 11th October, 1977.
The petitioner also sent an application for extension of leave by registered post on 12th October, 1977.
This letter is Annexure-7.
On 7th November, 1977, the Civil Surgeon was pleased to discharge the petitioner but advised him to remain in rest for another four weeks and he also sent an intimation to this effect to respondent No. 5.
Petitioner also simultaneously filed an application and sent the same to the respondent No. 5.
This letter dated 7th November, 1977 along with application dated 8th November, 1977 is Annexure-8.
On 17th September, 1977, the Civil Surgeon, Palamu declared the petitioner to be physically fit and released him and, so the petitioner joined his duty on 18th December, 1977.
The Superintendent of Police, Vaishali issued show cause notice to the petitioner vide his letter dated 26th December, 1977 asking the petitioner to show cause within a week against the allegations contained in the letter.
According to him, it was mentioned in the show cause that if the cause was not shown within a week, it would be deemed that the petitioner has nothing to do (say ?)
in the matter and it was further alleged in the show cause notice that the petitioner went on compensatory leave from 10th of May, 1977 and he was to present himself on 17th May, 1977 but he has joined his duty on 18th December, 1977.
Thus he was late in joining his duty by 215 days.
This letter is Annexure-9.
It is further stated that in the show cause notice mentioned above, six documentary exhibits were purported to have been attached, but the same were not sent to the petitioner along with the show cause notice.
According to him, out of six documents mentioned in the said show cause notice, petitioner on 23rd July 1977 had received only one document, i.e. the direction of the SP Vaishali asking him to present himself before the Civil Surgeon, Palamu for the treatment of his ailment or the petitioner should report on duty in the Police Line.
It is further stated that the petitioner who was working as constable went on permission leave from 1st January, 1978.
Petitioner on 4th January, 1978 sent a reply to the SP Vaishali requesting him to send some money out of the amount payable to the petitioner, so that the petitioner, who was suffering on account of paucity of money, was able to return and join his duty.
Again on 8th February, 1978, petitioner wrote a letter to the respondent No. 5 requesting him to send some money payable to him so that he, after making some arrangement for his starving dependents, might report on duty, as he was willing to join his duty.
This letter is Annexure-10.
On 14th February, a letter was issued from the office of respondent No. 5 vide Memo No. 371 under the signature of the Sergeant Major intimating the petitioner that his request for money payable to him for the period of leave and also the suspension allowance for the period he was under suspension has been rejected.
The Sergeant Major further informed the petitioner that the subsistence allowance of the petitioner has also been stopped, as the petitioner failed to join his duty after the period of leave was over.
The Sergeant Major, through the said letter, had directed the petitioner to report to the Police Lines, Vaishali as soon as the said information reached him.
The Xerox copy of the said letter is Annexure-11.
On 24th February, 1978, petitioner sent a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Tirhut Range, Muzaffarpur through the SP Vaishali praying for payment of subsistence allowance from 1st July, 1977 to 24th February, 1978, as the petitioner was in grip of trouble and his children were starving due to non-payment of subsistence allowance for which the petitioner was entitled and he had also written letters to the SP Vaishali in this regard.
Petitioner's said representation is Annexure-12.
Further it appears that the Sergeant Major, Vaishali issued a letter on 3rd July, 1978 under registered cover to the petitioner directing him to present himself in the Office of the Sergeant Major, Vaishali on 10th July, 1978 at 10.00 A.M. for disposal of his departmental proceeding bearing No. 7 of 1978.
The petitioner could not present himself before the Sergeant Major, as the said letter was received by him on 10th July, 1978.
Xerox copy of the said letter is Annexure-13.
On 14th July, 1978, the petitioner sent a letter to the Sergeant Major under registered cover stating therein that the petitioner received the letter dated 3rd July, 1978 on 10th July, 1978.
Copy of this letter is Annexure-14.
The Sergeant Major then sent a letter to the petitioner through Special Messenger, vide letter No. 1535 dated 14th July, 1978 directing the petitioner to appear in the office and present himself on 24th July, 1978 before the Sargeant Major, Vaishali for final explanation.
The said letter was received by the petitioner on 22nd July, 1978 at 400 pm Zerox copy of this letter is Annexure-15.
The petitioner states that because his condition was miserable, he could not arrange money to travel from Naudiha to Hijipur within that short span of time.
It is further stated that the SP Vaishali, respondent No. 5, issued a letter on 12th September, 1978 to the petitioner after having agreed with the notings of the Sergeant Major to show cause within 15 days as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
According to the notes of the Sergeant Major on the note-sheet, there were two allegations against the petitioner namely :  "(i) For taking bribe from a Barat party on 4th May, 1977, according to Hajipur PS Sanha No. 66 dated 4th May, 1977, while the petitioner was on duty of Traffic police, and  (ii) The petitioner had reported for duty after a delay of 215 days from the date on which the petitioner was granted leave, i.e. from 10.5.77 to the Departmental proceeding No.
64/77."
Xerox copy of this letter is Annexure-16.
The petitioner has further stated that the first charge contained in the above mentioned show cause was absolutely wrong, false and baseless.
The petitioner was withdrawn from duty on 3rd May, 1977 and sent to Police Line on 4th May, 1977 and he was sent along with others to Katihar for Target Practice which would be apparent from the relevant records.
The second allegation is also wrong and false, because the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali has accepted the absence of the petitioner for 215 days and allowed the salary of 167 days and had deducted the salary of 54 days by treating the said period to be leave without pay.
It is further stated that the salary for the leave granted for 167 days was also not paid to the petitioner.
It is further stated that the Sergeant Major, Vaishali sent Rs. 720/- out of the Provident Fund of the petitioner through Money Order which was received by the petitioner in the last of September, 1978.
On 1st October, 1978, the petitioner joined his duty as constable of police, Vaishali District Police Lines and on 6th October 1978, petitioner submitted his reply hand to hand against the above mentioned show cause against dismissal to the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali.
Xerox copy of reply of the petitioner dated 6th October, 1978 is Annexure-17.
It is further stated that the SP Vaishali, after considering the above show cause submitted by the petitioner, exonerated the petitioner from the charges from the fore-noon of 6th October, 1978.
The Superintendent of Police, Vaishali, while exonerating the petitioner, had inflicted a punishment of stoppage of increment of one year which is equivalent to Blackmarks and curtailed the subsistence allowance for the suspension period.
The SP Vaishali had written this order on the first page of the reply submitted by the petitioner to the show cause.
After the petitioner was exonerated of the charges in the departmental proceeding from the fore-noon of 6th October, 1978 by the order of the SP one Sri Parashuram Singh, Subedar in the Vaishali District Police Lines, wrote a letter to the Day Officer, Police Lines, Vaishali intimating him that Constable No. 284 Janardan Singh has been released from suspension from the forenoon of 7th October, 1978.
He in his letter had directed the Day Officer to inform Janardan Singh the petitioner to take the uniform and present himself on duty.
The copy of this letter is Annexure-18.
Further, after release from the charges, petitioner was given regular duty till 24th October, 1978 and he was posted at Garaul Police Station during the period and was released to join the Police Line vide Command Certificate dated 24th October, 1978 (Annexure-19).
It is stated that the petitioner, after exoneration, was posted as constable, Vaishali District Armed Police and was released from Garaul Police Station to join Vaishali Police Line along with other police Constables.
This party was released with four rifles and 100 rounds of cartridges.
One Ram Ratan Singh, Day Jamadar had issued a Parwana approving three days casual leave to the petitioner from 25th October, 1978 in the afternoon to 28th October, 1978 and directed the petitioner to present on duty in the Police Line on 29th October, 1978.
Zerox copy of this Parwana is Annexure-20.
It is further stated that the petitioner was surprised to receive the impugned order issued by the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali vide letter dated 25th October, 1978 dismissing the petitioner from service from 26th October, 1978.
Zerox copy of this letter is Annexure-21.
It is stated that the Superintendent of Police Vaishali had passed the above mentioned illegal, arbitrary and mala fide order dismissing the petitioner from service on the basis of the charges of which the petitioner had already been acquitted earlier in another departmental proceeding, including the departmental proceeding which concluded on 6th October, 1978.
Further, it is stated that the petitioner on 19th February, 1979 filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Tirhut Range, Muzaffarpur against the above mentioned order in departmental proceeding bearing No. 8 of 1978 narrating the above mentioned fact.
It is stated that the D.I.G.
Tirhut Range vide Memo No. 1365-C dated 17th October, 1979 dismissed the appeal as, in his order, he came to the conclusion that the charged constable the petitioner did not appear before the Enquiry Officer when he was informed twice, once by registered post and second time by Special Messenger and came to the conclusion that the petitioner did not appear and avoided to give final reply and he appeared after a delay of 215 days.
Thus, the D.I.G.
Tirhut Range held that there was no irregularity in the proceeding and he did not think it proper to interfere with the order of the Superintendent of Police (respondent No. 5).
Zerox copy of this order is Annexure-22J The petitioner further stated that he filed a Memorial before the Inspector General of Police, Bihar against the impugned order of the D.I.G., Police.
The Inspector General of Police, Bihar vide his order dated 24th September, 1981 rejected the memorial vide Annexure-23.
The petitioner then moved the Chief Minister, Bihar for review of the order of the IG Police, Bihar.
The Joint Secretary to the Government in the Department of Home (Police) vide his letter dated 15th June, 1983 communicated the decision of the Government to the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police, Bihar after considering the application filed by the petitioner that the same was rejected.
The Assistant to Inspector General of Police, Bihar communicated the above mentioned decision of the State Government to the petitioner, vide his Memo No. 6633/52-22-4-80/P-2 dated 19th December, 1986.
Petitioner again made an application to the Chief Minister Bihar on 14th July, 1989 requesting him to interfere in the matter, as he was the only earning member of the family and was starving with his family after being dismissed from service and he prayed for order of dismissal being cancelled and prayed for being restored to his post.
Then the Chief Minister, Bihar issued an order directing the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police, Bihar to send the file concerning the petitioner for perusal of the Chief Minister.
The office of the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police issued a direction to the SP Vaishali through Special Messenger to send the file of the Vaishali District Departmental Enquiry No. 8 of 1978 with the notes on the points raised by the dismissed constable within two days, because the Chief Minister was desirous to look into the file immediately.
The original copy filed by the petitioner was enclosed with the said direction.
The SP, Vaishali was asked to give priority to the matter.
The letter of the Director-General of Police, Bihar is Annexure-25 when after lapse of months, the document required by the Chief Minister for his perusal was not sent and no order was passed, the petitioner again made a representation to the Chief Minister that the file which was directed by him to be presented for his perusal had not been received after lapse of months and no order on his representation could be passed by the Chief Minister in absence of the file, then the Chief Minister, Bihar on 4th May, 1990 directed the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police, Bihar to communicate the Chief Minister with the information on the subject vide Annexure-26.
It is further stated that even after lapse of months, the file has not been sent for perusal of the Hon'ble Chief Minister and the petitioner was accordingly advised to file this writ petition.
It has been stated that because the impugned order is violative of Articles 14, 19, 21 and 311 of the Constitution of India, as it was passed after the petitioner was exonerated of the charges and was allowed to join his duties and had worked for more than 20 days, as constable.
It is stated that because the impugned order is without jurisdiction having been passed after the petitioner was exonerated of the charges and there is no provision under the Bihar Police Manual to review the order already passed.
It is also further stated that because the impugned order is illegal, arbitrary, mala fide having been passed after the petitioner was exonerated of the charges against him and was allowed to work, the order is illegal and fit to be quashed.
Further, it has been stated that because the impugned order is in violation of the principles of natural justice, as the petitioner was not given an opportunity to show cause either before issuance of impugned order it is illegal.
It is also further stated that because the order of the appellate authority has been passed without appreciating the facts contained in the Memo of appeal and thus, it is mechanical because of improper application of mind.
It is also further stated that the impugned order passed by the appellate authority is capricious to satisfy their own whim which is illegal and fit to be quashed.
Further it is stated that the impugned order was in violation of law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as reported in State of Assam v. JN Roy Biswas, AIR 1975 SC 2277 : 1975 Lab IC 1681 according to which the order impugned is fit to be quashed.
It has further been stated that the petitioner could not move this Court earlier as he had no money and this fact will be evident from the statement of Sergeant Major who withdrew the money from the GP Fund of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner is extremely in need of money and is in debt and, therefore, GP Fund was withdrawn and sent to the petitioner so that he might be able to appear in the Departmental proceeding before the impugned order was passed.
It is further stated that the petitioner has no other alternative, efficacious and speedy remedy and, therefore, he has moved this Court and has made the prayer as stated above.
A supplementary affidavit was also subsequently filed on behalf of the petitioner stating about certain more facts and explaining the same and reserved the right to make submission on further points at the time of final hearing.
3.
A counter-affidavit was filed on behalf of respondent No. 5 i.e. the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali.
It has been stated on behalf of respondent No. 5 that the petitioner was appointed as constable and was posted in the District of Palamau on 3rd May, 1965 and in the month of March, 1973, the petitioner was transferred from Dhanbad police to Vaishali District police.
It is further stated that the petitioner was negligent in his duty and was victim of home-sickness and therefore, he used to reside at home without leave and without information to the competent authority.
Besides, he was in the habit of realising money illegally from the public.
Thus, in the tenure of his service he faced three departmental proceedings from time to time instituted against him :  (a) Departmental Proceeding case No. 71/77, (b) Departmental proceeding No. 8 of 1978, and (c) Departmental proceeding No. 64 of 1977.
In Departmental Proceeding Case No. 71 of 1977, charge was framed against the petitioner for acts of indiscipline and for not doing duty properly.
It was stated that the petitioner proceeded on leave for six days from the afternoon of 10th May, 1977 and he was to join his duty in the forenoon of 17th May 1977, but he appeared to join his duty on 18th December, 1977 i.e. after 215 days of the scheduled time.
In this proceeding, the conducting Officer did not find him guilty on the ground of evidence of illness produced by the said constable.
He had enjoyed leave 221 days and letter No. 1358/78 dated 17th July, 1978, contains the order of the SP Vaishali who acted on the report of the conducting Officer and vacated the charges framed against the petitioner.
However, IG of Police modified the order of the SP and ordered to give warning to the petitioner which will appear from Annexure-A In Departmental proceeding Case No. 8 of 1978, against the order dated 25th October, 1978, the petitioner filed writ bearing C.W.JC.
No. 7168 of 1990.
It is stated that the petitioner had gone on leave from 1st January, 1978 for four days and he was to return on duty on 6th January, 1978.
Thereafter, without permission, he remained absent from duty for a long period and a proceeding was instituted against him and the charges were framed against him.
Notices along with charges were duly served on him, but intentionally and knowingly the petitioner did not appear before the Conducting Officer by joining his duty after four days and instead, he joined his duty on 1st October, 1978.
Thus, he absented himself for nine months 25 days without grant of leave.
It is further submitted that all legal formalities and procedures required were followed by the Department, principle of natural justice was never violated and the conducting Officer conducted the Departmental proceeding No. 8 of 1978 in accordance with the provisions of law.
It is further stated that in spite of service of notices and charges on the petitioner, he avoided the departmental proceeding with mala fide intention.
Under the circumstance, the departmental proceeding ended in ex parte decision and the Conducting Officer found the petitioner guilty and thereafter SP Vaishali, recorded his observation and findings after observing all the legal formalities and by order dated 25th October, 1978, he dismissed the petitioner.
The petitioner could not explain his long absence.
Thereafter he filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Tirhut Division and the D.I.G., Police, after considering all the formalities and after observing the legal formalities and after observing the legal formalities and after hearing the parties dismissed the appeal vide Order dated 17th October, 1979.
Thereafter the petitioner filed an appeal before the Inspector General of Police, Bihar and after considering all the evidence on the record, dismissed the prayer of the petitioner vide Order dated 24th September, 1981.
It is stated that the petitioner filed an application through post dated 9th January, 1978 under registered cover that due to acute paucity of funds and the heavy debt the petitioner was not in a position to return to duty.
The 3rd proceeding was Departmental proceeding No. 64 of 1977.
It is stated that on 4th May, 1977 the petitioner stopped a bus of Barat party coming from Ranchi and mis-represented himself as Officer Incharge of the Thana and tried to realise illegal money and on refusal the petitioner (sic) with the members of the Barat Party.
The SP Vaishali vide order, DO No. 1418 stayed the Departmental proceeding, since the petitioner had already been dismissed in Departmental Proceeding No. 8 of 1978.
Photo copy of the order dated 4th December, 1979 is Annexure-C  4.
It is stated that the writ application is not maintainable on the point of law as well as on the point of fact because it has been filed after a lapse of about nine years, after the final order passed by the Inspector General of Police, vide Momo No. 5054 dated 24th September, 1981.
It is stated that it is well settled proposition of law based on rulings that after lapse of such a long period, writ petition should not be entertained.
It is stated that the orders referred to by the petitioner in the writ petition do not indicate any violation of the provisions of Constitution and the order is neither illegal nor mala fide which will appear from perusal of Annexure-B Series.
All other allegations of the petitioner in paragraphs of the writ petition have been denied and it has been urged that the entire case may be considered in the light of the facts contained in those papers and the conduct of the petitioner during the period in question.
The Inspector General of Police ultimately disposed of the petition and rejected the appeal of the petitioner.
Therefore, it has been started that the present petition is fit to be dismissed.
5.
A similar affidavit has also been filed on behalf of petitioner against the counter affidavit filed on behalf of respondent No. 5.
It has been stated that all the statements in the reply to the counter affidavit are wrong, incorrect and things have been blown out of proportion.
It has been stated that neither the orders of the authorities were biased nor prejudiced, rather the petitioner was victim of home-sickness and was negligent in his duty.
It has further been stated that though the petitioner was not found guilty and was exonerated of the charge in the Departmental Proceeding No. 7 of 1977, the petitioner was not dismissed for the same ground, as it will be clear from Annexure-21.
He was actually discharged on the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer in the Departmental Proceeding No. 8 of 1978.
In this proceeding, petitioner joined his duty on 1st October, 1978, soon after he received the amount of Rs. 720 (seven hundred twenty) sent by the then Superintendent of Police, Vaishali after making necessary arrangement for food etc. for his starving family but it is incorrect.
It shows his lack of interest in doing his duty properly and acting according to the orders of his superior authorities.
So it has been submitted on behalf of respondents that the writ petition is not fit to be entertained.
6.
On consideration of the entire facts stated in the writ petition as also in the counter-affidavit, it becomes clear that the petitioner was not in the habit of discharging his duty as a constable in the Police Force and he was all along trying to create problems for his superior and on some pretext or the other, he was avoiding completion of the departmental proceeding against him.
Considering his earlier conduct, when he did not appear in the departmental proceeding No. 8 of 1978, it was passed ex parte against him and though he challenged the said order of the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali on the basis of report of the Enquiry officer in the Departmental Proceeding No. 8 of 1978, his appeal was dismissed by the D.I.G., police respondent No. 4 and subsequently also by the Inspector General of Police, respondent No. 3.
He also preferred an appeal before the Hon'ble Chief Minister, Bihar, who was also pleased to reject his prayer.
The Police Force happens to be a disciplined Force and strict discipline is required of the police personnel at lower level, otherwise it will become difficult to run the police Administration.
The conduct of the petitioner is that he left his place of posting taking leave of few days and then went on enhancing the same on one pretext or the other and then subsequently when he was asked to appear, he started evading his appearance saying that he had no money to appear.
Therefore, petitioner cannot say that the orders impugned suffer from any bias or prejudice against him.
Petitioner has also failed to furnish any material showing bias on the part of his controlling Officer, i.e. SP, Vaishali.
Actually the findings of fact by the officer holding departmental enquiry cannot be challenged in a writ petition, as is the law established on the point.
There also does not appear to be any substance in his plea that he filed this writ petition, after a lapse of nine years of the conclusion of the proceeding in the appeal for want of money.
Such plea cannot be legally maintained.
It is against the principles of equity and natural justice which is not in favour of the petitioner.
The writ petition, therefore, is not maintainable.
So far as the decision in the case of State of Assam v. JN Roy Biswas, 1975 Lab IC 1681 (supra) is concerned, it has no application in the facts of the present case.
7.
This application is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
BP Singh, Actg.
C.J :- 7A.
I agree with Brother BP Sharma, J that the writ petition should be dismissed.
The petitioner in the writ petition has given somewhat confused picture about the facts of the case.
Three departmental proceedings were initiated against him, namely, proceeding Nos. 71/77, 64/77 and 8/78.
The impugned order dated 25th October, 1978, dismissing the petitioner from service was passed in the departmental proceeding No. 8/78.
8.
It appears that departmental proceeding No. 71/77 was initiated against the petitioner since he went on compensatory leave for 6 days on 10.5.77 and reported for duty on 18.12.77 i.e. he overstayed his leave by 215 days.
The case of the petitioner is that he was ill and was unable to join his duties.
He was able to produce evidence in support of his plea and it appears from the materials placed before the Court that he had got himself treated by the Civil Surgeon, Daltonganj, who declared him fit to join the duty only on 17121977 and consequently he joined his duty on 18121977.
In the said proceeding the Inspector General of Police ultimately exonerated the petitioner of the charge after administering a warning to him.
9.
After joining his duty on 18121977, the petitioner again went on permission leave for three days on 111978.
He again overstayed his leave and joined the duty on 1101978.
This was the subject-matter of another departmental proceeding, namely, Disciplinary proceeding No. 8/78.
It appears from the materials placed on the record by the petitioner himself that after going on permission leave for three days, he made a request to Respondent No. 5 the Superintendent of Police, to send him money to enable him to join the duty.
The stand of the petitioner is somewhat peculiar, having joined the duty on 18121977 he again went on leave on 111978 and he again went on leave on 111978 and refused to join the duty on the pretext that he had no money to undertake the journey and report for duty.
The petitioner has mixed up the facts of these two proceedings which were distinct and separate.
It was sought to be argued that since the petitioner was exonerated of the charge levelled against him, the order of dismissal could not be passed against him.
The argument overlooks the fact that the petitioner was exonerated of the charge levelled against him in the Disciplinary proceeding No. 71/77 while the impugned order has been passed in Disciplinary proceeding No. 8/78.
10.
It further appears from the materials and documents produced by the petitioner himself vide Annexures 13, 14, 15 and 16 that the petitioner was informed of the Disciplinary proceeding No. 8/78 and that the petitioner was absent from duty during the relevant period.
From Annexure `13' it appears that the petitioner was asked to appear in the departmental proceeding on 10778.
To this communication the petitioner replied that he had no information about the proceeding and that he had received the intimation only on 10778.
The excuse given by the petitioner was that he had not received the intimation in time.
By Annexure `15' which is dated 14778 the petitioner was again required to appear before the Enquiry Officer on 24778 along with his explanation failing which it would be assumed that he had nothing to say in the matter.
The petitioner did not appear before the Inquiry Officer though he received this letter on 22.7.78.
Again on 12.9.78 Annexure `16' was issued by the Superintendent of Police, Vaishali, informing the petitioner that in the Disciplinary proceeding witnesses have been examined in the absence of the petitioner since he had not appeared to take part in the proceeding.
A show- cause notice was again issued to the petitioner along with the deposition of witnesses who had deposed in the Disciplinary proceeding.
15 days' time was granted to the petitioner to submit his reply.
This communication no doubt mentions the facts that two other proceedings were pending against the petitioner.
11.
It appears that the petitioner joined the duty on 11078 after a delay of nine months and 25 days.
In the Disciplinary proceeding No. 71/77 the petitioner was released from suspension with effect from 7.10.78; but in the Disciplinary Proceeding No. 8/78 an order of dismissal was passed on 251078.
This order was upheld in the Appeal by the D.IG of Police on 171079 holding that despite two opportunities given to the petitioner, he did not appear to take part in the departmental proceeding.
The Memorial submitted by the petitioner was also rejected on 2491981 and his appeal to the Chief Minister was also rejected on 1561983.
The instant writ petition was filed on 131190.
12.
It would thus appear from the facts of the case that in the departmental proceeding No. 8/78 despite opportunities given to the petitioner he did not take part in the proceeding.
Witnesses were examined in the proceeding and on the basis of the evidence adduced in the proceeding the petitioner was found guilty of the charges levelled against him.
Though the order of dismissal was passed on 251078, and his Memorial was rejected on 2491981, the instant writ petition was filed on 131190.
It was, therefore, rightly submitted on behalf of the State that the petitioner was guilty of inordinate delay in moving this Court and that he was not entitled to any relief.
There is substance in th submission urged on behalf of the State.
Apart from this, even on merit the petitioner has no case.
The documents produced by the petitioner himself disclose that he deliberately did not take part in the departmental proceeding despite opportunities given to him.
The record of the case shows that the petitioner evaded joining duty on frivolous grounds.
13.
So far as Disciplinary proceeding No. 64/77 is concerned, that related to a distinct charge of the petitioner having demanded illegal gratification from a Barat Party posing himself as Officer Incharge of the Thana.
That proceeding was stayed by the Disciplinary authority in view of the order of dismissal passed against the petitioner in the Disciplinary proceeding No. 8/78.
14.
In these facts and circumstances.
I have no hesitation in holding that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief from this Court and the writ petition deserves to be rejected.
Petition dismissed.