OP Sharma, J - The facts of the case are these :-  The State Recruitment Board as per advertisement Notice No. 3 of 1997 dated 2941997 invited applications for the posts of Excise and Sales Tax Inspectors.
The minimum qualification prescribed for the post was graduation.
By notification dated 11698, the Board prescribed short-listing criteria for the interview.
The petitioner, who had also applied for the post did not satisfy the short-listing criteria and as such was not interviewed.
2.
She challenges the vires of rule 13(ii) of Jammu and Kashmir Service Selection Recruitment Rules, 1992 on the ground that it denies equal opportunity to persons holding same qualification.
Notification dated 11693 prescribing criteria for short-listing of the candidates for the interview has also been challenged on the ground of being contrary of the advertisement notice without fixing such criteria.
3.
The Recruitment Rules, 1992 have been made in exercise of powers conferred under the proviso to Section 124 of the State Constitution.
It reads :-  "...........Provided that it shall be competent for the Governor or such person as he may direct to make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to such service and posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the Legislature under this section and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act."
These rules can thus be challenged only if these offend either Part-III or any other provision of the Constitution.
What is provided by Rule 13(ii) is that Board can restrict the number of applicants to be invited for interview to a maximum of five times the number of vacancies.
This rule reads :  "Ordinarily, the Board shall restrict the number of applicants to be admitted to oral or written test to a maximum of five times the number of vacancies after doing the preliminary screening on the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examination and such other criteria as the Board my deem fit."
4.
In the present case, short-listing is based on higher eligibility qualification, which is reasonable classification to achieve the object of the Rule.
Such a course is permissible under law as laid down in Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar, AIR 1995 SC 77 : 1995(1) SCT 50 (SC) holding that :  ".... As we have already pointed out that where the selection is to be made purely on the basis of interview, if the applications for such posts are enormous in number with reference to the number of posts available to be filled up, then the Commission or the Selection Board has no option but to short-list such applicants on some rational and reasonable basis."
5.
The principle has been reiterated in Union of India v. T Sudararaman, AIR 1997 SC 2418 : 1997(2) SCT 810 (SC), which reads as under :-  ".....
Note 21 of the advertisement expressly provides that if a large number of applications are received the Commission may short-list candidates for interview on the basis of higher qualification although all applicants may possess the requisite minimum qualification.
In the case of MP Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar, (1994) 6 JT(SC) 302 : 1994 AIR SCW 4088, this court has upheld short-listing of candidate on some rational and reasonable basis.
In that case, for the purpose of short-listing, a longer period of experience than the minimum prescribed was used as a criterion by the Public Service Commission for calling candidates for an interview.
This was upheld by this court.
In the case of Govt. of AP v. P Dalip Kumar, (1993) 2 JT (SC) 138 : 1993 AIR SCW 848 also this court said that it is always open to the recruiting agency to screen candidates due for consideration at the threshold of the process of selection by prescribing higher eligibility qualification so that the field of selection can be narrowed down with the ultimate objective of promoting candidates with higher qualifications to enter the zone of consideration.
The procedure, therefore, adopted in the present case by the Commission was legitimate...".
6.
The short-listing on the basis of academic merit is a method by virtue of which higher eligibility qualification has been prescribed for those to be invited to face the interview.
The procedure is not only fair and just but unexceptional also.
7.
Moreover, the criteria was notified on 1161998 and the interviews were conducted from 22698 to 471998.
Petitioner did not approach the court while the interviews were being conducted.
Allowing the petition would mean directing the respondents to hold fresh interview.
This cannot be done unless Rule 13(ii) is found invalid or the notification dated 11698 is held irrational or unreasonable.
8.
Moreover, the only relief sought by the petitioner is that he be also interviewed irrespective of higher eligibility prescribed by short-listing of candidates.
If this relief is granted at the interim stage, the writ shall stand disposed of finally because nothing more is required to be determined.
Such practice has been deprecated time and again by the Apex Court.
In Bank of Maharashtra v. Race Shipping and Transport Co. Pvt. Limited, AIR 1995 SC 1368 : 1995(2) R.R.R.
299, this principle was reiterated as under :-  "Time and again this court has deprecated the practice of granting interim orders which practically give the principal relief sought in the petition for no better reason than that a prima facie case has been made out, without being concerned about the balance of convenience, the public interest and a host of other considerations..." So, the petition cannot be entertained because the short-listing is legally valid and constitutionally permissible.
The petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.