JS Khehar, J (Oral) - It is not disputed that the petitioner Darshan Singh was inducted in the Army as a sepoy.
He suffered a paralytic attack in December 1985 while he was on casual leave.
Consequent upon his examination by the Medical Board he was invalidated from the Army on July 30, 1986.
As per the report of the Medical Board, the petitioner had suffered 100% invalidity for a period of two years on account of the paralytic stroke suffered by him.
The case of the petitioner was recommended by the Medical Board for grant of disability pension.
While doing so the opinion of the Medical Board was that the disability suffered by the petitioner was aggravated by his service in the Army.
It was also of the opinion that the disability was connected to his service.
The opinion of the Medical Board has been extracted by the respondents in paragraph 10 of the written statement.
The aforesaid opinion, as expressed above, has been acknowledged by the learned counsel for the respondents.
It is, therefore, undisputed that the disability of the petitioner was not only aggravated by reasons of his service but it was also attributable to his service.
2.
The claim of the petitioner for grant of disability pension having been recommended by the Medical Board was rejected by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) by rejecting the aforesaid recommendation.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the Accounts Department had no authority whatsoever to sit in judgment over a determination made by experts, specially when the determination is on the medical fitness of the person concerned and has been earlier made by a duly constituted Medical Board.
In this behalf learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon a decision rendered by the Apex Court in Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on January 14, 1993, wherein it was held that the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, could not sit in judgment over the opinion of the Medical Board or to redetermine afresh the nature and extent of disability of the claimant.
And the decision of this Court in Ujagar Singh v. Union of lndia, 1997(4) RSJ 587, wherein also this Court had arrived at a conclusion that the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) had no jurisdiction to sit over the opinion of the experts (Medical Board) while dealing with the case of grant of disability pension.
Likewise, learned counsel refers to a decision rendered by this Court in Nachhattar Singh v. Union of India, 1999(3) SCT 344, to the same effect.
4.
The legal position as enunciated by the Apex Court and also by this Court is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents, who fairly concedes that in view of the aforesaid decisions, the petitioner would be entited to disability pension for reasons of the assessment and report of the Medical Board.
5.
The paralytic stroke suffered by the petitioner was described as attributable and aggravated for reason of his service by the Medical Board.
For the aforesaid reason, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to disability pension on account of paralytic stroke which led to his invalidation from the Armed Forces on July 30, 1986 In these circumstances, the respondents are directed to release the disability pension payable to the petitioner within four months from today.
Allowed accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.