Iqbal Singh, J - Plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for permanent injunction with the averments that he had been working as a work-charge Chowidar under the control of defendant No. 2 since 11111980.
On 17101983, he went to Surranussi for the collection of steel and for that purpose, four trucks had been hired by the Junior Engineer.
One of the trucks in which the plaintiff was travelling, met with an accident near village Gazipur and he was badly injured and suffered permanent disability.
A report to this effect was made to the Sub-Divisional Officer on 20101983.
The plaintiff remained in hospital and had been making requests for payment of compensation to him and for regularisation of his services.
At one point of time, he was informed that his case for compensation had been forwarded to the Superintending Engineer for sanction.
It was further averred that he was neither paid compensation nor his services were regularised and rather he was threatened by defendants 1 to 3 that in case he insisted in the above claims, his services would be terminated.
It was also averred that the defendants had no right to terminate his services without assigning any reason and they did not allow him to perform his duties and, therefore, as an alternative relief, he is praying for mandatory injunction directing the defendants to regularise his services.
2.
Suit was contested by filing written statement.
It was stated that the plaintiff had served the Department on daily wages and his services were governed by the Code of the Public Works Department and not the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
As regards payment of compensation, it was stated that the plaintiff was entitled to recover the same from the owner of the truck or from the Insurance Company.
It was specifically stated that the plaintiff worked on daily wages from 11111980 to 1141988 and his wages for this period had been paid on muster roll and that he was not working in the Department since 1241988.
It was also stated that the services of the plaintiff were terminated as he was merely a daily wages worker and had not reported for duty after 1141988.
3.
Plaintiff filed replication controverting the pleas taken in the written statement and reiterating taken in the plaint.
On the rival pleas of the parties, the following issues were framed, besides that of relief :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to injunction prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is a casual labourer ?
OPD 3.
Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC has not been served ?
OPD 4.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit in the present form is not maintainable ?
OPD 4.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 2 it was found that the plaintiff was a casual labourer.
Under issue No. 3, it was held that non-service of notice u/s 80 C.P.C. would not come in the way of the plaintiff to seek the claim made in the suit.
Issues 4 and 5 were decided against the defendants and it was held that the civil Court had jurisdiction to try the suit and the suit was maintainable.
However, in view of findings on issues 1 and 2, the suit was dismissed by judgment and decree dated 1461991.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff filed appeal.
Learned Additional District Judge, Hoshiarpur allowed the appeal by judgment and decree dated 1051993, set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court and decreed the plaintiff's suit with costs as prayed for.
6.
This is how the defendants have filed the present second appeal.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Learned counsel for the appellants contended that the findings of the lower appellate Court on all the issues are erroneous and against the facts on record, based upon surmises and conjectures and the same are thus not tenable in the eye of law.
Counsel further contended that it stood proved on record that the plaintiff was a casual labourer and, therefore, in view of Rule 1.127, Chapter-1 of the Code of the Public Works Department of the State of Punjab, he was not entitled to any relief because the persons falling within the ambit of the above rule are in the footing monthly servants and their services could be terminated any time without notice and since the respondent was working on work-charge basis, he could not be treated as regular employee of the State.
Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, while supporting the findings returned by the lower appellate court, contended that though the respondent had been appointed on work-charge basis and while on official duty, he met with an accident and after he claimed compensation for the injuries suffered in the accident, he was threatened with termination of his services.
But before further arguments could be addressed, learned counsel for the respondent placed on record a copy of a policy decision dated 2311995 issued by the Chief Secretary of the Punjab Government and submitted that in view of the said order, services of many work charged, ad hoc and daily wage workers have been ordered to be regularised subject to their fulfilling the conditions stated therein and in the Committee.
A suitable direction can be issued in the case of the present plaintiff also, for regularisation of his services, in view of the aforesaid policy decision.
8.
After going through the aforesaid policy decision of the Punjab Government, dated 2311995, I am of the opinion that instead of going into the merits of the controversy raised herein, it would be appropriate to direct the defendants to consider the case of the present respondent also in the light of the above policy decision.
At this stage, the extract from the above policy decision, relevant for purposes of this case deserves to be noticed, which reads thus :-  "Government of Punjab Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms (Personnel Policies-III, Punjab) ORDER The Governor of Punjab is pleased to decide that the services of all work- charged employees/Casual, Daily Wages under the Punjab Government in various Department/Offices shall be regularised subject to the following conditions :- For Work-charged Employees : (i) All the work establishment (excluding office ministerial, clerical and drawing cadres) below the level of junior engineer engaged in the construction, execution of maintenance of work as called work Force shall further comprise of the following two categories :- (a) Project Force, and (b) Non-project Force which includes, buildings, roads, Public Health activities, canals, drainage, Government building works etc.
In the case of project force a project (as a Irrigation and Power) will be a unit of employment.
There will be a separate cadre and seniority list for each category in the project.
In the case of non-project force, "a Work Division" will be unit for casual or daily wage work force and "circle" for work-charged establishment.
Here also separate cadre and seniority list for each category will be maintained in the Division and Circle as the case may be.
(ii) Workers engaged on jobs which are likely to be of a short duration i.e. less than 240 days in a year will be terminated on completion of work.
No seniority list of such workers will be required to be maintained.
(iii) Workers of non-project work charge establishment who have completed five years service as on 30th November, 1994 will be made regular, if they were recruited before 3rd September, 1980.
The service of such non-project work charge employees will be regularised without any further screening about justification of continuance of these posts.
(iv) Since a complete ban on recruitment of work-charged staff was imposed by the State Government, those recruited in contravention of this policy decision after this date i.e. 3rd September, 1980 will be regularised only after screening by Committee against assessed requirement for each category on the projects on which they were appointed or on assessment of justification of such posts on the basis of norms approved for the continued nature of works in case of non-project work.
Those found surplus to the needs will be declared surplus and procedure laid down u/s 25-F of the Chapter-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 will be applicable to them.
xxxx... ... ... ...xxx" 9.
There is no dispute that the respondent had been appointed on work-charge basis and he actually worked at least for about eight years ie w.e.f.
11111980 to 1141988.
Though the specific stand of the defendant- appellants that the plaintiff being a work-charge employee, his services were governed by the Code of Punjab Public Works Department and not by the Punjab Civil Service Rules is the sole disputed question of fact about which none of the Courts below has rendered a clear answer, yet I deem it appropriate to direct the Committee appointed or to be appointed in view of the policy decision of the Punjab Government dated 2311995, to consider the case of the plaintiff-respondent for regularisation of his service in the light of the aforesaid policy decision.
The Committee before screening the matter with regard to regularisation of plaintiff's services shall in the first instance record a finding, whether the plaintiff was engaged and fell in the category of Project Force or Non-project Force, and thereafter shall, if required in terms of the above policy, proceed to consider his case for regularisation.
This process shall be completed within four months of the receipt or production of a copy of this order by the plaintiff.
In case, the Committee comes to the conclusion that the plaintiff is entitled to regularisation of services, the necessary relief as available in law and in view of the above policy decision including the plaintiff's reinstating in service with continuity and other ancillary benefits shall be released to him within three months thereafter.
The appeal is disposed of with the above observations and directions.
Orders accordingly.