Swatanter Kumar, J - In this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for quashing of the order dated 10th of May, 1996, Annexure P/4, passed by the authorities concerned and order dated 22nd of February, 1994, Annexure P/6, passed by the appellate authority rejecting the case of the petitioner for grant of disability pension.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Air Force as an Air Defence System Operator on 3rd January, 1981.
While in service, in 1986, the petitioner suffered a mortal ailment and was admitted to hospital.
In June, 1986, the petitioner was discharge from hospital while requiring him to rejoin his duty on 9th June, 1986.
However, he could not recover and his condition turned worse and he was found ailing from schizophrenia.
On 27th July, 1989, the petitioner was discharged from Air Force and invalidated out on medical ground.
On 3rd January, 1990, the petitioner made an application for grant of disability pension, which was declined by the authorities concerned on 10th May, 1990, against which the petitioner preferred an appeal on 13th July, 1990.
The said appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority on 22nd February, 1994, giving rise to the present writ petition.
3.
The facts of the case, as pleaded by the petitioner, are hardly in dispute.
Respondents, upon notice, had filed a detailed reply.
Paragraph 2 of the reply reads as under :  "That in reply to para No. 12 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the petitioner was invalided out of service by a duly constituted medical board.
The said medical board assessed the petitioner's disability SCHIZOPHRENIA 295 as 60% and FRACTURE LUMBER VERTEBRA-3 (N805) as 20% for two years.
It is further submitted that AFGIS has different rules governing the grant of benefits under the Insurance Scheme to its beneficiaries.
This is a contributory scheme.
In this society, the individual contributes and becomes its member and gains benefits as per the existing rules of the AFGIS.
Since the petitioner was a member of the said society and had contributed, he was sanctioned the amount admissible under the rules of the said society.
The grant of disability pension is not related to such scheme and cannot be compared.
The grant of disability pension is strictly governed by the Pension Regulations Part 1, 1961, Para 153, which is reads as under : "Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by Air Force service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over."
4.
Thus, the only defence raised by the respondents in the present case is that the Schizophrenia, the disease from which the petitioner was ailing, was neither attributable nor aggravated by the military service.
This question is no more res-integra as far as this Court is concerned.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case titled as Union of India and others v. Satwinder Singh and another, 1998(4) RSJ 467, answered this question in favour of the petitioner.
The Court commenting upon the aggravation or attributability of Schizophrenia to the Army service held as under :  "These decisions amply support the view taken by the learned Single Judge that the respondent No. 1, who was boarded out of service on being placed in medical category EEE with 70 per cent disability due to Schizophrenia entitled to get medical pension because at the time of his acceptance for military service no note was recorded that he was suffering from such disease and the opinion recorded by the Medical Board at the time of his discharge from service did not contain a note that the disease was such which could not be detected at the time of petitioner's entry in the service.
The learned Single Judge has distinguished the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Baljit Singh (supra) by observing that their Lordships were dealing with a case of injury and not of disease and further that various rules of Appendix II must be read together and unless the concerned authorities can establish that the disease was constitutional, benefit of disability pension cannot be denied.
Some of the observations made by the learned Single Judge with whom we are in complete agreement, read as under : "Mr. Dahiya's reliance on Baljit Singh's case (supra) is, to my mind, misplaced on facts as that was a case dealing with an injury and not a disease.
It is the conceded proposition that sub-rules (a) to (c) of Rule 14 (earlier Rule 7) must be read together and it must be established amongst other things that the conditions of military service had determined or contributed to the onset of the disease or its aggravation, but it must, nevertheless, be borne in mind that onus to deny a claim rests on the authorities and not on the claimant as postulated by Rule 9 which provides that the claimant shall not be called upon to prove the conditions of entitlement and that he will receive the benefit of any reasonable doubt and that this benefit would be given more liberally to the claimant in the field/afloat service cases.
It will be seen from the record that the Medial Board had, while rejecting them claim, merely observed "constitutional disease, hence not connected with the service."
To my mind, the onus put on the authority under Rule 9, could not be said to have been discharged in this situation, more particularly as the board did not consider that he had put in service almost continuously in the field, and as such the case for the grant of disability pension was to be considered more liberally."
5.
I may also make reference to another judgment of the same Division Bench in the case titled as A.J.S.
Chaudhary v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) RSJ 778, wherein while granting the relief of disability pension to the petitioner, the court held as under :  "The ratio of the decisions, referred to herein above, fully support the argument of Shri Randhawa that the rejection of petitioner's claim for disability pension is legally unsustainable because at the time of his acceptance for military service, no note was recorded that he was suffering from Schizophrenia and the opinion recorded by the Medical Board at the time of his discharge from service does not contain a note that the disease was such which could not be detected at the time of petitioner's entry in the service."
The petitioner had served a notice of demand before filing the present writ petition and all other ingredients for application of regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations are satisfied in the present case as is evident from the aforestated facts.
6.
In view of the above settled position of law and admitted position of facts on record that the petitioner was suffering from Schizophrenia which had developed and diagnosed five years after his enrolment in the military service, no adverse inference can be drawn against the petitioner.
There is no material placed on record before this Court which could show that the petitioner was suffering from this ailment at the time of his recruitment or prior thereto.
In fact, there is no material to show that in the 5-6 years of service he developed any symptoms suggesting the above disease.
7.
Resultantly, this writ petition is allowed.
8.
The order dated 10th of May, 1990, Annexure P/4, passed by the authorities concerned and order dated 22nd of February, 1994, Annexure P/6, passed by the appellate authority rejecting the case of the petitioner for grant of disability pension, are hereby quashed.
Respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for grant of disability pension in accordance with law.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.