RL Anand, J - Heard.
Delay of 156 days in filing the appeal and 40 days in refiling the appeal for the reasons stated in the applications is hereby condoned.
2.
On merits, I have gone through the impugned judgments and do not see any illegality in the same.
Sewa Ram unsuccessful plaintiff (now appellant) filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to get all benefits as per the 4th Pay Commission according to his colleagues' payment along with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum on the accrued amount payable to him amounting to Rs. 2 lacs approximately and also promotion to his higher rank along with others working in the department etc.
The case set up by the plaintiff was that he was serving in the office of Market Committee, Jalandhar since 141975 as Cleaner.
He was transferred to the office of Chief Engineer, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and was posted in the office of Executive Engineer, Punjab Mandi Board, Jalandhar.
His service-book was also sent to the Chief Engineer along with the service-book of one Sardul Singh.
He was drawing the scale of Rs. 320/- per month along with DA etc.
The other colleagues of the plaintiff, who were junior to him, were drawing the scale of Rs. 950/- and above and in this manner the plaintiff has been deprived of Rs. 1,300/- per month from the date of the implementation of the recommendations of the 4th Pay Commission.
He was promoted on 841989 as Head Roller Driver but was not being paid the salary as per his work.
His service-book was withheld by respondent No. 2 and he wanted his service-book to be completed.
He wrote many letters to the respondents in this connection, but to no effect.
Finally, he sent a legal notice to the respondents.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants.
Apart from taking some preliminary objections, it was the stand of the defendants that the plaintiff was in service since 1975 as Cleaner.
His services were regularised on 7.6.1977.
He was relieved on 171982 from Market Committee, Jalandhar and his services were placed at Engineering Wing, Chandigarh and at that time he was drawing basic pay of Rs. 325/- in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430/-.
His service-book was also sent to the office of Chief Engineer, Chandigarh, which was misplaced and increments could not be added in his basic pay.
The defendants denied the other allegations that the plaintiff was ever promoted as Head Roller Driver.
Now the service-book of the plaintiff has been traced and he would be granted all the benefits.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the grant of declaration as prayed for ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest, if so, at what rate ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the grant of mandatory injunction, as prayed for ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 5.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit by his own act and conduct ?
OPD 6.
Whether legal and valid notice u/s 80 CPC was served upon the defendants ?
OPP 7.
Whether the suit has been filed within period of limitation ?
OPP 8.
Whether the written statement has not been filed by fully authorised person ?
OPP 9.
Relief.
4.
The parties led evidence in support of their respective cases and the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 3111998.
He filed an appeal before the Court of Addl.
District Judge, Jalandhar, which for the reasons given in para Nos. 8 to 11, reproduced as under, of the judgment dated 16.11.1998 dismissed the appeal.
Hence this R.S.A.
"8.
The learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently contended that the learned Civil Judge has wrongly denied the interest to the plaintiff because it is duty of the Government to maintain the service book of its employees and if the service book was misplaced it is negligence of the department and as such the plaintiff was entitled to interest on the arrears which have not been paid after delay.
He has further contended that the plaintiff has not been considered for the post of driver though persons junior to him have been promoted and are getting pay more than the plaintiff and as such the plaintiff is required to be considered for the post of Head Roller Driver since the day his juniors have been promoted and as such the findings of the learned trial court on issues No. 1, 2 and 3 are liable to be set aside.
9.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents has contended that all the arrears have been paid to the appellant which he accepted and the delay occurred because the plaintiff did not give the option as required under the rules and, therefore, he has been rightly denied the interest.
He further contended that the persons promoted are of different cadre because they are work-charge employees whereas the plaintiff is a regular employee and as such he cannot be considered against the post of work-charge employees.
The trial court has, therefore, rightly decided the issues.
10.
The facts are not in dispute.
The arrears of the plaintiff on account of revision of grades have been paid after delay.
It is also not disputed that the service book was not traceable but the plaintiff himself admitted in cross-examination that option was required to be submitted to the Board and pay to be fixed only after submitting the option to the Board.
He further admitted and according to Rajinder Mohan, the plaintiff gave his option on 15.11.95 and, therefore, thereafter his arrears were paid.
The delay, therefore, occurred on account of non-furnishing of option by the plaintiff and as such he has been rightly held to be not entitled to interest.
As regards the promotion suffice it to say that the plaintiff Sewa Ram himself admitted that he was regular employee whereas Darshan Singh, Kuldip Singh, Satpal Singh, Sarup Singh and Gurbax Singh were work-charge employees.
He further admitted that the cadre of said persons was different from him.
Since the employees who are alleged to have been promoted from a separate cadre, therefore, the plaintiff has rightly not been considered alongwith others for promotion.
11.
No doubt, the plaintiff is performing duties of Head Roller Driver but he never raised any objection to do that work.
There is no order that he has been promoted as Head Roller Driver.
No such order has been produced and if the plaintiff was himself willingly performing the duties of Head Roller Driver, he is not entitled to get the pay of that post.
The trial Court, therefore, rightly decided issues No. 1, 2 and 3 against the plaintiff.
The findings of the trial court are, therefore, correct and are affirmed."
5.
The plaintiff-appellant is seeking enhanced pay on the ground that the persons junior to him had been granted the benefit of higher pay scale, therefore, by virtue of his seniority he is entitled to the higher scale which had been granted to his alleged juniors.
This is the point to be determined in this appeal.
The plaintiff can seek the relief only if he shows that the persons, who allegedly got more pay or scale, were junior to him in the same cadre.
If the cadre of the plaintiff and that of those persons is separate then the plaintiff has no case.
The plaintiff himself admits that he was a regular employee, whereas Darshan Singh, Kuldip Singh, Satpal Singh and Sarup Singh were work-charge employees.
He also admitted that the cadre of those persons was different from him.
Since those persons have been promoted from a separate cadre, therefore, the plaintiff cannot ask for a higher pay.
6.
With regard to the allegations of the plaintiff that he was performing the duties of Head Roller Driver, again there is no order in this regard vide which he was promoted as Head Roller Driver.
In the absence of any such order if the plaintiff had been performing the duties of Head Roller Driver will not be entitled to any additional benefits attached to this post.
Resultantly, I do not see any illegality in the impugned judgments and decrees passed by the Courts below.
No merit.
Dismissed in limine.
Appeal dismissed.