VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to note 2 to rule 127 sub-rule (3) of the Punjab Family Pension Rules of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II which in turn does not recognise marriage after retirement.
2.
Brief facts of the case that constrained petitioner Gurdial Singh to challenge note 2 to rule 127 sub-rule (3) need a brief mention.
Petitioner joined as a Constable in Punjab Police in 1948.
He was married with one Satyawati and out of this wedlock two sons and one daughter were born who are at present married and settled.
The wife of the petitioner, however, died on 2111980 and on 131986 the petitioner superannuated from the post of Head Constable that he was holding in the Haryana Police.
Before his superannuation, he rendered 38 years of service.
In January 1994, the petitioner married one Chhinder Kaur, stated to be a widow as her first had husband died.
In the same very year the petitioner informed his employer for changing the name for the purpose of family pension and thus, incorporating the name of his wife Chhinder Kaur.
The Superintendent of Police recommended the change of name for the purpose of family pension to Accountant General, Haryana.
However, the request of the petitioner was turned down by Accountant General of the basis of note 2 rule 127 sub-rule (3).
Rule 617 dealing with the family pension defines family in sub-rule (3) as follows :-  (3).
"Family" for purposes of this Scheme will include the following relatives of Government employees : (a) wife in the case of a male Government employee and husband in the case of a female Government employee; (b) a judicially separated wife or husband, such separation not being granted on the ground of adultery, provided the marriage took place before the retirement of the Government employee and the person surviving was not held guilty of committing adultery; and (c) minor sons; and (d) unmarried daughters below the age of 21 years.
1 (c) and (d) Note will include children adopted legally before retirement.
2.
Marriage after retirement will not be recognised for purposes of this Scheme."
4.
The learned Counsel representing the petitioner vehemently contends that note 2 of rule 617 sub-rule (3) is arbitrary and as such ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
For the aforesaid contention the learned Counsel relies upon two judgments of the Apex Court in Laxmi Kunwar (Smt.) v. State of Rajasthan, 1993(8) SLR 427 and Kanta Devi v. Union of India, 1994(5) SLR 279.
The facts culminating into order passed by the Supreme Court in Laxmi Kunwar's case (supra) would reveal that Tej Dan, late husband of the petitioner was working as Patwari in the service of the State of Rajasthan and he retired from service on June 30, 1980.
After his retirement only he married the petitioner Laxmi Kunwar and shortly thereafter he died.
The Rajasthan Government denied family pension to the petitioner on the ground that Tej Dan married her after retirement and under the rule she was not entitled to pension.
The petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India came to be filed in the Supreme Court challenging the vires of the relevant rules.
Rule 268-D dealing with the family pension that came to the discussed in Laxmi Kunwar's case (supra) reads thus :-  "(1) Family for the purposes to this Chapter, will include the following relations of the officer :- (a) wife, in the case of a male officer.
(b) husband, in the case of a female officer, (c) minor sons; and (d) unmarried minor daughters.
Note (1) (c) and (d) will include children adopted legally before retirement.
(2) Marriage after retirement will not be recognised for the purpose of this rule."
5.
Placing reliance upon earlier judgments in Bhaghwanti v. Union of India, 1989(4) SCC 397, the Supreme Court held that note 2 to rule 268-D reproduced above was arbitrary and as such ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
A comparison of note 2 of rule 268-D and note 2 of rule 617 sub-rule (3) would demonstrate that the same are absolutely identical.
That being so, the question posed in the present petition is not res integra, but, in fact, stands clinched in favour of the petitioner by the Judgment of Apex Court in Laxmi Kunwar case (supra).
Nothing at all could be urged on behalf of the respondents that may detract from the contentions raised by the learned counsel on the vires of note 2 to 617 sub-rule (3) is struck down being ultra vires Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
Consequently, a direction is issued to the respondents to forthwith nominate Chhinder Kaur as nominee of the petitioner in the relevant pension papers.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.