SB Sinha, A.C.J.
- This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 20th July, 1999 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in W.P. No. 506(W) of 1999 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the respondent had been allowed.
2.
The writ petitioners who are three in numbers possessed certificates of Junior Basic Training.
The writ petitioner No. 3 claims himself to be a member of backward class.
The Employment Exchange, pursuant to a requisition made in that regard by the appellant herein, sponsored their names along with other eligible candidates but no call letter had been issued in their favour on the ground that they were over aged.
3.
Admittedly, applications were invited in respect of the vacancies which were notified on 25th September, 1996.
The date of birth of the petitioners were 4th March, 1956, 24th April, 1956 and 16th July, 1955 respectively.
They on the date of the initiation of the selection process were admittedly over aged.
The writ petitioners, however, had relied upon two circulars issued by the State of West Bengal for the purpose of showing that so far as the petitioners No. 1 and 2 are concerned, in absence of any rule made in this regard the prescribed age limit should be calculated on the basis of 1st day of the year of the recruitment and so far as the petitioner No. 3 is concerned that is in relation to a backward class candidate, relaxation of 3 years for the said purpose should be given.
4.
Accepting the aforementioned submission, the learned trial Judge held that they were eligible for consideration and in this situation disposed of the writ application directing :-  "Therefore, in the above conspectus of the case, I hereby direct the District Primary School Council to consider the eligibility of the petitioners by taking into consideration of their age as on first day of the recruitment year.
If they are found within age then steps be taken to consider their case in the post of Assistant Teachers.
"It has been submitted by Mr. Maity, the learned Advocate that the list or panel of the candidates has already been prepared and sent to the Director of School Education for approval.
Even assuming the panel was sent, then the petitioners' names also may be forwarded with comments for inclusion of their names in the panel.
If they are successful for the post of Assistant Teacher they may be placed at the suitable petitions in the panel already prepared in accordance with merit."
5.
As regard the reckoning of age an instruction dated 17th February, 1995 was issued by the Director of Employment which is to the following effect :-  "Serialized Instruction 1/95 : Sub : Crucial date for calculation of age.
Unless specifically mentioned in the recruitment rules, the prescribed age limits (both lower and upper) should be as on the first day of the year of recruitment, i.e. the year the procedure for recruitment has been taken up by the appointing authority in the case of vacancies under the State Government, its undertakings and in local bodies.
2.
This issues with concurrence of the Finance Department as communicated vide UO Group-P (Service) No. 1697 dated 191094.
3.
This will have immediate effect."
6.
As regard relaxation of upper age under West Bengal Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 only Memorandum has been issued on 10th January, 1997 which is to the following effect :-  "The question of granting relaxation of upper age limit to the candidates belonging to Backward Classes for recruitment to all posts and services under the Government or in Semi-Government Organisation has been under consideration of the Government for some time past; 2.
After careful consideration of the matter in all its aspects, the Governor is pleased to decide that the candidates belonging to the backward classes as specified for the purpose of the West Bengal Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 by issuing notification in that behalf shall be entitled to relaxation of three years over the prescribed upper age limit for direct recruitment to any service or post under the Government of West Bengal, the local and Statutory Authorities constituted under any State Act, Corporations in which was not less than 51% of the paid up share capital is held by the State Government, Universities, Colleges affiliated to the Universities, Primary, Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools and other Educational Institution which are owned or aided by the State Government and in the establishments in Public Sector.
This order will be take immediate effect."
7.
The fact that in terms of the provision of Section 106 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, rules had been framed known as Rules relating to recruitment and leave of teachers in Primary Schools in West Bengal by a Notification dated 25th November, 1991 which has come into force from the said date is neither in doubt nor in dispute.
Rule 8 of the said Rules reads thus :-  "8.
Calling for the names from the Employment Exchange :- (a) The number of vacancies as determined under rule 4, except in case the vacancies mentioned in sub-rule (a) and sub-rule (b) of rule 14 and the vacancies to be filled by inter-council transfer under the provisions of sub- section (k) of Section 19 of the Act, shall be intimated by the Council to the concerned Employment Exchange.
For the purpose of preparation of panel for eligible candidates, the Employment Exchange shall be requested to send names of candidates, both trained and untrained, who have requisite qualifications and in order of seniority of registration, and the list of candidates so prepared shall comprise of at least 50% of trained candidates unless the number of registered trained candidates at the concerned Employment Exchange is sufficient to comprise of the 50% of the names in the list : Provided that in case of non-availability of sufficient number of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Employment Exchange of the concerned revenue district, a reference shall be made by the Council to the special Employment Exchange for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes at the State level for sending further names.
(b) The letter to the employment exchange mentioned in sub-rule (a) shall contain, among other matters :- (i) the required minimum qualifications of candidates; (ii) the reservation quota for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates and physically handicapped candidates; and  (iii) the number of vacancies to be filled up.
(c) The total number of vacancies existing on the 31st December of a calendar year shall be treated as the number of vacancies for that year."
8.
This court in a number of decisions has held that the aforementioned rules will have force of law and must be strictly complied with.
Reference in this connection may be made to Biman Chandra Karmakar v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1999(2) CHN 289.
In unreported decision in Sri Alok Kumar Pandit and others v. Ad-hoc Committee, Midnapore District Primary School Council and others, C.O.
No. 8857(W) of 1996 disposed of on 11th November, 1998, one of us has held :-  "In West Bengal Board of Primary Education v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1997(1) CLJ 165 : 1995(1) S.C.T.
366, a Division Bench of this Court has categorically held that all appointments must be made in terms of 1991 Rules.
It has further been held that all appointments made contrary to or inconsistent with the said Rules would be void.
To the self same effect is the ratio of Special Bench Judgment of this Court in Debasish Dutta v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1998(2) CLJ 199.
Reservations have been made for Scheduled Caste candidates, Scheduled Tribes candidates, handicapped persons and those candidates who come within the purview of dies-in-harness category and the candidates who had to be appointed on compassionate ground in terms of Rule 14(6) of 1991 Rules.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by this Bench in Tulsi Charan Mondal & others v. State of West Bengal and others in Writ Petition No. 29853(W)/97 disposed of on November 2, 1998 wherein it has been held that any circular letter which is inconsistent with the provisions of 1991 Rules issued by the State prior to coming into force of the 1991 Rules cannot be given effect to nor any circular letter which has been issued in contravention of the provisions of the said Rules can be held to be valid.
This court, has in no uncertain terms, held that even an executive instruction which has been issued in terms of Article 162 of the Constitution of India can only supplement the Rules and cannot supplant the same.
The 1973 Act and 1991 Rules are self-contained codes in the matter of appointment, leave etc. No appointment, thus, can be made in derogation of the procedure laid down under 1991 Rules.
The State Government, thus, in view of the existence of valid statutory rules is not empowered to carve out another extra category for the purpose of reservation which is not contemplated under the 1973 Act or the Rules framed thereunder.
Reservation policy can be adopted by Executive instruction if there do not exist any Statutory Rules."
9.
The fact that such a provision for relaxation of age is not contained in the rules has not been disputed.
Rule 6(a)(ii) provides that a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a teacher unless he fulfils the conditions viz. that he is not below the 18 years of age and not above 40 years of age.
The said rules, therefore, have statutory force and the minimum and maximum age having been specified in the statutory rules, the same could not have been amended by reason of any departmental instructions or a Memorandum which does not have the force of law.
As noticed hereinbefore, the Serialized Instruction No. 1/95, dated 17th February, 1995 has been issued by the Director of Employment, West Bengal.
The said instruction, therefore, would be binding on the State of West Bengal only in respect of the recruitment of candidates.
10.
However, the appellant is a statutory authority.
The teaching and non- teaching staff of a primary school are not employees of State of West Bengal.
The serialized Instruction, therefore, cannot be said to have any application whatsoever in the instant case.
11.
Furthermore, in terms of Section 32 of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1937 the Board is a body corporate.
12.
So far as the Memorandum dated 10th January, 1997 is concerned, it appears that therein the question as regard relaxation of upper age limit of the candidates belonging to the Backward Class was considered.
However, in the writ petition, no averment has been made to the effect that the writ petitioner No. 3 ever intimated to the appellant that he is a member of Backward Class and, thus, is entitled to relaxation of age in terms of the Government Circular.
Such a case having not been made out, in our opinion, the Ld.
Trial Judge ought not to have been issued the impugned direction.
Furthermore, a panel has already been prepared.
It was, thus, not a case where the discretionary jurisdiction should have been exercised.
The petitioner No. 3's name could not have been directed to be included in the panel as he had not appeared in the interview.
His case may, however, be considered in future in accordance with law.
13.
The learned Counsel for the respondent, however, has relied upon a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Rattan Kumar Saha and others v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1998(1) CLJ 374.
In that decision it was held :  "For the reason aforementioned, we are of the view that the judgment under appeal could not have been passed only on the basis of the decision in the case of Ratan Kumar Saha's case (supra).
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the cases of those writ petitioners who would come within with purview of Rule 8 of 1991 Rules and if their names have been sponsored by the Employment Exchange, shall be considered for appointment in accordance with law.
Keeping in view the fact that the appointments in various Districts have not been made for a long time, the respective Dist.
Primary School Council should see to it that the appointments in the post of Assistant Teachers may be made as expeditiously as possible."
14.
Furthermore, a direction issued in equity does not create a binding precedent.
Here the writ petitioners have failed to prove existence of a legal right in themselves and, a corresponding legal duty in the respondents and thus, no case has been made out for interference with the decision taken by the appellant inasmuch as admittedly the appellants did not fulfil the requisite qualifications.
15.
For the reasons aforementioned the appeal is allowed and the impugned order is set aside but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.