KK Srivastava, J - This judgment will dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions (Nos 12584 and 15505 of 1998) as they involved common points of law and facts.
Dalwinder Singh son of Prem Singh has filed CWP No. 12584 of 1998.
Gurmeet Singh son of Harmohinder Singh has filed CWP No. 15505 of 1998.
Both these petitioners applied to respondent No. 1, Panjab University, Chandigarh, for appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics respectively in pursuance to advertisement No. 6/97 (copy Annexure P-5 on the petition of Balwinder Singh).
The note appended at the foot of the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement (copy Annexure P-5) is as under :-  "Note :- For the post of Lecturers (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education, the candidates should possess the following in addition to above qualifications : For one post : NIS Diploma in coaching hockey.
For second post : NIS Diploma in coaching Athletics."
2.
The post of Lecturers shown at item No. 3 in the advertisement, copy Annexure P11 included the post of Physical Education (Coaching) in the Physical Education Department.
The petitioners, Dalwinder Singh and Gurmeet Singh were selected by the Selection Committee/Syndicate and they were offered appointment to the posts of Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics respectively.
Copy of the letter sent to petitioner Dalwinder Singh is Annexure P6 dated 21.3.1998, in para 2 whereof it was mentioned, inter alia as under :-  "....In accordance with the decision of the Syndicate dated 21.3.1998 and subject to and in anticipation of the approval of the Senate, I am directed to offer you the appointment of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-75-2800-100-4000 on the terms and conditions mentioned below."
The first condition was to the effect that the appointment was on probation for one year from the date of joining; the period of probation could be extended in accordance with the rules of the University.
3.
Likewise the appointment was offered to the other petitioner, Gurmeet Singh, vide letter (copy Annexure P12 on the file of CWP No. 15505/1998).
The appointment offered to petitioner Gurmeet Singh also contained the same clause for offering of appointment to the said post in the same grade subject to and in anticipation of the approval of the Senate.
Regarding the post under the terms and conditions, it was mentioned that the appointment was on probation for one year from the date of joining and the period of probation could be extended in accordance with the rules of the University.
The offer of appointment made to both the petitioners was to be put up in the meeting of the Senate to be held on 2631998.
The Senate, however, did not approve their appointments.
Accordingly, the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh wrote to both the petitioners letters (No. 10599/Est.I to Dalwinder Singh and No. 10596/Estt.I to Gurmeet Singh) on 2341998 and intimating them the decision of the Senate in the following words (as contained in para 2 of the letter) :-  "This is to inform you that the Senate at its meeting held on 2631998 has not approved of your appointment as such.
Consequently, the offer of appointment made to you is hereby cancelled."
4.
Copies of the proceedings of the meeting of Senate held on 2631998 have been placed on record (as Annexure P8 on the file of Dalwinder Singh and Annexure P14 on the file of Gurmeet Singh).
It is alleged that objection to the offering of appointments made to the two writ petitioners was raised in the meeting of the Senate by Shri SS Hundal, a Member of the Senate, who has been impleaded as respondent No. 3 in both the petitioners and whose address is mentioned in the memo of parties as under :-  "Member of the Panjab University Senate, Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Moga."
5.
The respondent No. 1/University re-advertised the aforesaid two posts of Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics vide advertisement No. 4/98 (copies of which filed by Dalwinder Singh and Gurmeet Singh are Annexure P9 and P15 respectively).
In the Department of Physical Education, shown in item No. 3(a) 7 posts of Lecturers were shown including three posts in Coaching.
The explanation appended to the qualifications required that the posts of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education required the following conditions in addition to the other qualifications mentioned in the advertisement :-  1.
Specialisation in Master Degree (Physical Education) in Hockey and representation in game at Inter-University/National.
2.
Specialisation in Master Degree (Physical Education) in Badminton and representation in game at Inter-University/National.
3.
Specialisation in Master Degree (Physical Education) in Athletics and representation in game at Inter-University/National.
6.
In the meantime, the Vice Chancellor in exercise of the authority vested in him under Regulation 5 at page 125 of PU Cal.
Vol. 1, 1994, appointed the two writ petitioners as Lecturer (Coaching) on temporary basis at Rs. 2200/- pm in the pay scale of Rs. 2200/4000 for a period of one year or till such time the posts are filled in after selection, whichever is earlier, to assist also in the immediate need of sports camps on the campus starting shortly.
This letter dated 1251998 issued by the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh to the Chairman, Department of Physical Education, Panjab University, Chandigarh has been placed on record vide copy Annexure P10 on the file of Dalwinder Singh and copy Annexure P16 on the file of Gurmeet Singh.
However, vide letter dated 481998, issued by the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh to the Chairman, Department of Physical Education, Panjab University Chandigarh, it was communicated that the Vice Chancellor has cancelled the appointments of both the petitioners with immediate effect.
Copy of this letter is Annexure P11 on the file of Dalwinder Singh and P17 on the file of Gurmeet Singh petitioner.
7.
The petitioners, Dalwinder Singh and Gurmeet Singh, in both the writ petitions filed under Articles 226 and 227 have prayed for quashing of the order dated 2341998 cancelling their appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics respectively.
They further seek the quashing of the proceedings of the meeting of Senate of the respondent University held on 2631998 to the extent that the appointments of the petitioners were not approved, being contrary to the advertisement No. 6/97 and also being in gross violation of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners also prayed for quashing of advertisement No. 4/98 insofar as it re-advertised the posts of Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics as the same contains qualifications which are lower than the qualifications advertised earlier, vide advertisement No. 6 of 1997.
The petitioners also seek the quashing of letter dated 481998 to the extent that the Registrar of the respondent-University has directed the Chairman to relieve the petitioners immediately.
The petitioners seek the quashing of the aforesaid letters and advertisement on the grounds, inter alia, as under :-  (1) The petitioners fulfilled the requisite qualification for the post of Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey and Athletics in the Department of Physical Education of respondent No. 1/the University as per requirement of advertisement No. 6/97.
They were duly selected by the Selection Committee/Syndicate of the respondent/University.
(2) The decision of the Senate of the respondent-University at the meeting held on 2631998 was vitiated by malice and ill-will on the part of Shri SS Hundal, Member/respondent No. 3, who was highly prejudiced against the petitioners, being personally and deeply interested in another candidate namely Gurcharan Singh Brar.
Vide averments made in para 17 of the writ petition filed by Gurmeet Singh, it was alleged that the decision of the Senate was largely influenced by respondent No. 3/Shri SS Hundal, who had initiated the debate regarding their appointments.
(3) The advertisement No. 4/1998 vide which two posts have been re- advertised, was vitiated by lowering and changing the qualifications for the two posts, which had been provided for in the earlier advertisement No. 6/1997 and this was done in order to make Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar eligible for the said post.
(4) The appointment offered by the Vice Chancellor in exercise of his rights to the petitioners vide letter dated 1251998 was for a period of one year or till the duly selected candidate was appointed on the post, which ever happened earlier.
Still the appointment so offered vide letter dated 1251998 was cancelled in less than three months time due to extraneous considerations.
9.
According to the petitioners, the writ petitions raised the following questions of law for determination :-  (i) Whether the Senate can act arbitrarily and be influenced by the deliberations of a particular member and not approved the recommendation of the University without holding any discussion with regard to the qualifications and experience of a candidate, who is eligible ?
(ii) Whether the Senate of the University can say that the qualifications for the post are not valid after having itself approved the qualifications at the time of issuance of the advertisement ?
(iii) Whether the qualifications and conditions for recruitment of a Lecturer in the University can be changed to suit a particular individual so as to make him eligible ?
(iv) Whether the University can act without reasons beyond the qualifications that are advertised for filling up a particular post ?
(v) Whether the University is not bound by its own letter dated 1251998 while fixing the terms and conditions of appointment of the petitioners ?
10.
Upon issuance of notice of motion, respondents No. 1 and 2 filed written statement in both the petitions.
Respondent No. 3/Sh.
SS Hundal, Member of the Panjab University Senate, however, did not put in appearance despite being served with the notice.
11.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have averred, inter alia, that the appointment of the petitioners was made subject to and in anticipation of the approval of the Senate, which is the appointing authority in case of Class `A' post and since the Senate did not approve the appointments of the petitioners in its meeting, therefore, their appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education has been cancelled.
It was stated that the Senate at its meeting held on 2631998 considered the matter of provisional appointment of the petitioners and respondent No. 3/Sh.
SS Hundal had pointed out in the very beginning that these petitioners were simply having NIS Diploma in Coaching, which had not been recognized by the University Grants Commission and which even a Matriculate could join and qualify.
It was further pointed out that the possession of NIS Diploma in Coaching has no relevance at all to qualify UGC NET for Lecturership.
After considerable deliberations, the Senate in its wisdom decided not to approve the appointment of the petitioners.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 controverted the allegations made in the writ petitions that the Senate had acted in an arbitrary, discriminatory and illegal manner in not approving the appointment of the petitioners.
It was, however, stated that the qualifications for the various posts, as prescribed by the UGC are approved by the Syndicate and not by the Senate, as alleged by the petitioners.
It was mentioned that the advertisement No. 6/97 clearly provided that the candidates for the post of Lecturers in Physical Education (Coaching) should possess in addition, NIS Diploma in Coaching Hockey (for one post) and NIS Diploma in Coaching Athletics (for the second post).
It was averred that these additional qualifications have not been prescribed by the UGC/Syndicate.
These were, in fact, advertised at the instance of the Administrative Committee of the Department of Physical Education.
Thus, there is no question of these qualifications having been approved by the Senate, as stated by the petitioners.
Regarding Shri Gurcharaan Singh Brar, it was contended that he was not found eligible for the post of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education of the University as he did not possess the requisite diploma from NIS.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 defended the decision of the Senate of the University by contending that the Senate being the competent authority for appointment to Class `A' posts, was within its right not to approve the appointment of the petitioners.
It was further alleged that the post of Lecturer (Coaching-Hockey) is not financed by the UGC and thus, it cannot be said that this post is duly approved by the UGC However, the Senate being the appointing authority in case of Class `A' posts is fully competent to reject the recommendations of the Selection Committee/Syndicate.
It was further contended that there was no violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioners.
Though the petitioners were eligible for appointment as Lecturers in Physical Education (Coaching), the Senate was fully competent to reject the recommendations of the Selection Committee/Syndicate.
The charge of political manoeuvring and manipulation on the part of respondent No. 3/Shri SS Hundal was stated to be wrong and denied.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 made the following averments in paras 21 and 22 of their reply :-  "21.
That in reply to para 21 of the writ petition it is submitted that the posts of Lecturer in Physical Education (Coaching), have not been advertised under Advertisement No. 4/98 with the revised additional qualification.
It is, however, not correct on the part of the petitioner to say that the qualifications now provided for consideration for appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education are, in fact, the requisite qualifications approved by the UGC for appointment of Lecturers and not Lecturer (Coaching).
As a matter of fact the UGC has not prescribed/communicated any separate qualifications for the post of Lecturers in Physical Education and Lecturers in Physical Education (Coaching).
The revised additional qualifications have been given in the advertisement in the light of the discussion held in the Senate meeting.
The contention that this has been done to make Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar eligible for consideration for the appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) has no basis and hence denied."
22.
That in reply to para 22 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the posts of Lecturers in Physical Education (Coaching) have already been advertised vide Advt.
No. 4/98 keeping in view the discussion held in the Senate meeting.
There is no violation of the principles of natural justice and equality in advertising these posts vide Advt.
4/98."
12.
Regarding cancellation of the appointment offered by the letter dated 1251998, by letter dated 481998, it was contended that the Hon'ble Court vide order dated 12.8.1998 while issuing notice of motion had directed that the petitioner be permitted to continue till such time either new appointment is made or the term of their appointment expires.
In compliance with the orders of this Hon'ble Court, the respondent University has issued office orders on 31.8.1998 allowing the petitioners to continue to work as Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education w.e.f.
the date they were relieved in terms of the office orders dated 481998 till such time either new appointment is made or the term of their appointment i.e., one year expires, and the petitioners submitted joining report w.e.f.
481998.
13.
I have heard Shri SS Saron learned Counsel for the petitioners and Shri Viney Mittal, learned Senior Advocate for respondents No. 1 and 2 and have carefully perused the record of the case.
14.
The undisputed facts in respect of both petitioners are that they had applied for appointment to the post of Lecturer in (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education of the University in Hockey and Athletics and they were duly selected by the Selection Committee/Syndicate of the University.
It is also not disputed that the offer of appointment made to both of them was subject to approval of the Senate of University.
It is also undisputed that the Senate of the University in its meeting held on 2631998 did not approve the appointments.
15.
The first point of controversy that has been raised by the petitioners is about the bias of respondent No. 3/Sh.
SS Hundal, a member of the Senate of the University, with regard to his being personally interested in getting Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar appointed as a lecturer in the Department of Physical Education.
Since Sh. Gurcharan Singh Brar did not qualify for appointment to the said post of Lecturer (Coaching), Shri SS Hundal initiated the debate in the meeting of the Senate and to a large extend he is alleged to have influenced the members of the Senate, which ultimately resolved not to approve the appointment of the petitioners on the said posts.
16.
The other dispute is regarding the lowering of the qualifications in the advertisement No. 4/98, vide which the two posts of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education were re-advertised along with one other post.
17.
The last point of controversy is about offer of appointment made by the Vice Chancellor, vide letter of Registrar/respondent No. 2 issued on 1251998 to the petitioners, being honoured and complied with by respondents No. 1 and 2, who did not wait for the events mentioned as conditions in the said letter of appointment to happen and abruptly terminated the services of the petitioner vide letter dated 481998.
18.
So far as the third point is concerned, there is not much of dispute raised by respondents No. 1 and 2, who have in their written statement submitted in para 25 as under :-  "That in reply to para 25 of the writ petitions, it is submitted that this Hon'ble Court vide order dated 12.8.1998 while issuing notice of motion, further ordered that the petitioner be permitted to continue till such time either, new appointment is made or the term of his appointment expires.
In compliance with the orders of this Hon'ble Court, the respondent University has issued office orders on 31.8.1998 allowing the petitioner to continue to work as Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education w.e.f.
the date he was relieved in terms of the office orders dated 481998 till such time either new appointment is made or the term of his appointment i.e., one year expires, and the petitioner has submitted joining report w.e.f.
481998."
19.
The petitioners are, thus continuing on the post and their term of appointment would come to end after expiry of period of one year from the date of their joining.
Under these circumstances, this controversy no longer survives.
20.
So far as the first point raised by the petitioners is concerned, it may be mentioned at the very out-set that the respondent-university while offering appointment to the petitioners had clearly intimated that the offer of appointment was subject to approval by the Senate of the University.
It is not disputed that the Senate of the University is the competent authority, having the requisite jurisdiction to approve the appointments offered to the candidates selected by the Selection Committee/Syndicate of the University insofar as class `A' posts are concerned.
The Senate of the University is competent to consider the eligibility and suitability of a particular candidate selected provisionally and then to accord its approval or not to accord approval to the said appointment.
It is not for this Court to reconsider the requisite qualifications, eligibility and suitability of the petitioners to the post of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education.
21.
However, the petitioners have made allegations of bias against respondent No. 3/Shri SS Hundal.
The meeting of the Senate was held on 26.3.1988.
Shri SS Hundal referred to the appointments recommended under item No. 12(13) and stated that the persons simply having NIS Diploma in Coaching, which was not even recognized by the UGC and which even a matriculate could join and qualify, had been selected against the post of Lecturer.
The result of Shri Gurmeet Singh, one of the candidates, for MA Part II was awaited and he was thus declared ineligible by the office, as was apparent from the office noting on the application.
A candidate, who had not been called for interview, had 21 years experience was usually an expert for conducting the viva of PhD candidates.
The approval for this appointment, he felt, should be kept in abeyance.
22.
For the purpose of dealing with the allegations of bias against Sh. S S Hundal, the allegations made in para 16 of the writ petition No. 12584 filed by Dalwinder Singh are being extracted below.
(The allegations made by Gurmeet Singh in his petition are also similar to those made by Dalwinder Singh) :  "16.
That after perusing the minutes of the Senate the petitioner came to know the background which led to the non-approval of the petitioner for the post of Lecturer (Coaching) in the Department of Physical Education.
The background of the case was that Shri SS Hundal respondent No. 3 who is the member of the Senate was formerly President of Punjab College Teachers Association and one Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar was the Vice President of the Punjab College Teachers Association.
Shri SS Hundal respondent No. 3 and Shri Brar had good relationship amongst themselves and they were good friends and close associates.
Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar had also applied for the post of Lecturer (Coaching) Athletics in pursuance of the advertisement No. 6/97 Annexure P-5.
However, the candidature of Shri Brar was rejected at the time of scrutiny of the applications as he was not eligible for consideration for appointment as per the advertisement Annexure P-5.
Shri Brar did not have the requisite NIS Diploma (Coaching) in Athletics and therefore he was ineligible for consideration for appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) in pursuance of advertisement No. 6/97 Annexure P-5.
Shri Brar felt slighted for being ignored even from consideration for appointment as Lecturer (Coaching) Athletics.
Therefore, he though his friend and associate Shri SS Hundal respondent No. 3, who was/is the member of the Senate of the respondent University raked up issue in the proceedings of the Senate that persons simply having NIS Diploma in Coaching which has not even been recognised by UGC and which even a matriculate can join and qualify had been selected against the post of Lecturer.
Particular reference was made to the selection of Shri Gurmeet Singh one of the candidates who had been selected as Lecturer (Coaching) Athletics along with the petitioner in pursuance of the same advertisement i.e. Advertisement No. 6/97 Annexure P-5.
The entire discussion and consideration revolved around the fact that Shri Gurmeet Singh was ineligible and there was no debate on the question of eligibility or of any other kind with regard to the petitioner.
However, the Senate in an arbitrary, discriminatory, and irregular manner did not approve the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer (Coaching) Hockey...." 23.
The main thrust of the averments made in para 16 as aforesaid is about the alleged close relationship of Shri SS Hundal/respondent No. 3 with Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar and about latter being found ineligible for appointment to the post of Lecturer (Coaching), who allegedly felt slighted and was, thus, allegedly helped by respondent No. 3 by opposing the appointment of both the writ petitioners.
It is not disputed that Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar was not found eligible for appointment to the said post.
There is no reference to the non-selection of Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar in the minutes of the Senate.
In reply to para 16 of the writ petition of Dalwinder Singh petitioner, respondents No. 1 and 2 made the following averments :-  "16.
That the contents of para 16 of the writ petition with regard to relationship between respondent No. 3 and Shri Gurucharan Singh Brar is denied for want of knowledge."
It is admitted that Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar was not found eligible for the post of Lecturer (Coaching).
The contention of the petitioner that there was no debate on the question of eligibility or of any other kind in regard to the petitioner is not tenable since, as stated by the petitioner himself in this para, respondent No. 3 (Shri SS Hundal) had pin-pointed in the very beginning of the discussion on the item in the Senate meeting that persons imply having NIS Diploma Coaching (which the petitioner also possesses besides the other selected candidates, viz. Shri Gurmeet Singh) which has not been recognized by the UGC and which even a Matriculate can join and qualify had been selected against the post of Lecturer.
It is further pointed out that possession of NIS Diploma in Coaching has no relevance at all to qualifying UGC NET for Lecturership.
After considerable deliberations, the Senate, in its wisdom, decided not to approve the appointment of the petitioner as also of the other selected candidate, viz. Shri Gurmeet Singh.
The contention that the Senate in an arbitrary, discriminatory and irregular manner did not approve the appointment of the petitioner as a Lecturer (Coaching-Hockey) is thus, unfounded, hence denied."
24.
It will appear from reply to para 16 aforesaid that in the meeting of the Senate Shri SS Hundal had initiated the discussion regarding the selection of the two petitioners and he had pointed out that these petitioners simply had NIS Diploma in Coaching, which had not been recognised by the UGC and the same could be held even by a Matriculate.
The submissions regarding the relationship between Shri SS Hundal and Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar were denied for want of knowledge.
25.
In para 17 of the reply filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, in the case of Gurmeet Singh, it was averred as under :-  "That the contents of para 17 of the writ petition with regard to relationship between respondent No. 3 and Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar is denied for want of knowledge.
It is admitted that Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar was not found eligible for the post of Lecturer (Coaching).
The contention of the petitioner that there was no debate on the question of eligibility or of any other kind in regard to the petitioner is not tenable since, as stated by the petitioner himself in this para, respondent (Sh. SS Hundal) had pin-pointed in the every beginning of the discussion on the item in the Senate meeting that persons simply having NIS Diploma in Coaching (which the petitioner also possesses besides the other selected candidates, viz. Shri Dalwinder Singh) which has not been recognized by the UGC and which even a Matriculate can join and qualify had been selected against the post of Lecturer.
It is further pointed out that possession of NIS Diploma in Coaching has no relevance at all to qualifying UGC NET for Lecturership.
After considerable deliberations, the Senate, in its wisdom, decided not to approve the appointment of the petitioner as also of the other selected candidate, viz. Shri Dalwinder Singh.
The contention that the Senate in an arbitrary, discriminatory and irregular manner did not approve the appointment of the petitioner as a Lecturer (Coaching-Athletics) is, thus, unfounded, hence denied."
26.
A perusal of the reply filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 to the averments made in para 17 of the petition would go to show that the University had taken the similar stand as the one taken in the case of Dalwinder Singh petitioner.
It may be mentioned that the mere averments regarding the good relations between Shri SS Hundal/respondent No. 3 with Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar and for that matter the want of knowledge of respondents No. 1 and 2 regarding the said good relations and also notwithstanding the fact that Shri SS Hundal has not filed reply, it could not be reasonably inferred that Shri SS Hundal was biased against the petitioners.
27.
A careful perusal of the minutes of the Senate would go to show that Shri SS Hundal/respondent No. 3 had initiated the matter regarding the appointment of the two petitioners, Dalwinder Singh and Gurmeet Singh for the post of Lecturer (Coaching) in Hockey and Athletics in the Department of Physical Education and the other members of the Senate had also participated in the debate on this point.
The names of such participants are Principal Tarsem Raj Bahia, Principal Shah Mahajan, Principal (Mrs.) Raj Garg and Professor Ram Parkash besides the Vice Chancellor.
Barring Dr. NS Mann, who himself was a product of the NIS, no other member supported for approval to be accorded to the appointments of the petitioners.
The Vice Chancellor also intervened in the debate and as per minutes of the meeting of the Senate, he clarified as under :-  "The Vice Chancellor clarified that the person concerned told him that he had cleared the written papers and his dissertation had been pending in the office for the previous six months.
He felt that if in despatch of the Dissertation, the delay was caused not by the candidate but by certain procedure, the persons concerned should not be put at disadvantage that was the only consideration under which he allowed the person to be called for interview.
If the members felt that it should not be done the item could be dropped."
28.
After the Senate had a through debate regarding the approval to be accorded to the petitioners for appointment to the post of Lecturer (Coaching), the Senate resolved as under :-  "Resolved : That recommendations of the Syndicate contained in item Nos. 12 and 13 on the agenda be approved except that of recommendation at 12(1-a) and 12(13) (a&b).
(a) ......... (b) the recommendation pertaining to selections at 12(13) (a & b) be not approved."
29.
So far as the qualifications of the two petitioners are concerned, they have placed on record certain annexures.
Vide Annexure P1, Dalwinder Singh obtained Degree of Bachelor in Physical Education on 13.9.1990.
He obtained degree of Master of Arts in the subject of Physical Education on 391997, vide Annexure P2.
He was awarded Diploma in Coaching in Hockey, in Second Division, vide annexure PS, by SAI Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports Bangalore.
He attended XVII Diploma Course from July 92 to May 93.
Vide Annexure P4, issued by the University Grants Commission on 13101997, it was certified that he was qualified in UGC Test for Junior Fellowship test only subject to fulfilment of minimum eligibility condition laid down for the test.
He was asked to fill out the pro forma given below and attach attested copies of all documents.
A final certificate in that regard would be issued after receiving the above referred pro forma and supporting documents.
Vide Annexure P4, dated 18121997, he was informed that he had qualified the UGC Test for eligibility for Lecturership only.
30.
Petitioner Gurmeet Singh obtained degree of Bachelor of Physical Education in May, 1994, vide Annexure P1.
Vide Annexure P2, the Sports Authority of India, Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports Awarded him Diploma in Coaching in Athletics after he attended the XXXII Regular Diploma Course from July 94 to May 95.
He obtained the degree of Master of Arts in February, 1998, vide Annexure PS.
Vide Annexure P3/A, he was awarded University Medal for standing first in MA (Physical Education) Examination held in April, 1997.
Vide Annexure P4, he qualified the State level eligibility test for Lecturership in the subject of Physical Education.
Vide Annexures P5, he was informed that he had qualified the UGC test for the eligibility for Lecturership.
Annexure P6 to P10 are the certificates regarding experience as Athletics Coach.
31.
It may be mentioned that petitioner Gurmeet Singh applied for appointment to the post of Lecturer (Coaching) Athletics in the Department of Physical Education on 27101997.
At that time the degree of Master of Arts (Annexure P3) had not been conferred on him, which was issued to him on 2421998.
The letter of University Grants Commission (Annexure P5) is also dated 17121997, i.e. subject (subsequent ?)
to the date of application moved by Gurmeet Singh for his appointment as Lecturer.
The certificate of the Department of Evening Studies, Panjab University, Chandigarh (Annexure P8) is also dated 16.3.1998, which is also subsequent to the date of his application for the post of Lecturer (Coaching).
Similarly the certificates issued to him by DAV Model School, Sector 15-A, Chandigarh (Annexure P9) dated 1831998 and by the Director Sports, Panjab University, Chandigarh (Annexure P10) dated 17.3.1998 are also subsequent to the date of his applying for the post of Lecturer (Coaching).
In the proceedings, there is a reference about the office report regarding petitioner Gurmeet Singh having not acquired the qualification of Master of Arts on the date he applied for his appointment.
32.
After giving my thoughtful and anxious consideration to the whole matter, I am unable to agree to the contention of learned Counsel for the petitioners that they have been discriminated by the Senate and that too at the behest of Shri SS Hundal/respondent No. 3.
The allegations of bias against Shri SS Hundal have not been substantiated.
It has not been shown that Shri SS Hundal was biased in favour of Shri Gurcharan Singh Brar and was in any way biased against the petitioners.
Since the allegation of bias has not been successfully shown against Shri SS Hundal, the decision of the Senate not to accord approval to the appointments of the petitioners cannot be held to be malicious and biased.
The last submission regarding lowering of qualification in subsequent advertisement has no merit as the petitioners can also apply for the posts advertised requiring lower qualification.
33.
So far as the action of the respondent/University in cancelling the appointment offered to the petitioners on 1251998 to the post of Lecturer (Coaching) is concerned, it may be pointed out that the meeting of the Senate did not approve the action of the Vice Chancellor in offering the appointment in exercise of his powers, particularly, in view of the fact that their appointments had not been approved by the Senate, it cannot be said that the impugned order terminating the temporary appointment of the petitioners by the Vice Chancellor (which had been communicated to them by the Registrar, Panjab University/respondent No. 2 on 481998), was contrary to the conditions contained in the earlier appointment letter dated 1251998 and the said action cannot be said to be arbitrary and illegal.
In view of the foregoing discussion, I find no merit in these two writ petitions, which are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.