VK Bali, J (Oral) - Vinod Kumar Garg through the present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash admissions of respondents 2 and 3 and in consequence thereof to admit the petitioner in M Tech.
(Computer Science and Engineering) Course, Session 1999-2000, in accordance with the select list Annexure P-1, where the petitioner is at Serial No. 4 in the Waiting List.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to the present petition need a necessary mention.
It is the case of the petitioner that the Punjabi University, respondent No. 1 herein, issued a Handbook of Information for admission in MTech.
(Computer Science and Engineering), Session 1999-2000.
The essential qualification to appear in the entrance test was Master's degree in Mathematics etc. with minimum 55 per cent marks.
The petitioner being eligible, having MSc.
(Mathematics) with 70 per cent marks and distinction of gold medal apart from diploma PGDCSA, applied for the course under contention.
After entrance test, merit/select list was prepared and the petitioner was placed in the waiting list at serial No. 4 in the open general category.
It is the case of the petitioner and which has not been denied that in case reserved seats were not filled to the extent of unfilled seats in the said category, the seats would be thrown open for the general category.
Five seats which were otherwise earmarked for reserved category remained unfilled.
In the manner aforesaid, the petitioner who was in merit at No. 4 in the waiting list ought to have been admitted.
However, deviating from the prospectus, wherein it was specifically provided that eligibility of a candidate has to be considered on the date interviews are to take place, respondents 2 and 3 who had passed the qualifying examination i.e. MSc.
after the date of interview were admitted in preference to the petitioner.
3.
Before I might proceed further with this case, the relevant cause deviation whereof has been complained of in giving admission to respondents 2 and 3 by ignoring the petitioner, needs a ready reference.
The same reads thus :  "The Entrance Test for admission to M Tech.
(Computer Science & Engineer shall be open to all candidates who are eligible under the following conditions:- xxx xxx xxx (b) The result of the candidates of their qualifying examination must be available on the date of interview."
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 all that has been pleaded in defence to the case projected by the petitioner is that the result of qualifying examination of respondent No. 2 Miss Vartika Nagpal and respondent No. 3 Miss Anjali Kakkar were not available at the time of interview.
The Admission Committee did not admit them on the date of interview (21.7.1999).
These two candidates made several representations to the University authorities Later on, the Vice Chancellor formed a Committee.
The admissions were made on the approval of the Vice Chancellor on the recommendations of the committee on the following grounds :-  (i) Ms. Anjali Kakkar, Respondent No. 3, topped the entrance test therefore she was admitted to the course.
(ii) Ms. Vartika, Respondent No. 2, stood second in the entrance test and topped the MSc.
(Maths) exam.
of Punjabi University, therefore she was admitted to the course.
4.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned, his rank was 20 i.e. much lower than the rank of Ms. Anjali Kakkar and Ms. Vartika Nagpal.
It is further the case of respondent No. 1 that no candidate in the general category was admitted having a rank lower than that of the petitioner.
5.
It requires to be mentioned here that in so far as respondents No. 2 and 3 are concerned, no one has chosen to appear on their behalf and this fact has been recorded in the interim order dated August 30, 1999.
6.
The undisputed facts that emerge from the pleadings of the parties thus reveal that date of interview after the entrance test was July 21, 1999.
There were in all 15 seats in the course under contention and that petitioner No. 4 was at No. 4 in the waiting list.
Five seats earmarked for reserved category candidates could not be filled and therefore as per provisions contained in the prospectus regarding which, as mentioned above, there is no dispute, had to be thrown open to the candidates belonging to the general category.
It has further remained undisputed that the prospectus does contain clause, which has been reproduced above, and the same disentitle the candidates for admission whose results might have been declared later in point of time i.e. after the date fixed for interview i.e. July 21, 1999.
A Full Bench of this Court in Swaranjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) RSJ 512 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) (FB), has held that the terms and conditions notified in the Admission Notice/Brochure issued are binding in the matter of granting admissions.
The same have the force of law and the authorities cannot be allowed to act in contravention thereof.
In view of the relevant clause of the prospectus referred to above and in view of the dictum of the Full Bench in Swaranjit Singh's case (supra) the University authorities were not justified in admitting respondents No. 2 and 3 despite the fact that they had topped the entrance test being placed at Nos. 1 and 2 in the merit list.
The clause in the prospectus was binding upon the University authorities.
That apart, there is a definite purpose for holding eligibility on a particular date.
It is too well known that result of a qualifying examination with regard to the various students located all over the country is declared from time to time.
Even though, a candidate who has appeared in the qualifying examination is eligible to take the entrance test, there has to be a last date when result of the qualifying examination must be declared.
If this is not done, there will be no finality attached to the select list at all and in a given case admissions might have to be given and correspondingly cancelled spread over the whole academic year.
It is with a view to avoid this kind of eventuality, which will work injustice to all concerned, that a clause like the one reproduced above, was provided in the prospectus itself.
In a case of this kind, merit takes a back seat.
The University authorities, however, gave precedence to the merit at the cost of violating clause with regard to the last date of eligibility provided in the prospectus and the action of the University authorities being in violation of the clause aforesaid, it cannot but be held that whereas respondents 2 and 3 were given admission against law, the petitioner was denied the same.
7.
In view of the discussion made above, this petition succeeds.
A direction is issued to the University authorities to admit the petitioner in M Tech.
(Computer Science and Engineering) for the Session 1999-2000.
Learned counsel representing the parties inform the Court that two candidates from the waiting list i.e. at Nos. 1 and 2 have since already been admitted.
Respondents No. 2 and 3 were accommodated out of the remaining three seats, whereas one admission in the same manner as was given to respondents 2 and 3, has been given to Amit Aran.
The last candidate i.e. Amit Aran was admitted in the course under contention after filing of the present writ petition.
While issuing direction to the University authorities it is further clarified that if it may be possible not to disturb admission of respondents 2 and 3 and of Amrit Aran, they be allowed to continue the studies.
However, if it becomes necessary to disturb admission of one out of the three mentioned above, the University authority would ease out the one who obtained least marks in the entrance test out of the three mentioned above.
8.
At this stage, learned counsel, relying upon a judgment of this Court in Miss Sumedha Kalia and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1990 Pb.
& Haryana 239, states that the petitioner was not at fault and on account of the admission given to him by the order of this Court, he may run short of lectures and, therefore, shortage of lectures should be condoned.
The Court need not pass any orders on this matter at this stage.
Suffice it to say that if the petitioner makes a representation to the above effect before the concerned authorities, they will consider the same in accordance with law.
This petition is disposed of in the manner indicated above, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Copy dasti under the signature of the Court Secretary.
Petition allowed.