Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this second regular appeal is to the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, dismissing the first appeal preferred by the unsuccessful plaintiff.
2.
Gurnam Singh, plaintiff, who was working as a Clerk in the State of Punjab, subsequently upon formation of the State of Haryana, in that State as Assistant Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, Ambala, was ordered to be dismissed from service vide order dated 2691983.
The appeal as well as the revision against this order was dismissed by the competent authorities on 1091984 and 3071985, respectively.
According to the plaintiff the said orders were totally unjustified, illegal and were violative of principles of natural justice.
The suit was contested by the State and it was stated that the suit was not maintainable for want of notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On merit, it was contended that enquiry against the appellant was conducted in furtherance to the Charge Sheet dated 2791979 in accordance with rules and principles of natural justice and after affording the appellant opportunity of show cause why major penalty be not imposed upon him, vide order dead 2991983 he was removed from service.
The learned trial court framed the following three issues :  i) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
ii) Whether no notice under Section 80 CPC has been served with the defendant before filing the suit ?
OPP.
iii) Relief.
3.
After affording the opportunities to the parties to lead evidence, the learned trial court vide its judgment and decree dated 20.2.1991 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff with no orders as to costs.
The plaintiff being dissatisfied preferred an appeal before the learned Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, who also dismissed the appeal, vide the impugned order dated 2881997 giving rise to this regular second appeal.
During the course of hearing the learned counsel for the appellant contended that the findings recorded by the learned trial court on issues No. 1 and 2 are palpably incorrect in face of Ex. P7 and Ex. P9 and the admission of DW 1 in his cross examination.
At the outset I would proceed to discuss the findings recorded by the learned courts below in Issue No. 2.
This issue has been answered by the learned trial court against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendant.
These findings were affirmed by the learned first appellant court.
During the course of hearing, the learned counsel appearing for the parties produced relevant record.
DW 1 Ashok Kumar, the sole witness examined by the defendant, in his cross-examination clearly admitted that the original notice served by the defendant was in the office.
In face of this categoric admission on the part of DW 1, the notice was sent by registered acknowledgement due and was addressed to the respondent.
Averment to this effect was also made by the plaintiff in the plaint, which was vaguely denied by the defendant.
But for admission of DW 1 in his cross examination the findings recorded by the learned courts below could not be sustained.
But once it is admitted that the original notice is in the office file of the respondent, I am of the considered view that the onus of the Issue No. 2 was discharged by the plaintiff to the suit.
Resultantly, I would upset the findings recorded by the learned courts below and answer the Issue No. 2 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant.
Reverting to the first issue, it was again answered against the plaintiff.
Reference to Exhibits P7 and P-9 would be relevant.
Bare reading of copy of the enquiry report shows that the charges against the plaintiff were not of very grave nature.
They related to charging the late fee in place of publication fee of Rs. 20/- which was payable after 3111978 for renewal of permit C-4.
The article of charges does not reflect as to what loss had been caused to the State.
Furthermore, vide Exhibit P-9 Shri SS Ahlawat, the Officer in charge of the Regional Transport Authority, Faridabad, had written to the State Transport Controller, Haryana, Chandigarh, to drop the allegations against the plaintiff, which reads as under :  "I have gone through the explanation tendered by Shri Gurnam Singh and find that his explanation is very elaborate and to the point.
I am convinced by the arguments adduced by him and feel that no irregularity has been committed by him while he was working as Assistant Secretary, R.T.A.
Ambala.
2.
I have also seen the findings of the Enquiry Officer and find with disappointment that his findings are most arbitrary, which have been recorded without taking into account the explanation of Shri Gurnam Singh and other relevant factors.
I strongly feel that the Enquiry Officer has not been able to make out a case against Shri Gurnam Singh.
3.
Under the above circumstances, it is my firm opinion that no action may be taken against Shri Gurnam Singh on the basis of the findings and in view of the detailed explanation given by Shri Gurnam Singh.
The above extract of the said order would be relevant at this stage.
4.
It was conceded before me during the course of hearing that alongwith the appellant another officer, namely; Sudershan Kumar, was also called upon to face the same charges and a common enquiry was held agasint both of them.
Identical findings have been recorded agasint both the said officers vide Ex.P-7 and Ex.P-67 respectively but the Appellate Authority has adopted a different yardstick and has imposed totally different punishment on the appellant and the other officer.
While the appellant has been ordered to be removed from service and the order of punishment was maintained by the Appellate Authority, but the Appellate Authority revoked the order of removal of Mr. Sudershan Kumar from service and punishment of reduction in pay scale reverting him to the initial start in his time scale was imposed.
The order of the Appellate Authority gives no valid reason for creating this classification between two delinquent officers, who were identically charges, commonly inquired into and similar order of removal from service was passed against them.
5.
The appellant has put in 23 years of service and has a good service record.
Ex.P16 reflects the service record of the appellant from 1958 to 1981-82 as under :  ACR's 58-59 Good Honest 59-60 Good Honest 60-61 Good Honest 61-62 Good Honest 62-63 Average No complaint 63-64 Average No complaint 64-65 Very Good Honest 65-66 Very Good Honest 66-67 Very Good/Excellent Honest 68-69 Very Good Honest 69-70 Very Good Honest 70-71 Good Honesty 71-71 Excellent Honest deserves appreciation Letter of appreciation conveyed 72-73 Outstanding Good 73-74 Very Good Good 74-75 Very Good Honest 75-76 Very Good Honest 76-77 Outstanding Very Honest 77-78 Very Good Honest 78-79 Good/Very Good Honest/Good 79-80 Under Suspension 80-81 -do- 81-82 Outstanding by RTA The learned counsel for the appellant also argued that question of loss to the State revenue is misconceived.
According to him as per Ex.P.41, Ex.P.-42 and Ex.P.-43 parties had deposited a sum of Rs. 1313/- for renewal of their licence for a period of five years and it had also come on record that in case of application for renewal within the stipulated period, Rs. 3/- is charged as publication fee but if the application is submitted beyond the stipulated period but within the grace period then Rs. 20/- is charged and a sum of Rs. 20/- had been paid.
6.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and gravity of the article of charge, I am of the considered view that the impugned order of punishment calls for an interference by this court, as punishment does not appear to be commensurate to the gravity of the charges.
Normally courts would not interfere in the quantum of punishment unless the punishment is one which at the face of its pricks the judicial conscience of the courts.
7.
While considering the question of quantum of sentence the Disciplinary Authority is expected to keep in mind the gravity of the offence or charges, loss to the State revenue and such other attendant circumstances which would help the Disciplinary Authority to come to a just and fair conclusion.
The application of mind in this regard is one of the pertinent essentials for sustainability of an order of punishment.
The appellate authority had rejected the appeal of the appellant without considering any of the issues raised much less to discuss them in some detail.
8.
For the reasons aforestated, I am of the considered view that the finding of the learned courts below of Issue No. 1 also calls for interference though on the limited question of quantum of sentence.
9.
Resultantly, this regular second appeal is accepted.
The judgments and decrees of the learned courts below are set aside.
The impugned orders dated 2691983 and 1091984 are set aside.
Setting aside of the impugned orders of punishment would neither vitiate the enquiry nor would affect the same in any manner whatever.
Further a direction is issued to the respondent herein to pass a fresh order of punishment within 30 days from the date the certified copy of this order is brought to its notice.
In the meanwhile the appellant would not be entitled to any benefits.
Fresh order of punishment shall govern the interest and obligation of the parties.
However, there shall be no orders as to costs.
Appeal allowed.