Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 17.3.98 passed by a leaned Single Judge of this Court in CO No. 9163(W) of 1996 whereby and hereunder the writ application filed by the appellant herein was dismissed.
The petitioner claims himself to be the adopted son of Hiralal Some and Sudama Domini.
The said Sudama Domini died on 18494 while she was in service of the Municipality.
The appellant filed an application for his appointment on compassionate ground.
As the same was denied, he filed a writ application before this Court.
By an order dated 8.3.96 passed in CO No. 2481(W) of 1996 this Court directed the authority to consider the matter in accordance with law after giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant herein.
Pursuant to the said order, an order has been passed on 2751996 by the Chairman of the Municipality which is contained in Annexure "G" to the application for appropriate order.
2.
The learned Judge keeping in view the fact that reason has been assigned in the said order, refused to interfere with the matter and dismissed the writ application.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant submits that the authority of the Municipality while passing the impugned order failed to take into consideration the relevant fact that the petitioner had been granted succession certificate as adopted son of Sudama Domini by the Assistant District Judge, Suri, Birbhum in Misc. Case No. 19 of 1994, a copy whereof is contained in Annexure "F" to the application.
4.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant to that effect appears to be correct but apart from the same other grounds have also been assigned.
Furthermore, the learned counsel for the appellant when questioned failed to point out before this Court that there exists any statute, statutory rules or any policy decision in terms whereof the appointment on compassionate ground has to be given to a dependent of the deceased employee.
An appointment on compessionate ground can be granted only to the wife, son and unmarried daughter.
5.
It has not been pointed out before us that there existed any policy decision or statutory rules in terms whereof the petitioner is entitled to obtain appointment on compassionate ground.
Furthermore, in view of the fact that much delay has been caused, we are of the opinion that it is not a fit case in which discretion of this Court should be exercised.
Reference in this connection may be made to the cases reported in 1994(4) SCC 132 and 1998(2) SCC 412 and a recent decision of this Court reported in 1991(1) CLT 166.
6.
For the reason aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
7.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Appeal dismissed.