VS Aggarwal, J - The present writ petition had been filed by the State of Haryana and another seeking quashing of the award dated 5.8.1996 passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Ambala.
2.
The relevant facts are that respondent Nepal Singh was working as a Chowkidar in the Civil Supplies Department Haryana, under District Food and Supplies Controller, Kaithal.
He was posted in the godown situated in village Dhand.
He worked from February, 1984 to September, 1985.
On 1111985 a case with respect to the offence punishable under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him.
The workman claimed that his services were terminated w.e.f.
1111985.
He was tried by the court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kaithal.
He was acquitted of the charge on 2351991.
He claimed that he may be reinstated with full back wages.
3.
The petitioner management contested the claim and took up the plea that the respondent workman was employed only from February, 1984 to September, 1985.
His wages were paid on the rates approved by the Deputy Commissioner.
The services of the workman had not been terminated.
Instead, it was asserted that he abstained from duty after the registration of the criminal case.
He was charged with theft of four wheat bages.
It was further asserted that the Food and Supplies Department is not an industry.
4.
The Labour Court framed the issues and recorded evidence.
It was held that the workman had served the petitioner management for more than 240 days.
His case fell within the ambit of section 25B(i)(ii) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short "the Act").
It was further held that the petitioner department was an industry.
The contention of the petitioners that the services of the workman were terminated on account of completion of specific work was also rejected.
Accordingly, the award was passed directing reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service and full back wages.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners assailed the said award alleging that, in fact, the workman had abandoned his job in November, 1985 when First Information Report was registered against him pertaining to the offence punishable under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code and that the services of the workman had not been terminated.
So far as this particular plea is concerned, this is simply stated to be rejected.
Before the Labour Court, as has been recorded while deciding issue No. 2, the contention raised was that the services of the workman were terminated on completion of specific work also.
This is contrary to the plea that services were not terminated.
It betrays common sense to believe that the workman would stop working himself merely because a case had been registered against him.
His contention that he was asked not to join the duty must be believed.
Therefore, it must be held that it was not a case of abandonment of service.
6.
In that event, it had been urged that it was a work of temporary nature and even if what is asserted by the petitioners above is ignored, on completion of the same, the workman, indeed, could not insist for a right to continue in service.
The Labour Court has recorded that there was no material placed on the record to show that this was a work of temporary nature.
The management has only produced Mr. NS Wahi, District Food and Supplies Officer, Kaithal.
He besides stating that the workman had abandoned his job did not make any reference that if was a work of temporary nature.
Therefore, the whole edifice of the argument falls for lack of evidence.
Consequently, in the absence of any other plea being offered, there is no ground to interfere in the impugned award.
7.
As a result of the reasons given above, the writ petition being without merit must fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.