Satyabrata Sinha, J - The petitioners who are seven in number have prayed for issuance of a writ of or in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise them in services.
2.
The petitioners claimed themselves to have been working as Cargo Pool Workers within Haldia Dock Complex area.
They allegedly worked for a period of 11 years.
According to the petitioners, they having been working in the said capacity for a number of years, were entitled to be absorbed in services.
According to the petitioners, the services are regulated under Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948.
Section 2(b) of the said Act defines dock worker to mean a person employed or to be employed in, or in the vicinity of, any port on work in connection with the loading, unloading, movement or storage of cargoes or work in connection with the preparation of ships or other vessels for the receipt or discharge of cargoes or leaving port.
`Employer' has been defined in Section 2(c) to mean in relation to a dock worker, the person by whom he is employed or to be employed as aforementioned.
Section 3 which is an enabling provision empowers the Central Government to make a scheme for the registration of dock workers and employers with a view to ensuring greater regularity of employment and for regulating the employment of dock workers, whether registered or not, in a port.
Sub-section (2) of Section provides the details which may be provided for in the scheme.
3.
Some persons had filed a writ application earlier.
The matter went upto the Supreme Court of India and by an order dated 19th September, 1988 as contained in Annexure `A' to the affidavit-in-opposition the Supreme Court keeping in view of memorandum of settlement arrived at under Section 12(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 dated 27.6.1988 as also keeping in view the points involved therein, namely, decasualisation of dock workers in Paradip Port, felt that it would be just and convenient if the parties to the settlement were requested to arrive at a settlement with regard to decasualisation of dock workers in Paradip and other Ports.
The said order is contained in Annexure `A' to the affidavit-in-opposition.
4.
A writ application was filed by the petitioners, inter alia, on the ground that their services are not being regularised by the 1st respondent herein.
The said writ application was marked as C.O.
No. 2672(W)/89.
The petitioners in the said writ application, inter alia, contended that they had worked upto 1988.
They had also alleged that Calcutta Port Trust authorities are their principal employers.
The said writ application was disposed of by Manoj Kumar Mukherjee, J (as His Lordship then was) by an order dated 1371990 by directing the Government of India to decide upon the question whether Scheme under Section 3(1) of Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 should be framed or not for the Haldia Dock Complex.
It stands admitted that the Central Government did not agree to frame any scheme in terms of Section 3(1) of the said Act.
In the meantime the Haldia Dock Complex authority entered into an agreement with President of SMU Haldia to the effect that 705 Casual Cargo Pool Workers would be considered for employment for cargo pool operation under the Haldia Dock Complex.
Allegedly the Labour Commissioner (Central) directed the Haldia Dock Complex Authority to take appropriate steps for decasualisation of Cargo Pool Workers.
Thereafter this writ application was filed when interview letters were issued to other workers for their appointment.
5.
The respondents in their affidavit-in-opposition categorically stated that the petitioners on their own showing in the earlier writ application had worked till 1988.
It is stated that they had been working as sweepers only and not as Cargo Pool Workers.
In any event, according to them, there is no relationship of employer and employee between the 1st respondent and the petitioners.
6.
In paragraphs 4 and 26 of the writ application the petitioners have stated thus :-  "4.
Your petitioners state that there are about 750 cargo pool workers who have been working there for last 11 years as casual workers and/or labourers within Haldia Dock Complex in clearing the goods from the ships and /or vessels which arrive at Haldia Dock Complex through the clearing agents but the same was not permissible.
The cargo pool workers were and are engaged for clearing the said goods from the Haldia Dock and Port Complex which is under the administrative control of the Calcutta Port Trust authorities, particularly the Deputy Chairman, Calcutta Port Trust authorities, Haldia Dock Complex authorities without taking any responsibility of the workman and/or Cargo pool workers who are engaged in clearing the goods from the Vessels and/or reached and arrived within the Haldia Dock Complex and to avoid their responsibility continued with labour contract system by engaging casual workers through private agency without any valid licence under the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act, 1970.
26.
In the premises, your petitioners have no other alternative but to move the present writ petition on the following amongst others :- I.
For that the respondent-authorities being the authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India should have acted fairly and properly but in the instant case the petitioners have been discriminated by not considering their case before absorption of junior casual workers.
II.
For that the petitioners being the senior-most casual workers are entitled to be permanently absorbed as Mazdoor.
III.
For that the Cargo Pool Workers/casual workers make a class and are entitled to equal protection but in the instant case the same has not been complied with and the impugned action of the respondent authorities in not considering the case of your petitioners for permanent absorption as Mazdoor under the Haldia Dock Complex Authorities is wholly mala fide, arbitrary and without jurisdiction and liable to be set aside.
IV.
For the impugned action of the Respondents is also violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
V. For that your petitioners having worked for the last 11 years under the Haldia Dock Complex authorities are entitled to be considered for permanent absorption and such benefits of the petitioners have been sought to be taken away by the respondent authorities without taking recourse to law and as such an appropriate mandate may be issued by this Hon'ble Court directing the Haldia Dock Complex authorities to consider the case of your petitioners in the matter of permanent absorption of your petitioners as Mazdoor under the Haldia Dock Complex from amongst the Cargo Pool Workers on the basis of the seniority and/or list approved and forwarded by the Haldia Dock Cargo Pool Workers Union.
VI.
For that life includes livelihood and deprivation of livelihood is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India and the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed inter alia that practice of employing labour through contractors for conducting work inside premises of the preliminary employment none of the researcher of International Labour Organisation and other such organisation and as labour only contracting or inside contracting system has been termed as Archaic system and Relic of the early phase of capitalistic production which is now showing signs of revival in the very recent period.
Of late, there has been tendency on the part of the Dock Company including Public Sector Companies to get the work done through contractor other than through their own men.
VII.
For that the impugned action of the respondent-authorities in not permanently absorbing your petitioners as `Mazdoor', who have been working for last 11 years under the Haldia Dock Complex and there is no suspension order against your petitioners, is arbitrary, mala fide, and contrary to principles of natural justice and the same is discriminatory too, and as such the same is liable to be set aside."
7.
From the statements made in the writ application itself it would, thus, appear that they are not entitled to be regularised in their services either under general law or under the provision of the Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act, 1970 inasmuch as no notification has been issued prohibiting employment of contractor labourers in the Haldia Dock Complex.
This application furthermore raises several disputed questions of fact.
8.
The petitioners cannot obtain any writ of or in the nature of mandamus even against the principal employer (which fact is denied and disputed by the 1st respondent) as they do not have any legal right in that regard.
The contractors labourers can be directed to be regularised only when a notification is issued by the appropriate government in terms of Section 10 of Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act.
Before a writ of mandamus can be issued the petitioners must show existence of a legal right and a corresponding legal duty in the respondents.
It is well known that regularisation is not a mode of recruitment.
Reference in this connection may be made to Director of Public Instruction of W.B.
and others v. Dr. Ashish Pal and others, 1998(2) CHN 241, RK Trivedi and others v. Union of India and others, 1998(9) SCC 58 and State of West Bengal and others v. Ranjit Kumar Paul, 1998 LIC 1796.
9.
Furthermore, it is well settled that only because if a person hase worked for more than 240 days, the same would ipso facto entitle, the workers are to be regularised in the service.
See Madhyamik Siksha Parishad, UP v. Anil Kumar Mishra, AIR 1994 SC 1638.
10.
Furthermore, according to the respondents, other persons have been regularised in services in view of an agreement entered into by and between them and the Union.
The respondents contend that the petitioners do not come within the purview of the said agreement.
The petitioners had questioned the right of one Lachman Seth to enter into such an agreement as President thereof.
Even assuming that the said agreement applies to the case of the petitioners as has been contended by Mr. Mukherjee, a writ petition cannot be entertained for enforcing the said bipartite agreement.
11.
Furthermore, when the Central Government has refused to frame a scheme in terms of Section 3 of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, no mandamus can be issued directing regularisation of their services as the said provision is an enabling one.
Neither the Supreme Court of India nor this court had ever directed the Central Government to frame a scheme.
Only the matter relating to framing of a scheme was directed to be considered.
If the Central Government in its wisdom has refused to frame a scheme, no writ of mandamus would be issued therefor.
12.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this application which is accordingly dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.