Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This matter has a chequered history.
The petitioner, Santosh Sharma was working as an Investigator in the office of the District Social Welfare Officer, Hissar, whereas her husband Padam Kumar was posted as a Lecturer in Military Science in Government College, Hissar.
She was, however, transferred from Hissar to Chandigarh vide order dated 1251997 Annexure P-3 to the petition.
After her efforts to stall her transfer failed, she filed C.W.P.
No. 8475 of 1997 in this Court and amongst the various issues raised by her, it was contended that respondent No. 4 Sh. Kanwal Singh, Development and Panchayat Minister, Haryana, Chandigarh, (who is also respondent No. 4 in the present writ petition) had been instrumental in having her transferred from Hissar to Chandigarh on account of mala fides and political rivalry that he had with the petitioner and her husband.
This Court in its judgment dated 27.1.1998 quashed the transfer order Annexure P-3 and directed that the petitioner should not be transferred from Hissar before the general transfers for the year 1998.
The petitioner was, accordingly, posted at Hissar on 1551998 vide Annexure P-11.
Vide Annexure P-12 dated 2461998, however, the petitioner has been retransferred to Chandigarh.
Annexure P-12 has been retransferred to Chandigarh.
Annexure P-12 has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
On 371998, while admitting the petition, the Division Bench ordered a stay of the impugned transfer order Annexure P-12 and it is the conceded position that the petitioner continues to remain posted at Hissar on that account.
3.
On notice of motion, two replies have been put in Court i.e. one on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and the other on behalf of respondent No. 4, against whom allegations of mala fide have been levelled.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, it has been stated that the petitioner had even after her transfer from Hissar to Chandigarh not joined duty at Chandigarh and continued to remain on leave.
It has also been pointed out that L.P.A. No. 227 of 1998 had been admitted on 3071998 against the judgment dated 2711998 in CWP No. 8475 of 1998.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, the allegations of mala fide have been denied and it has been pointed out today that the petitioner had been transferred in the general transfers on account of the liberty granted by this Court in the earlier writ petition.
4.
During the course of the hearing today, it has been pointed out by Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned State counsel and confirmed by Mr. Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner's husband Padam Kumar had, in the meanwhile, been transferred from Hissar to Government College, Panchkula and the petitioner was, therefore, quite satisfied with her present posting in Chandigarh.
Mr. Malik has, nevertheless, voiced an apprehension that as the Govt. College Panchkula had no faculty for the teaching of the subject of Military Science and there was no student in the said subject it was possible that after getting the present petition disposed of, the respondents would transfer the petitioner's husband from Panchkula.
There might be some justification for the fear in the light of the fact that the petitioner has come to this Court twice and a case of mala fide stood proved against respondent No. 4 on account of the findings in the earlier writ petition.
5.
This petition is, accordingly, disposed of with a direction that if a proposal is mooted to transfer Padam Kumar the petitioner's husband within two years from now from Panchkula to some other place, he will be given one month's notice specifying the reasons for his proposed transfer so that he may, if so advised, approach this Court yet again.
It is also directed that as the petitioner's children stand admitted to schools at Hissar and the annual school examination are to be held in the months of February/March, 1999, the petitioner will be permitted to join her duty at Chandigarh at the end of March, 1999.
No further directions are necessary in the facts of this case.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition disposed of.