Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 65 of 1998 and C.W.P.
No. 382 of 1998.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 65 of 1998.
2.
The petitioners, four in number, are Diploma Holders in various Engineering Trades and presently employed as Instructors in Government Aided Polytechnics in the State.
The State Government formulated a scheme under which the Instructors working in various branches of Engineering in Polytechnics, were to be sponsored to undergo training at the Technical Teachers Training Institute at Calcutta (hereinafter called the TTTI) so that they could improve their qualifications and thereby their chances for promotions.
Under this scheme, the candidates were to be awarded a monthly stipend in addition to salary that they were drawing in the present Institution.
It appears that this decision had been taken pursuant to a report submitted by the `Madan Committee' in the year 1970 which made suggestions for the adjustment and revision of the staff structure and other related matters in various Engineering Institutions.
This Committee recommended inter alia that the lowest post in an Engineering Institution would be that of a lecturer and suggested that as there were a number of teachers who were working on lower posts such as Assistant Lecturers, Demonstrators and Instructors etc, they should be absorbed by adjusting them against the new posts of Lecturers provided they fulfilled them minimum qualifications.
It was also provided that those who did not fulfil these qualifications, would be given an opportunity for improving their qualifications.
It is the petitioners' case that pursuant to this decision, the State Government had been sponsoring Instructors/Demonstrators for training to Calcutta.
The State Government also issued an order dated 21.9.1976 directing that the Instructors/Demonstrators working in the Privately Managed Government Aided Polytechnics were to be equated with Instructors/Demonstrators working in the Government Polytechnics with regard to their pay scales and emoluments but as this benefit was not given, some of those aggrieved working in government aided institutions filed C.W.P.
No. 7863 of 1993 in this Court, whereupon a Division Bench in its order dated 1821994, allowed the writ petition and directed that the pay scales of Instructors/Demonstrators in the privately managed Polytechnics were to be equated with those working in government institute with effect from the year 1987.
It is the admitted position that this judgment has attained finality as the SLP filed was, thereafter, dismissed.
Subsequent to the judgment aforesaid, the Govt. accorded sanction for the conversion of 58 posts of Instructors/Demonstrators as Lecturers and these 58 posts included the four posts held by the petitioners.
Vide Annexure P-10 dated 10.10.1997 addressed to the Principals of various Polytechnics, respondent No. 2 - the Director of Technical Education, Punjab, sought applications from Instructors for admission to the training course at the TTTI, Calcutta.
The petitioners applied for the same but received no positive response thereto.
They, accordingly, submitted a representation dated 20111997 to respondent No. 2 requesting that their names be immediately sponsored for the course but once again received no reply.
Frustrated thereby, the petitioners have come to this Court seeking a mandamus against respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and a direction that the petitioners be sponsored to the training course at Calcutta.
It is the petitioners' case that respondent No. 2, the Director, Technical Education and deliberately withheld the petitioners' case for sponsorship on account of his annoyance as a contempt petition had been filed before the Supreme Court by some other Instructors/Demonstrators on account of the non-compliance with the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 7863 of 1993.
3.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by respondent No. 2 on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
It has been pointed out that the Punjab Government had converted 58 posts of Instructors/Demonstrators as Lecturers with the stipulation that further recruitment to these posts would be made from amongst candidates who had a IInd Class Degree in Engineering.
It has also been pointed out that as this qualification had been introduced w.e.f.
1995, the petitioners (even after having undergone the training course), would not be eligible to be designated as Lecturers as they were mere diploma holders.
Reliance, in this connection, has been placed on Annexure R-1 dated 30121997, a communication from the Director, Industrial Training, Punjab, to the Secretary to the Government in which the above facts had been pointed out and a recommendation made that the department should not recommend the petitioners for training to Calcutta on this account and that the Demonstrators/Drawing Instructors who had been sent for training to Calcutta earlier, had filed a Contempt Petition in the Supreme Court which had created a problem for the department.
This proposal was evidently accepted by the State Government vide Annexure R-2 dated 911998.
4.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners in response to the written statement and it has been pointed out that the assertion that the qualification for redesignation as Lecturers had been changed w.e.f.
1995, was wrong and reliance, in this connection, has been placed on Annexure P-13, a communication dated 21.8.1990 from the Director, Technical Education that diploma holders could not be redesignated as Lecturers unless they had undergone a training course to improve their qualifications.
5.
During the course of motion hearing, it was noticed by the Division Bench in its order dated 421998 that the parties seemed to be at variance with regard to the qualifications for redesignation as Lecturers and time was given to the Additional Advocate General, Punjab, to produce the relevant record to show that the prescribed qualifications had been amended w.e.f.
1995.
The case was taken up, thereafter, on 1321998, but it appears that as nothing was put on record by the State Counsel on that day, the writ petition was admitted to a final hearing and an interim order made in favour of the petitioners giving them liberty to join the course at their own cost for the time being, till the decision in the writ petition.
6.
Mr. AK Walia, the learned Counsel for the petitioners has raised two arguments before me, firstly that the petitioners fulfilled the basic qualification of being Diploma Holders for being sponsored to the training at Calcutta which could lead to their absorption as Lecturers and that the stand of the respondents that the minimum qualification for lecturer was a Degree qualification, was not tenable; secondly that the stand of the Director, Technical Education, was mala fide for the reasons that he had got annoyed on account of the filing of the Contempt Petition in the Supreme Court and had made a deliberate attempt to forestall the petitioner's case by misrepresenting the facts before the State Government in the Communication Annexure R-1.
7.
As against this, Mr Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for respondent No. 1 and 2 has urged that the petitioners were not entitled to be sent for training as even on successful completion of the course in question, they were still not entitled for absorption as they did not have the basic degree qualification.
The plea of mala fide has also been denied.
8.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and going through the record, I am of the opinion that these petitions deserve to succeed.
9.
It is evident that the petitioners have sought a writ of mandamus against respondents No. 1 and 2 and for the issuance of such a writ, the petitioners must have an enforceable right to claim it, whereas the respondents must have an obligation imposed upon them by law.
It does, however, appear from the resume of the facts on record that Mr. Walia's arguments must nevertheless prevail as the reasons that the respondents have given while declining sponsorship to the petitioners are on the face of it, untenable.
From Annexure P-13 and Annexure A appended thereto, it is evident that the qualifications for appointment of Lecturers were a Diploma of three years duration from a recognised Institute of the State Board of Technical Education provided that the appointees with these qualifications would not be allowed to earn any increment on the post of lecturer till the incumbent made up his deficiency by undergoing two short courses arranged by the TTTI From the order of this Court dated 421998, it is evident that the respondents had been directed to produce the relevant record to show that these qualifications had been revised w.e.f.
the year 1995 making a degree qualification a pre- requisite for appointment as lecturer.
No such document has been forthcoming and Mr. Sharma, the learned D.A.G.
has even today conceded that the qualifications were, in fact, in the process of being amended and the draft rules had been forwarded to the Punjab Public Service Commission for their approval and the matter was still under consideration of that body.
It is, therefore, apparent that the stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement is wrong.
Viewed in this light, the observations in Annexure R-1 with regard to the filing of the Contempt Petition, becomes relevant.
In this document, the Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh, had proposed to the State Government that the Instructors/Demonstrators should not be sponsored to the TTTI for training and had observed that "According to above, these employees are not eligible for the post of lecturer with TTTI Diploma with effect from 1995, as per the revised prescribed qualifications, they should have first class BE degree and if these employees do not have BE degree qualification, they will continue on their present posts; till they improve their qualifications.
Besides this, those Demonstrators/Drawing Instructors who were sent to TTTI, Calcutta for training, had filed a Writ Petition for the revision of Staff Structure and the matter was under consideration of the Government, but these employees while filing contempt petition did not take the Department in confidence and the department had to face a lot of problems.
Keeping in view of the position explained above, this department do not recommend to send these employees for training, for which the Govt. may confirm".
10.
As already noted above, the respondents' stand with regard to the qualifications, has been found to be unacceptable and reference to the Contempt Petition as being an additional reason that no recommendation be made, clearly points out that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 was based on wrong information and also influenced by the Contempt Petition that had been filed.
A case of mala fides vitiates all action and as the Madan Committee had specifically provided that a chance must be given to Diploma Holders, to improve their qualifications, as provided in Annexure P-4, a writ must issue in favour of the petitioners.
11.
While admitting these writ petitions on 1321998, it had directed that the petitioners be sponsored for training at their own cost for the time being subject to the final decision in the writ petition.
Mr. Walia has pointed out that the petitioners are presently undergoing the course in question and the only question which now remains to be seen is as to whether they would be entitled to the stipend etc. for that period.
12.
In the light of what has been held above, I am of the opinion that the names of the petitioners were withheld and not sponsored to the training course for wholly untenable reasons.
In this view of the matter, it is directed that the petitioners will be allowed to continue with the course in question and their stipend and emoluments will be paid in the manner as if they had been sponsored by the State Government.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.