Swatanter Kumar, J - ( C.M.
No. 3253-C of 1998) - This was an application filed for stay of execution of the judgment and decree dated 2171997 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar.
Reply was filed on behalf of the respondent to oppose the stay.
2.
With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, the appeal itself was heard on merits as some pleas sought to be raised in support of the application were to be raised by counsel for the parties on the merits of the appeal.
The counsel for the parties also produced the relevant records.
This application is, therefore, disposed of, subject to the decision of the regular second appeal, on merits.
R.S.A.
No. 3914 of 1997  3.
State of Punjab has preferred this regular second appeal against the concurrent finding of fact arrived at by the learned Courts below.
Gurmukh Singh Ex. Constable has filed a suit for declaration that the order dated 1431990 passed by the Inspector General of Police, PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
as well as the order dated 3111989 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, PAP, Jalandhar Cantt.
dismissing him from service is illegal, bad and invalid.
4.
According to the plaintiff in the month of March, 1988 he was posted in Railway Bridge Guard, Faridkot.
He had gone to market for some work on 1031988 where he learnt that his wife was unwell and he proceeded to his village to see her.
He was treated absent from duty without permission from 1031988 to 2241988.
A departmental enquiry was held.
Show-cause notice was issued and finally vide order dated 13.1.1989 he was dismissed from service.
Revision against the said order was also dismissed on 1431990 as afore-stated.
According to the plaintiff no reasonable opportunity was given to defend the enquiry.
Neither any show cause notice was issued nor his length of service was taken into consideration as postulated under the provisions of Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules.
The plaintiff had served a notice under Section 80 CPC prior to the institution of suit.
5.
The suit was contested by the defendant.
It raised a preliminary objection with regard to maintainability of the suit and on merits it was stated that he had not proceeded on leave after informing the authorities concerned that his wife was ill.
He was un-authorisedly absent for the said period.
The enquiry had been conducted in accordance with law and principles of natural justice.
The order did not call for any interference according to the defendants.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the learned trial Court:-  (1) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP (2) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
(3) Whether notice under section 80 CPC is not legal and valid ?
OPD (4) Whether the plaintiff has no locus-standi to file the present suit ?
OPD (5) Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his act and conduct from filing the present suit ?
OPD (6) Relief.
The learned trial Court vide its judgment and decree dated 1241994 decreed the suit of the plaintiff with costs which was unsuccessfully assailed in appeal by the State of Punjab.
The learned First Appellate Court vide its judgment and decree dated 2171997 affirmed the decree passed by the learned trial Court.
The learned counsel appearing for the State contended that the learned Courts below have erred in appreciating the evidence on record and have committed an error of jurisdiction in decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
In this regard he mainly stressed upon the fact that the absence of the plaintiff-respondent herein was unauthorised and illegal.
7.
The learned Courts below have concurrently held that the orders passed by the authorities concerned suffer from non-application of mind.
The authorities have not taken into consideration the service record of the petitioner while passing the impugned order of dismissal from service.
The averment of the plaintiff has not been disputed that he has a good service record and in accordance with the provisions of Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rules, such length of service is a relevant factor to be taken into consideration by the disciplinary authority.
It is also clear from the record that the revisional authority while passing the order dated 1431990 has not discussed any of the pleas raised by the plaintiff but has passed an order simplicitor of dismissing the revision.
In other words the order of revisional authority dated 1431990 is a non-speaking one.
8.
There is no doubt to the proposition of law that unauthorised absence from duty is a misconduct of a grave nature and would ask the penalty of dismissal.
But what really needs to be seen in the present case is that the respondents had regularised the absence of 44 days of the plaintiff prior to the conclusion of the departmental proceedings.
The leaned counsel for the State has not been able to dispute the fact that the absence of 44 days was directed to be treated as leave of the kind due and hence unauthorised absence was regularised and such regularisation was not simplicitor for the purposes of computation of amount due but was substantive order passed in favour of the plaintiff.
The learned Courts below have relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Narinder Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) S.L.R.
76 : 1995(4) SCT 222 (P&H).
I would affirm the said findings arrived at by the learned Courts below.
9.
From the above discussion it is clear that the impugned orders at least suffer from two basic infirmities i.e. non-application of mind and not being in conformity with Rule 162. of the Punjab Police Rules.
Further-more serious prejudice has been caused to the right of the plaintiff by not adhering to the principles of natural justice as well as to the aforesaid rules.
Resultantly, the appeal preferred by the State is dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.