Satya Brata Sinha, J - The petitioner in this application have, inter alia, prayed for the following reliefs:-  "(a) A writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents and/or their servants and/or their agents to rescind, cancel and/or withdraw the order dated 2781991 by which the petitioners purportedly placed in the Pay Scale of Rs. 425/- 1050/- (Rs. 1390/- 2970/- as revised with effect from 111986) not from 141981; (b) A writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents and/or their servants and/or their agents to place the petitioners in the Pay Scale of Rs. 660/- 1600/- (Rs. 2200/- 4000/- as revised with effect from 141981) instead of Rs. 1390/- 2970/- with effect from 111986."
2.
Although this case has a chequered history, for the purpose of disposal of the application, it is not necessary to state the facts of the matter in great details.
Suffice it to say that the petitioners were appointed as field organisers of the first respondent pursuant to an advertisement as contained in annexure `A' to the writ application wherein the following qualifications were prescribed :-  "(a) Master/Hons.
Degree with aptitude for field work for all categories of candidates except for scheduled tribes; (b) An ordinary pass degree with aptitude for field work in case of scheduled tribe candidates relaxable to pass in the higher secondary (Class XII) in case degree holders are not available; (c) Age not exceeding 35 years;" 3.
The petitioners were appointed as field organisers in terms of annexure `B' to the writ application and their educational qualifications have been noted therein.
Despite the fact they are holders of Hons.
Graduate or Master Degree, allegedly the said educational qualifications had not been taken into consideration for the purpose of fixing their scale of pay.
A writ application was filed by the petitioners.
A learned Single Judge of this Court allowed the said writ application, whereagainst the first respondent and others preferred an appeal which was marked as Appeal No. 892 of 1988.
A Division Bench comprising of BC Basak, J and Tarun Chatterjee, J, after considering the matter in great details and keeping in view the fact that the entire grievance of the petitioners were pending consideration before the Pay Commission allowed the appeal in part, inter alia, directing :-  "The Pay Commission be allowed to go into the question as to what should be the pay scale of the writ petitioners generally including the question as to the period from which such pay scale shall be allowed, and, if necessary, different pay scales for different periods.
We make it clear that we are setting aside the order of the learned Trial Judge fixing a pay scale of Rs. 500-1300/- for the period specified.
We do not want in any way, to limit the Terms of Reference of the Pay Commission.
We make it clear also that the Pay Commission shall, in respect of the writ petitioner, determine the scale of pay and while doing so they shall be entitled to fix different pay scales for different periods if they so think fit.
We also make it clear that this is to be done after giving an opportunity to the petitioners of a personal hearing.
We also make it clear that such fixation of pay scale should be in accordance with law and particularly having regard to the pay scales of other statutory Corporations in respect of persons holding similar positions.
We further make it clear that while taking such decision, the Pay Commission shall consider the educational qualifications and responsibilities borne by the petitioners.
This relates to the Pay Scale.
This also relates to the terms and conditions of the services of the statutory undertakings.
Keeping in mind the serious and onerous job entrusted to the Pay Commission, we desire that, if it is otherwise possible, the Pay Commissionshall determine the question regarding the pay scales of the writ petitioners as early as possible and if possible within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order to the Pay Commission through the Secretary of the Pay Commission."
4.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the Pay Commission instead of recommending the scale of pay as has been prayed for, in fact upgraded the post of inspectors, incumbents whereof do not have the same educational qualifications as that of the petitioners and in fact are not having the same responsibilities.
The respondents in their affidavit-in-opposition have raised a contention that the Pay Commission being an expert body and it having fixed scale of pay upon taking into consideration all the materials on records, it has no say in the matter.
The State of West Bengal has been impleaded as party.
No affidavit-in-opposition has been filed nor anybody has appeared on its behalf.
5.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, and particularly, the grievance raised by the petitioners that the Pay Commission had failed and/or neglected to consider the case of the petitioners that their case had not been considered by the Second Pay Commission in the light of the directions made by the Division Bench as noticed herein-before, it was incumbent upon it to produce all the records before this Court, particularly when the case relating to fixation of scale of pay of the employees of the first respondent had been referred to the Pay Commission at the instance of the State.
It is not possible for this court in exercise of its power of judicial review and in particular, decision of the Division Bench in the aforementioned appeal No. 893/88, to grant reliefs as prayed for by the petitioner.
But there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that if the petitioners pointed out certain anomalies and further raised a question that the Pay Commission had not followed directions of the Division Bench of this Court, it was incumbent upon the State to refer the matter to another committee, more particularly, when the Managing Director of the first respondent had all along been recommending the case of the petitioners.
Furthermore, the grievance of the petitioners to the effect that the Pay Commission had considered the matter relating to enhancement of their scale of pay only with effect from 181986 in stead and place of 141981 as was demanded by them.
6.
In the premises aforementioned, in the opinion of this Court interest of justice will be sub-served if a sub-committee consisting of the Secretary, Finance Department, Secretary, West Bengal Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes Welfare Department and the Chairman of the first respondent considers the grievances of the petitioner and pass an appropriate order after giving an opportunity of hearing to a representative of the petitioners as also the Inspectors working under the first respondent.
The petitioners may file a copy of their writ application/supplementary affidavit before the committee of the aforementioned three members as also affidavit-in-opposition filed by the respondents.
It also will be open to the officers belonging to the category of Inspectors to file a detailed representation on their behalf.
7.
Keeping in view the fact that the matter is pending for a long time, the Committee aforementioned is hereby requested to consider the matter and make necessary recommendation at an early date and preferably within a period of twelve weeks from the date of communication of this order and the date of receipt of the documents of the representations from the parties.
8.
This application is disposed of with the aforementioned directions, but in the facts and circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
9.
Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for urgently, shall be given on priority basis.
Order accordingly.