Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Mr. Narinder Lal Gupta has filed the petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India praying for a direction to the respondents to release the complete death-cum-retirement gratuity to him.
The deduction of Rs. 20,200/- plus Rs. 1,575/- has been stated to be discriminatory.
Thus the petitioner prayed for refund of the said amount with interest.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents.
It has been stated that the recovery on account of border house rent and compulsory allowances paid in excess to the petitioner has been effected from the gratuity and as such the writ petition merits dismissal.
This writ petition does not survive any longer in view of the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 7986 of 1997 : 1997(1) SCT 822 (P&H), where the Court held as under :-  "The petitioner is challenging Annexure P-2 dated 17101994, by which sanction was conveyed for payment of gratuity by order dated amounting to Rs. 67,650/- subject to recovery of a sum of Rs. 28,300/-.
According to the respondents, the said recovery was to be made in view of over payment of border house rent allowance erroneously paid to the petitioner.
No material has been placed before us to show any misrepresentation of fault on the part of the petitioner for the said excess payment of border house rent allowance.
Since the petitioner has retired from service, for no fault of his, no part of the gratuity found due to him, could be withheld.
The question involved in the writ petition is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No 1141 of 1997 (Jagjit Singh v. Punjab State and others) decided on April 11, 1997 and Civil Writ Petition No 16258 of 1996 (S.D.
Taneja v. State of Haryana) decided on April 1, 1997.
Part of the impugned order directing recovery to be made from gratuity payable to the petitioner is hereby quashed and set aside.
The respondents are directed to pay full amount of gratuity due to the petitioner within four weeks from today.
In case of delay, payment shall be made with interest at the rate of ten per cent per annum up to the date of actual payment.
A copy of the order may be given to the learned Advocate-General, Punjab, dasti.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No costs."
As is clear from the above settled position of law that the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court is based upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jagjit Singh (supra), the respondents have no escape from the liability towards the petitioner.
It is nobody's case that the petitioner had made any misrepresentation or had played any fraud upon the department to get the higher border house rent allowance and compulsory allowance.
That being so, I have no hesitation in allowing the present writ petition.
2.
Being bound by the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court, I hereby allow this petition filed by the petitioner and direct the respondents to pay the remaining gratuity as well as other allowances to the petitioner due to him within a period of 4 weeks from today.
If the payment is not made within aforestated period, the respondents shall be liable to pay interest at the rate of 10% per annum on the entire amount from the due date till its realisation.
3.
Writ petition is allowed without any orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.