AK Ganguly, J - This writ petition has been filed against an order dated 24101997, which is at annexure-1.
By the said order the previous order of transfer in respect of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 dated 1391997 was stayed.
2.
By an order dated 1391997 which was passed in respect of various officers, petitioner No. 1 was transferred from Buxer to Deoghar and petitioner No. 2 from Madhubani to Madhupur as S.D.O.
The case of the petitioners is that pursuant to such order of transfer they joined the said posts and assumed charge.
Thereafter comes the order dated 24101997 staying the aforesaid order of transfer which was passed in respect of the petitioners barely a month back.
3.
As the impugned order dated 24101997 has not disclosed any reason for passing such an abrupt stay of transfer order, this Court while hearing the matter on 5111997 at the very admission stage granted stay of operation of the order dated 24101997 and also directed the parties to file affidavits.
4.
After such an order was passed by this court on 5111997, some of the private parties i.e. respondent Nos. 5 and 6 filed an application for vacation of stay order and also filed affidavit and Counsel for the State respondent also filed an affidavit.
As all these matters are kept pending for some time, one of the private parties contended that the stay order dated 5111997 stands vacated by operation of sub-clause (3) of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
As the aforesaid stand was taken on 11121997, this Court fixed the matter under the heading admission on 15121997 and the matter was heard in full on that date and all the parties advanced their submissions.
5.
From the affidavit, which is filed by the State-respondent, it appears that they have not disclosed any reason why the order of transfer which is passed in respect of the petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 is required to be stayed.
The only explanation given in the counter-affidavit filed by the State respondent and affirmed by Dy.
Secretary, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms is that the Government has power to transfer and post any employee of the State Government.
The exact wording of the said affidavit is set out below.
"It is submitted that the State Government has got full power to transfer and post any employee of the State Government.
As regards the stay of the posting of petitioner No. 1 and petitioner No. 2 as S.D.O./S.D.M.
Deoghar and Madhupur respectively, the State Government has done it without any prejudice."
6.
It goes without saying that the stand taken in the affidavit is an unfortunate one.
7.
It is obvious that State Government has power to transfer an employee.
It is equally well settled that such power has to be exercised reasonably and in public interest.
There exists some well known difference between the existence of power and the exercise of power.
In the present case the administrative authorities have asserted that simply because they have the power to transfer, they have transferred the employees.
No Court can allow an exercise of power of this nature.
8.
In the name of exercise of power of transfer the Government is not at liberty to treat an employee like a ping-pong ball to be tossed about from one station to another within a span of one month and that too without disclosing any administrative reason even on affidavit.
9.
In that view of the matter, this Court has no hesitation in holding that the order which has been passed on 24101997 in exercise of power of transfer is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
As such, the impugned order at annexure-1 is quashed.
10.
This Court also considers that respondent Nos. 5 and 6 may be affected as a result of quashing of the order dated 24101997.
So they may be given suitable posting by the appropriate authority within a period of fortnight from the date of service of a copy of this order.
11.
With this observation this application is allowed to the extent indicated above.
No costs.
Application allowed.