RP Sethi, J - Tempted by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Punjab State Electricity Board and another v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma and others, A.I.R. 1987 SC 367 the petitioners have filed and the present petition for quashing the decision of the respondent-Board, Annexure P-2, fixing quota of 67 per cent and 33 per cent respectively from amongst the posts of Inspectors on the basis of Diploma Holders and non-Diploma Holders for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers.
It is prayed that promotion of respondent Nos. 2 to 5 be quashed and the petitioners be directed to be promoted to the post of Junior Engineers from amongst the post of Inspectors on the basis of their seniority and merit.
In Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) the facts were that Ravinder Kumar filed a suit for declaration that he be deemed to have been promoted from the date when his juniors mentioned in the suit were promoted to the post of Line Superintendent.
He had stated that he had joined the service in the Punjab State Electricity Board as Line Man on 25.12.1969 and worked as apprentice Line Man from 29.12.1969 to 28.12.1970 on a fixed salary of Rs. 140/- per month whereafter he was allowed regular scale of Rs. 110-330 since the date of his joining as Line Man.
The terms and conditions of the service of the Line Man as well as of the Line Superintendent were governed by the rules framed by the Punjab Government in exercise of its powers under Article 309 of the Constitution which were termed as P.W.D.
(Electricity Branch) Provisional Class III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952.
Subsequently, the State Electricity Board came into being and the Electricity Department came under the administration of the State Electricity Board.
As Line Man he had been performing his duties efficiently and honestly and he had passed BA, ITI and National Apprentice Certificate in the trade of Line Man.
All the Line Men under the Board were either diploma holders or ITI trained or non-diploma holders and they formed and constituted one common cadre known as Line Man.
The seniority list was common and the Board had been promoting officials from Line Man to Line Superintendent on pick and choose basis in consideration of the qualifications by fixing the quota between the diploma holders and non-diploma holders which resulted in arbitrary discrimination between the diploma holders and non- diploma holders.
He contended that action of the defendants in fixing the quota between the diploma holders and non-diploma holders Line Men for the purposes of promotion to the post of Line Superintendent was illegal, unconstitutional and arbitrary.
The defendants contested the claim of the plaintiff submitting therein that as he was governed by the rules framed by the Government he could not challenge the action of the respondents prescribing quota for promotion in the ratio as detailed therein.
After the trial of the suit, the Subordinate Judge 1st Class, Patiala held that the plaintiff was entitled to promotion to the post of Line Superintendent and decreed the suit.
The appeal filed by the Board was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala, and Regular Second Appeal No. 254 of 1988 was also dismissed affirming the judgment of the trial Court.
The matter was thereafter taken to the Supreme Court wherein it was held :  2.
The only issue raised in this appeal is whether defendant 1, that is, the Punjab State Electricity Board, is competent to discriminate between diploma holders and non-diploma holders Line Men forming the common cadre of Line Men having a common seniority list in promoting these Line Men on the basis of quota fixed by the order of the State Electricity Board even though the requisite qualification for promotion for Line Man to the post of Line Superintendent is either the holding of diploma or certificate for electrical engineering from a recognised institute or the non-diploma holders having passed one and half years course in the trade of Electrcian/Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institute and are matriculates and have worked for four years as Line Man continuously and immediately before promotion, as has been provided by the office order No. 97/ENG/BET/G-33 dated 22.10.1968 the relevant except of which is quoted herein below :  "For Direct Recruitment :  (a) Possess 3 years' certificate or diploma course in Electrical Engineering from any recognised Institute or a certificate of having passed the NCC Test conducted by the State Board of Technical Education/All India Council for Technical Education.
(b) Have passed action (examination) of the Institution of Engineering (India) Exam with Elementary Electrical Engineering as the optional paper.
For promotion :  (c) (i) Have passed 1-1/2 years' course in the Electrical Trades of Electrician/Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institutes and are matriculates and have worked for 4 years as a Line Man continuously and immediately before promotion.
(ii) Have passed 1-1/2 years' course in the Electrical Trades of Electrician/Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institutes and are non-matriculates but are capable of preparing estimates, writing up measurement books accurately, keeping store accounts, etc., and have worked for 4 years as a Line Man continuously and immediately before promotion.
(iii) Persons holding diploma in Electrical Engineering of 3 to 4 years duration recruited as Line Man against the reservation of 60% fixed for recruitment of persons holding certificate of 1-1/2 years' course in the Electrical Trades of Electrician/Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institutes, have worked as Line Man for 3 years continuously and immediately before promotion.
On promotion as Line Superintendent they will be given weightage of 2 years' service as compared to non-diploma holders, at the time of fixation of their seniority and pay in accordance with the instruction contained in Board's Memo No. 88774/84/BET (33) L dated 29121967.
(d) (i) Matriculates Line Man having a total continuous service of 9 years as at ALM and Line Man out of which they should have worked as Line Man for 4 years continuously and immediately before promotion.
(ii) Non-matriculates Line Man having a total continuous service of 11 years as ALM and Line Man out of which they should have worked as Line Man for four years, continuously and immediately before promotion, provided they are capable of preparing estimates, writing up measurement books accurately keeping store accounts and in addition are conversant with Consumer Accounts or possess a special experience for transmission line work.
9.
The State Electricity Board by its order dated 1451970 introduced the following quota for promotion to the cadre of Line Superintendents  1.
Direct recruitment from the open market 62%  2.
Diploma holders Line Men 5%  3.
Line Men non-diploma holders 33%  This quota of promotion for diploma holders Line Men to the post of Line Superintendent was further increased by office order No. 244 dated 271973 by fixing the quota for promotion of diploma holders Line men already in service of the Board from 5% to 20%.
Again by office order No. 78 dated 951974 the State Electricity Board further increased the quota of promotion of diploma holders Line Men already in the service of the Board from 20% to 33%.
10.
There is no dispute, rather it is not controverted that the position of the plaintiff-respondent in the joint seniority list of Line Men in the scale of Rs. 110-330 of the Punjab State Electricity Board from 161967 to 3181974 which has been filed as additional document by the Punjab State Electricity Board in CA 3341 of 1983 that the plaintiff-respondent's name was mentioned at S. No. 995 whereas names of defendants 3 to 7 appear in the said list in S Nos. 1451, 1546, 2309, 1877 and 2279 respectively.
Therefore, all the defendants 3 to 7 are undoubted junior to the plaintiff-respondent as Line Men in the joint seniority list of Line Men comprising both diploma holders and non-diploma holders Line Men in the same cadre.
It is also clear and evident from the office Order No. 97 dated 221068 that the qualification for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent from Line Man is either holding certificate or diploma in electrical engineering from any recognised institute or having passed 1-1/2 years' course in the electrical trade of Electrician/Line Man/Wire Man from recognised Industrial Training Institute and are matriculates and have worked as Line Man for four years continuously and immediately before the promotion.
The petitioner who is an Arts Graduate and has ITI Certificate (in the trade of electrician 2 years' duration) and also have National Apprentice Certificate in the trade of Line Man 3 years' duration is eligible for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent as he has fulfilled all the requisite qualifications.
There is no gain-saying that all the Line Men either diploma holders or non-diploma holders are performing the same kind of work and duties and they belong to the same cadre having a common/joint seniority list for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent.
The orders dated 12.7.1977 being order No. 73 promoting defendants 3, 4 and 5 as well as office order No. 898 dated 17.8.1977 promoting defendants 6 and 7 on the basis of quota from diploma holders as fixed by the order of the State Electricity Board dated 951974 is wholly arbitrary, illegal, discriminatory and violative of the quality clause contained in Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as it purports to promote defendants 3 to 7 who are admittedly junioir to respondent 1 in service as Line Man in the State Electricity Board.
It has been rightly held by following the decision in Shujat Ali's case (1975) 1 SCR 449 at 400 : (AIR 1974 SC 1631 at P. 1655) that the promotion of defendants 3 to 7 who are admittedly junior to the plaintiff-respondent in the service as Line Man to the post of Line Superintendent are illegal.
arbitrary and discriminatory and so bad.
It is pertinent to refer to the observations of this Court in the said case which reads as follows :-  But where graduates and non-graduates are both regarded as fit and, therefore, eligible for promotion, it is difficult to see how, consistently with the claim for equal opportunity any differentiation can be made between them by laying down a quota of promotion for each and giving preferential treatment to graduates over non-graduates in the matter of fixation of such quota.
The result of fixation of quota of promotion for each of the two categories of Supervisors would be that when a vacancy arises in the post of Assistant Engineer, which, according to the quota is reserved for graduate Supervisors, a non-graduate Supervisor cannot be promoted to that vacancy, even if he is senior to all other graduate Supervisors and more suitable than they.
His opportunity for promotion would be limited only to vacancies available for non-graduate Supervisors.
That would clearly amount to denial of equal opportunity to him."
The writ filed by the petitioner herein was allowed by the learned Single Judge of this Court on the same terms as Civil Writ Petition No. 1903 of 1987 decided on 25.1.1988. Letters Patent Appeal filed in C.W.P.
No. 1903 of 1987 was considered by the Full Bench of this Court and disposed of vide judgment delivered in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and other, 1989 (4) SLR 437.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed in the case of the petitioner was allowed but the Civil Writ Petition was remitted back to the Single Judge for re-decision in accordance with the views expressed in L.P.A. No. 402 of 1988 against the writ petitioners herein who were found to have approached this Court without any delay and by impleading private respondents as parties in the writ petition.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents herein has submitted that in view of the later judgment of the Supreme Court in P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, (1993) 2 SCC 340 : 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC), the judgment delivered in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) is to be deemed to have been set aside being no good law which require the dismissal of the present writ petition.
The Supreme Court in P Murugesan's case (supra) had held :  "The learned counsel for the respondents relied upon the decision in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma, (1986) 4 SCC 617, a decision rendered by a Bench comprising AP Sen and BC Ray, JJ.
The category of Line Men in the service of the Punjab State Electricity Board comprised both diploma holders and others who may be referred to as non- diploma holders.
They constituted one single category having a common seniority list.
By means of the rules issued under the proviso to Article 309, a quota was prescribed for diploma holders, the result of which was that diploma holders who were far junior to the non-diploma holders were promoted ignoring the non-diploma holders.
The rule was held to be bad by the learned Subordinate Judge, Patiala.
On appeal, the Additional District Judge, Patiala affirmed the judgment.
It was affirmed by the High Court as well.
The matter was brought to this Court.
This Court affirmed the judgment of the High Court.
A perusal of the judgment shows that the attention of the Bench was not drawn either to TN Khosa or to other decisions.
Reference was made only to the observation made between the diploma holders and non-diploma holders was discriminatory and bad.
Apart from the distinction on facts between that case and the case before us, it is evident that non-consideration of TN Khosa and other decisions relevant under the subject has led to the laying down of a proposition which seems to run counter to TN Khosa.
With great respect to the learned Judges who decided that case, we are unable to accept the broad proposition flowing from the case."
In State of Jammu and Kashmir v. TN Khosa and others, A.I.R. 1974 SC 1, the Supreme Court held that classification on the basis of educational qualifications made with a view to achieve the administrative efficiency could not be said to be rest on any fortuitous circumstances and are to be held to be not unconstitutional.
It was further held that though the persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into a common class of service, they could, for the purposes of promotion, be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
In that case, the diploma holders in Engineering had filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir challenging the validity of certain service rules framed by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir which was dismissed by the Single Judge but in appeal the Division Bench of the High Court took the view that the impugned rules were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The writ petitioners in that case, were serving in different branches of Engineering Service of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and had been appointed as Assistant Engineers between the year 1960 and 1966 by promotion from Subordinate Engineering Service.
The conditions of service were then governed by the Rules published vide order No. 1328-C-1939 which provided that promotion by transfer or promotion to the cadre of Divisional Engineer could be made only from the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
Promotion in the cadre of Assistant Engineers could in turn, be made only from the cadre of Supervisors in the Subordinate Service.
Recruitment by transfer was to be made on the basis of merit, ability and the previous record of the candidate, seniority being considered only in case of equality of merit, ability and excellence of record.
In 1962, the pay scales were generally revised and Rule 12 of the Rules divided the Assistant Engineers into two categories, date-wise.
Engineers appointed prior to 181960 were placed in Grade I while those appointed subsequently were placed in Grade II, regardless of whether appointments to the post of Assistant Engineers were made directly or by promotion.
The pay scales were further revised in the year 1968 and under Rule 10 the Rules the Assistant Engineers were granted new pay scales but it was provided that "QB at Rs. 610/- will not be crossed by Assistant Engineers with Diploma Course."
This rule was challenged by the writ petitioners in so far as it denied to them an opportunity to cross qualification bar.
The Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1920 came into force on 12101970 which provided for appointment to the gazetted post in various branches of the Engineering Service superseding the old rules on the subject.
As regards the promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
It was provided that only those Assistant Engineers would be eligible for promotion who possess the Bachelor of Degree in Engineering or holding the qualification of A.M.I.E.
Section A and B who have put in at least 8 years service in the J & K Engineering (Gazetted) Service.
The writ petitioners contended that under the Rules of 1939, Assistant Engineers were entitled to be promoted to the higher cadre on the basis of their merit and record and no distinction was made between the degree holders and diploma holders for the purposes of said promotion.
The distinction made by the impugned Rules between the degree holders and diploma holders was alleged to be arbitrary and capricious because according to them academic and technical qualifications could be germance only at the time of recruitment.
For the purposes of promotion, efficiency and experience alone should be taken into consideration.
It was further contended that once the government appoints a candidate with different academic of technical qualification to the same cadre having the same pay scales and similar duties, such candidates would form one class and they would not be further classified for the purposes of promotion on the basis of their educational qualifications.
The Supreme Court dealt it alongwith the law on the subject and held :  "Since the constitutional code of equality and equal opportunity is a charter for equals, equality of opportunity in matters of promotion means an equal promotional opportunity for persons who fall, subsequentially, within the same class.
A classification of employees can therefore be made for first identifying and then distinguishing members of one class from those of another."
4.
37.
Classification, however, is fraught with the danger that it may produce artificial inequalities and therefore, the right to classify is hedged in with salient restraints; or else, the guarantee of equality will be submerged in class legislation masquerading as laws meant to govern well marked classes characterized by different and distinct attainments.
Classification, therefore, must by truly founded on substantial differences which distinguish persons grouped together from those left out of the group and such differential attributes must bear a just and rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
5.
38.
Judicial scrutiny can therefore extend only to the consideration whether the classification rests on a reasonable basis and whether it bears nexus with the object in view.
It cannot extend to embarking upon a nice or mathematical evaluation on the basis of classification, for which such an inquiry permissible it would be open to the Courts to substitute their own judgment for that of the legislature or the rule-making authority on the need to classify or the desirability of achieving a particular object.
6.
39.
Judged from this point of view, it seems to us impossible to accept the respondents' submission that the classification of Assistant Engineers into Degree-holders and Diploma-holders rests on any unreal or unreasonable basis.
The classification, according to the appellant, was made with a view of achieving administrative efficiency in the Engineering services.
If this be the object, the classification is clearly correlated to it for higher educational qualifications are at least presumptive evidence of a higher mental equipment.
This is not to suggest that administrative efficiency can be achieved only through the medium of those possessing comparatively higher educational qualifications but that is beside the point.
What is relevant is that the object to be achieved there is not a mere pretence for an indiscriminate imposition of inequalities and the classification cannot be characterised as arbitrary or absurd.
That is the farthest that judicial scrutiny can extend.
7.
40.
On the facts of the case, classification on the basis of educational qualification made with a view to achieving administrative efficiency cannot be said to rest on any fortuitous circumstances and one has always to bear in mind the facts and circumstances of the case in order to judge the validity of a classification.
The provision in the 1930 Rules restricting direct recruitment of Assistant Engineers to Engineering graduates, the dearth of graduates in times past and their copious flow in times present are all matters which can legitimately enter the judgment of the rule-making authority.
In the light of these facts, that judgment cannot be assailed as capricious on fanciful.
Efficiency which comes in the trial of a higher mental equipment can reasonably be attempted to be achieved by restricting promotional opportunity to those possessing higher educational qualifications and we are concerned with the reasonableness of the classification not with the precise accuracy of the decision to classify nor with the question whether tests have long since been discarded.
In fact American decisions have gone as far as saying that classification would offend against the 14th Amendment of the American Constitution only it is "purely arbitrary, oppressive or capricious" Joseph Radice v. People of the State of New York, (1923) 68 Law Ed. 690, 695; American Sugar Ref.
Co. v. Louisiana, (1900) 45 Law Ed. 102, 103 and the inequality produced in order to encounter the challenge of the constitution must be "actually and palpably unreasonable and arbitrary" Arkansas, Natural Gas Co v. Railroad Commission, (1923) 67 Law Ed. 705, 710.
We need not go that far as the differences between the two classes graduates and diploma-holders furnish a reasonable basis for separate treatment and bear a just relation to the purpose of the impugned provision.
40-A.
Educational qualifications have been recognised by this Court as a safe criterion for determining the validity of classification.
In State of Mysore v. P Nara Singh Rao, (1968) 1 SCR 407 : (AIR 1968 SC 349) where the cadre of Tracers was recognised into two, one consisting of matriculate Tracers with a higher scale of pay and the other of non-matriculates in a lower scale, it was held that Articles 14 and 16 do not exclude the laying down of selective tests nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
Therefore, it was open to the Government to give preference to candidates having higher educational qualifications.
In Ganga Ram v. Union of India, (1970) 3 SCR 481 at P. 488 : (AIR 1970 SC 2178) it was observed that :  "The State which encounters diverse problems arising from a variety of circumstances is entitled to lay down conditions of efficiency and other qualifications for securing the best service for being eligible for promotion in its different departments."
In the Union of India v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli, AIR 1971 SC 811 (813), a Central Health Service Rule requiring that a professor in Orthopaedics must have a post-graduate degree in the particular speciality was upheld on the ground that the classification made on the basis of such a requirement was not "without reference to the objectives sought to be achieved and there can be no question of discrimination".
The arguments that a degree qualification was not the only criterion of suitability was answered laconically as "strange".
8.
41.
Under the Schedule to the 1970 rules a degree qualification is prescribed as a condition for promotion to the post of an Executive Engineer from the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
But there is no rule requiring a similar qualification for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer which is next higher to the post of Executive Engineer or for promotion to the apex post of the Chief Engineer.
The schedule provides that recruitment to these two categories of posts shall be made by promotion from amongst persons in cadres next below, who possess experience for a stated number of years.
This circumstance is pressed into service by the respondents in support of their plea that the whole basis of classification is unreal and that the true object could not be the attainment of higher administrative efficiency.
If it was thought necessary to prescribe a degree qualification in order to achieve efficiency in the post of Executive Engineers, ex-hypothesis it should have been equally imperative, if not more to provide for a similar condition regard to promotion to higher posts - thus runs the argument."
The Supreme Court further held :-  "We are, therefore, of the opinion that though persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers they could for purposes of promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
The rule providing that graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of diploma-holders does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and must be upheld.
9.
But we hope that his judgment will not be construed as a character for making minute and microcosmic classifications.
Excellence is, or ought to be, the goal of all good government and excellence and equality are not friendly bed-follows.
A pragmatic approach has, therefore, to be adopted in order to harmonize the requirements of public servants.
But let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions a theory of classification which may somewhat, perhaps submerge, the precious guarantee of equality.
The eminent spirit of an ideal society is equality and so we must not be left to ask in wonderment.
What after all is the operational residue of equality and equal opportunity."
The Apex Court in P Murugesan's (supra) specifically referred to TN Khosa's case (supra) and came to the conclusion that "non-consideration of TN Khosa's case and other decisions relevant on the subject has lead to the laying down of proposition which seems to run counter to TN Khosa's case.
With respect to the learned Judges who decided that case, we are unable to accept the broad proposition flowing from the case."
It implies, therefore, that without using harsh words in their judgment, the Apex Court in P Murugesan's case (supra) held that the law laid down in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) was no good law in the presence of the law laid down in TN Khosa's case and other cases.
10.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that mere casual expressions carry no weight and that every passing expression cannot be treated as an ex cathedra statement, having wright of authority.
It was further contended that the Court is not bound by the various reasons given in support of the decision and the doctrine of ratio decidendi alone has the force of law.
It was further argued that the decision on the question which has not been argued cannot be treated as a precedent to the followed.
It was further contended that the view expressed by a Division Bench consisting of two Judges of the Supreme Court in an earlier case dissented from a Division Bench of 3 Judges in a later decision cannot be held to have been overruled and be deemed to be holding the field.
In support of his above contentions, he has relied upon the Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, 1988 (4) JT 10, Krishena Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1990 (3) JT 173, Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala v. State of Maharashtra, 1985 (1) C.L.R.
272 and The Regional Manager and another v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, A.I.R. 1976 SC 1766.
In Union of India and another v. KS Subramanian, A.I.R. 1976 SC 2433, it was held that the proper course for a High Court is to try to find out and follow the opinions expressed by larger benches of the Supreme Court in preference to those expressed by smaller benches of the Court.
This practice was held to have crystallized rule of law declared by the Supreme Court.
In Vasant Tatoba Hargude and others v. Dikkaya Muttaya Pujari, A.I.R. 1980 Bombay 341, it was held that if there was conflict between earlier and later decision of the Supreme Court, the later decision must prevail.
In Rana Natwar Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1980 M.P. 129, it was held that if there was conflict between two Supreme Court decisions, the Courts in the country are bound to follow the decision delivered by the larger Bench.
To the same effect is the judgment of the Full Bench in U. P. State Road Transport Corporation v. The State Transport Appellate (Tribunal) U.P.
Lucknow, A.I.R. 1977 Allahabad 1.
The Supreme Court in Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise v. Dunlop India Ltd and others, (1985) 1 SCC.
260, referred to the system of dispensing justice in the country and hoped that in the hierarchical system of courts in the country, it was necessary for each lower tier including the High Court to accept loyally the decision of the Higher tiers.
Referring to Cassell and Co v. Broome, 1972 AC 1027 (1972 (1) All Engg.
Reports 801), their Lordships observed :  "We desire to add and as was said in Cassell & Co Ltd v. Brome, we hope it will never be necessary for us to say so again that "in the hierarchical system of courts" which exists in our country, it is necessary for each lower tier", including the High Court, "to accept loyally the decisions of the higher tiers".
It is inevitable in hierarchical system of courts that there are decisions of the Supreme Appellate Tribunal which do not attract the unanimous approval of all members of the judiciary.....
But the judicial system only works if someone is allowed to have the last word and that last word, once spoken, is loyally accepted.
The better wisdom of the court below must yield to the higher wisdom of the court above.
That is the strength of the hierarchical judicial system.
In Cassell & Co Ltd v. Broome, commenting on the Court of Appeal's comment that Rookes v. Barnard who rendered per incuriam, Lod Diplock observed :-  "The Court of Appeal found themselves able to disregard the decision of this House in Rookes v. Barnard by applying to it the label per incuriam.
That label is relevant only to the right of an appellate Court to decline to follow one of its own previous decisions, not to its right to disregard a decision of a higher appellate court or to the right of a Judge of the High Court to disregard a decision of the Court of Appeal.
It is needless to add that in India under Article 141 of the Constitution the Law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India and under Article 144 all authorities, civil and judicial in the territory of India shall act in aid to the Supreme Court."
11.
After going through the various judgments cited at the Bar and perusing the pleadings of the parties, I have come to the irresistible conclusion that the point of law determined by the Supreme Court in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) and TN Khosa's case (supra) were not only identical but almost same.
The Supreme Court in P Murugesan's case (supra) has specifically held that the law declared in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) was no good law in view of the earlier judgment of the Apex Court in TN Khosa's case (supra) delivered by 5 Judges Bench.
There is no escape from the conclusion that in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court on TN Khosa's case (supra) and P Murugesan's case (supra) (1993) 2 SC 340, the petitioners are not entitled to any relief on the basis of the judgment delivered in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case AIR (87) SC 367 (supra).
The case of the petitioner rests upon the sandwalls erected with the support of the observations made by the Supreme Court in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) which with the passage of time have not only weakend but dashed to the ground leaving no strength on the feet of the petitioner to stand on his legs.
The castle sought to be raised on the foundation raised in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) could not be completed by the petitioner by the winds of the cruelty of the time.
The petitioner have not been in a position to project any other ground in support of their case and despite to the judgment of the Full Bench remitting the case of the petitioners for reconsideration they have not been in a position to satisfy the Court justifying the issuance of a command as prayed for.
12.
The writ petition has no merit and is accordingly dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.