M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner in the instant case has questioned the memo dated 20th February, 1993 whereby the petitioner has been informed that it has been decided that the agreement under which the petitioner was appointed is not being reviewed (renewed?)
on the expiry of the said period.
The petitioner seeks direction to the respondent to cancel the impugned memo dated 20th February, 1993 and for further directions with respect to the petitioner's service.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was appointed as an Accounts Clerk after interview wherein 40 other persons who had similarly applied were interviewed.
The petitioner was appointed on contract basis.
The agreement executed with the petitioner is dated 25th November, 1983 (annexure 'A' to the writ petition).
Clause 1 of the said agreement is relevant and is extracted hereinbelow :-  "That the employee will be appointed as Account Clerk Officers' Mess HQ Bengal Area on probation for six months w.e.f.
01 Dec, 83.
On completion of six months period to his satisfactory performance the employee shall be made the permanent incumbent.
That this agreement in the first instance is for two years.
Therefore (Thereafter?
), the agreement may be renewed by mutual consent for a further period of two years at a time subject to a maximum of four years".
3.
The petitioner completed the probation period of service satisfactorily and an endorsement to that effect is made on the agreement (annexure 'A') and in clause A it is specifically stipulated that the period of employment in permanent status shall be for 3 years from Ist June, 1984 to 31st May, 1987.
The period stipulated in the agreement expired but the petitioner was continued until 10th Feb, 1994 when another agreement was executed with regard to the petitioner's appointment.
Clause 1 of the said agreement being relevant for the purpose of the present enquiry is extracted hereinbelow :-  "(a) Appointment : The employee continues as Accountant since 01 June, 1987 till date without any break in service in the permanent status.
That this agreement is in the first instance for three years from the date of execution of this agreement.
Thereafter the agreement may be renewed by mutual consent by both employer and employee for a further period of three years at a time subject to a maximum age of 60 years of employee".
On the expiry of the said agreement dated 10th Feb, 1994 the same was not renewed and the petitioner continued until the impugned memo dated 20th February, 1998 was issued informing the petitioner that the agreement is not being reviewed (renewed?).
4.
An objection has been raised by the petitioner that in the impugned memo reference is made to an agreement dated 20th February, 1994 whereas the correct date of the agreement is 10th February, 1994.
The objection is of no consequence merely because the date of agreement is wrongly stated.
The question is whether the petitioner is entitled to continue into service upto the age of 60 years as contended by him.
5.
According to the petitioner he has continued in service from the date of his initial appointment under the agreement dated 25th November, 1983 until 1988 and has thereby acquired permanent status.
According to the petitioner he is entitled to continue upto the age of 60 years as a permanent employee.
6-7.
It must be stated that the petitioner was appointed on contract basis.
The service of the petitioner was subject to the terms of the contract.
The relevant term of the respective agreements are extracted hereinabove.
Under the first agreement, the petitioner was appointed on probation for 6 months and on satisfactory performance the petitioner was to be made permanent incumbent.
On such satisfactory completion the petitioner was to be made permanent subject to the conditions stipulated in the agreement.
The agreement stipulated the period of employment in the permanent status as 3 years from Ist June, 1984 to 31st May, 1987.
The contention of the petitioner that after completion of 6 months' satisfactory probation, the petitioner acquired permanent status has in the circumstances to be viewed in the light of the said contract only and not in the sense that the petitioner became a permanent incumbent de hors the agreement or contract of service.
Even after completion of probationary period satisfactorily the status of the petitioner cannot be but a contractual employment for a term and subject to the terms of the contract.
8.
In the instant case it has to be held that the impugned order does not suffer from any legal infirmity nor has any case been made out for quashing the impugned order.
There is no obligation statutory or otherwise to compel the respondent authority to renew the contract of the service of the petitioner which expired by efflux of time in terms of the contract entered into between the parties.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner was afforded opportunity of placing before Court any rule or regulations governing his service which can be said to have been violated by issuing of the impugned order.
The petitioner has failed to produce the same before the Court.
9.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon certain observations made in Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, 1991 Supp(1) SCC 600 : 1991(1) SCT 675 (SC).
It may be stated that the Supreme Court in Brig.
S Ramachandran v. Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works Ltd and ors., 1995 Supp(3) SCC 674 considered the case of contractual appointment in the light of the observations made in the Delhi Transport Corporation case and observed in the following terms :-  "Mr. A Subba Rao, learned counsel for the appellant, has vehemently contended that clause 6 of the appointment order (quoted above) is liable to be struck down in view of the law laid down by this Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corpn Ltd. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly as approved by the Constitution Bench in Delhi Transport Corpn.
v. DTC Mazdoor Congress.
We are of the view that the law laid down by this Court in the abovesaid two judgements has no application to the facts of the present case.
The appellant joined service on 1061980 and his services were terminated on 441981.
He had hardly worked for one year.
There is nothing on the record to show that he was appointed by Respondent 1 on a regular basis.
We are, therefore, of the view that the appellant was not a regular/permanent employee of Respondent 1 and he had no right to continue till superannuation.
The ratio of the above two judgments is not, therefore, applicable to the case in hand".
10.
As already noticed the petitioner was not a regular/permanent employee of the respondent and has therefore no right to continue till superannuation.
11.
For the reasons aforesaid I find no ground to entertain the above writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
As there was no direction for filing affidavit-in-opposition the averments made in the writ application are deemed not admitted.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.