THB Chalapathi, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of all the aforesaid writ petitions since the common questions of law and facts are involved in the same.
2.
The petitioners have been working in Punjab Women and Children Development & Welfare Corporation (hereinafter called `PUNWAC') in various capacities.
The PUNWAC was set up in the year 1979 with the objective of helping the needy women and children with a paid up capital of Rs. 5 crores.
The Corporation has been suffering losses every year.
The Punjab Government has drawn up a plan to wind up loss making units including the `PUNWAC'.
In order to reduce the financial losses and to remove the surplus staff, the Corporation introduced a `Golden Hand Shake Scheme' on 2111994 (vide Annexure P-7).
Options have been given to the employees interested to avail of the said scheme and it is also indicated therein that in case sufficient number of employees do not give their consent by the due date, the Corporation will be left with no alternative but to take action for the retrenchment of the employees.
The said scheme was circulated to all the employees of the Corporation.
The petitioners who are employees of the PUNWAC alongwith other employees made a representation to the Government for adjustment of the employees of the PUNWAC in other departments of the Government or its Organisations.
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that some of the employees have been absorbed in other departments of the Government adopting a method of pick and choose.
Further according to the petitioners, the absorption of some employees without taking into account their seniority in other departments while demanding the petitioners and others to opt for `Golden Hand Shake Scheme' or face retrenchment is violative of the equality clause.
It is the further case of the petitioners that the Government framed schemes for absorption of surplus staff of public undertakings according to which the petitioners are entitled to be absorbed in Governmental Departments or Organisations or Public Sector Undertakings.
The Corporation ignoring the same and without absorbing the petitioners in the vacancies available either in the Government Departments or Public Undertakings, compelled the petitioners either to accept the `Golden Hand Shake Scheme' or face retrenchment.
This action of the Corporation is illegal and the Scheme (Annexure P-7) is liable to be quashed.
The petitioners also allege that the sorry state of affairs in the PUNWAC was the result of the acts and omissions on the part of the Management.
The staff became surplus due to indiscriminate ad hoc appointments made by the Management without having any regard to the functional requirements of the PUNWAC.
The petitioners cannot be penalised for the wrongs done by the Management.
4.
It is also the case of the petitioners that they were in service of the PUNWAC since its inception and some of the employees who were appointed on ad hoc basis have been absorbed in other departments of the Government.
Thus the petitioners were made to suffer discriminatory treatment.
The petitioners, therefore, pray for quashing of the aforesaid scheme whereby they were forced to opt the same and also for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to implement the policy of the Government regarding absorption and absorb the surplus staff of the PUNWAC in other Governmental departments or Public Sector Organisations and Public Undertakings.
5.
The challenge to `Golden Hand Shake Scheme' is not sustainable.
Admittedly, the Corporation is running into financial losses.
To get over the financial crisis if the PUNWAC intends to reduce the strength of staff by introducing the `Golden Hand Shake Scheme' and if only functional staff is required to be continued, no fault can be found with in the action of the PUNWAC.
There is no compulsion on the employees to opt for the Scheme.
Only option has been given to them so that the PUNWAC may be in a position to reduce the strength of the staff and to get rid of the surplus.
Since there is no compulsion on the part of the employees to opt for the said scheme, it cannot be said that there is any violation of rights of the employees or the petitioners.
The scheme introduced by the PUNWAC cannot be and is not liable to be quashed.
6.
The learned Counsel for the petitioners further contended that they are entitled to be absorbed in the vacancies that are available in the Governmental departments and Public Sector Undertakings.
In support of this contention, they relied on the circulars issued from time to time on the subject on the basis of which the surplus staff of the sick units on their winding up was absorbed in the Governmental Departments, Organisations or Public Sector Undertakings.
7.
When the Corporation is running into financial losses and when the Board of Directors of the Corporation decided to reduce the strength of the staff, the petitioners cannot claim a right to be continued in service even though the Corporation is not in a position to pay the salaries of the staff.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot claim that they should not be retrenched.
If they are retrenched without following the procedure, it is always open to them to avail the alternative remedy either by approaching the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act or to challenge the termination of their services in any other appropriate Forum.
But they cannot seek any direction from this Court that they are entitled to be continued in service of the Corporation.
8.
The Punjab Government has issued a circular letter bearing No. 14/10/92-4PP-3/7791 dated 261992 in regard to absorption of the surplus staff.
Thereafter the Government clarified it vide its letter dated 1761992 that the Departmental Selection Committee should adjust or appoint the surplus employees on the basis of their qualifications and if the surplus employees do not fulfil the requisite qualifications only then the outside candidates should be considered.
The same position continued upto 1331995.
It is useful to extract the letter of the Government of Punjab dated 1331995 :-  "I am directed to invite your attention to the Punjab Government Circular letter No. 11/15/92-2PP1/1613, dated 30th January, 1992, on the subject noted above, vide which priority category No. 3, contained in Punjab Government circular letter No. 18/14/86-5PP(1703)/5964 dated 24.4.1986 read with circular letter No. 18/14/89-2PP1/4481 dated 2681991 was amended as below :- 3.
"The employees declared surplus on account of abolition of any post (s)/department of Government and Public Sector Undertaking(s) of the State Government or for some other reasons considered fit by Government, inter alia, on account of abolition or reduction of post (s) as a result of assessment made by Staff Inspection Unit etc. 2.
After reconsideration, it has now been decided to amend priority Category No. 3, with immediate effect as under :- "3.
The regular Government employees declared surplus on account of abolition of post(s)/department(s) of the State Government for any reason, including reduction of posts etc." It is the Government which changed its Policy to absorb its employees on the abolition of department of Government and Public Sector Undertakings of the State Government with effect from 1331995.
It is only regular employees who are declared surplus on account of abolition of any post(s)/department of Government alone are entitled to be absorbed.
This letter in my view is prospective in nature.
It cannot be made applicable retrospectively.
9.
After considering all the facts and circumstances of the case, I come to the following conclusions :-  (i) The Golden Hand Shake Scheme is not violative of any of the provisions of the Constitution or any other enactment or law.
(ii) When the posts are abolished due to financial crisis, the Board Management of PUNWAC has every right to abolish the posts and retrench its employees, who do not wish to opt for Golden Hand Shake Scheme.
(iii) If any employee is retrenched contrary to the principle of the `Ist come last go' or in violation of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, the remedy available to the retrenched employee is to approach the Labour Court and not to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court as this Court will not be in a position to adjudicate upon the disputed questions of fact.
(iv) Those employees who have been retrenched on the ground of surplus prior to 1331995 will have a right to be considered for employment either in the Governmental departments or its Organisations or Public Sector Under-takings owned and controlled by the Government depending on the qualifications, suitability and availability of the posts.
Those employees who have been retrenched after 1331995 on the ground of surplus will have no right to be considered for employment either in the Governmental departments or in its Organisation or Public Sector Undertakings under its control and Management.
In view of my conclusions arrived at, I direct the PUNWAC :  (i) to send a list of the employees who have been retrenched on the ground of surplus from the Corporation prior to 1331995 on their refusal to opt the Golden Hand Shake Scheme within two months from the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
(ii) The Government shall consider the cases of those employees who have been retrenched on the ground that they are surplus for their absorption in the Governmental departments or its Organisations or Public Sector Undertakings owned or controlled and managed by the Government depending on their qualifications, experience and suitability and pass an appropriate order in the case of each individual taking into account their length of service which they rendered in the PUNWAC.
This entire exercise shall be done by the Government within a period of three months from the receipt of the list of those employees who have been retrenched prior to 1331995 to be furnished by the PUNWAC and the employees who have been retrenched after 1331995 have no right to be considered for absorption.
(iii) No employee whose services have been terminated by way of punishment or for some other reason is entitled to be absorbed.
10.
With the above directions, all these writ petitions are disposed of accordingly.