VS Aggarwal, J - Haryana State Minor Irrigation & Tubewells Corporation Limited (hereinafter described as 'the petitioner') seeks quashing of the award dated 9.11.1995 passed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar.
2.
The relevant facts giving rise to the present writ petition are that respondent Vinod Kumar had raised a dispute with the petitioner alleging that he was appointed as Mate by the petitioner on daily wages on 19121984.
He worked as such uptil 1681985.
His services were abruptly terminated w.e.f.
1781985.
He claimed that termination of his services was illegal, arbitrary and mala fide being in violation of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') because he was neither given any notice nor was paid any retrenchment compensation.
He also stated that principle of 'last come and first go' had not been followed.
He did apprentice training for one year from 231987 to 131988 and prayed for reinstatement with full back wages.
The petitioner-management had contested the said claim and alleged that the respondent-workman had absented voluntarily.
From 16.8.1995 the workman did not turn up for duty and abandoned the job himself.
The question of termination of his services did not arise.
He had submitted an application and was appointed as an apprentice under the Apprentice Act, 1961.
Even at that time he did not raise any question of his alleged termination.
The learned Labour Court held that domestic enquiry on the charge of absence from duty has not been held.
No show cause notice had been served and, therefore, the retrenchment without following the due procedure was illegal.
The contention that the claim was barred by time was also rejected.
A direction, therefore, was issued that respondent is to be reinstated forthwith with continuity of service.
He was not entitled to any back wages from 1681985 to 1991989.
3.
Aggrieved by same, the present writ petition has been filed.
The petitioner contended that the respondent-workman had left his job without informing or in other words had abandoned the job himself.
He did not return to work after 1781985.
Otherwise also he had joined the petitioner as a daily wager.
On the request of the workman whenever petitioner-Corporation had needed the extra hand or for stop-gap arrangement the workman used to present himself.
It was further pointed out that respondent-workman thereafter in 1987 had approached the petitoiner for his appointment as an apprentice workman under the Apprentice Act at Chandigarh.
He was appointed but relieved on 131988.
In other words, the case of the petitioner was that there was no retrenchment of the workman.
4.
The petition as such had been contested by the workman.
His reply was in line with his claim petition.
It was pleaded that respondent-workman continued working with the management from 19121982 to 1881985.
His services were terminated in violation of the provisions of section 25-F of the Act.
Junior person namely Nazar Singh had been retained in service while services of workman-respondent Vinod Kumar were terminated.
He had raised the demand on 2091989.
The Government declined to make the reference.
Thereupon the respondent-workman had filed Civil Writ Petition 14736 of 1990 and the same is allowed.
It was held that prima facie the matter needed a reference.
It was thereafter that reference was made by the Government to the Labour Court.
It was denied that the workman had abandoned his service.
No domestic enquiry was held and no opportunity was given to the workman-respondent to show cause.
He supported the findings of the Labour Court that his service had been terminated and it was not a case of abandonment of job.
5.
There is no dispute as is apparent from the resume of the facts given above that the respondent-workman had been working on daily wages.
There was no order terminating his services that had been produced on the record.
No show cause notice or enquiry had been held.
But on behalf of the petitioner, it had been highlighted that it was a case of voluntary abandonment of job, because thereafter the respondent-workman even applied for the post of Apprentice Draftsman (Civil).
6.
Annexure P-2 is the copy of the application submitted by the respondent- workman to the Managing Director of the petitioner.
It reads :-  "Sub:- Appointment of Apprentice Draftsman (Civil).
R/Sir,  I have passed the Draftsman (Civil) examination from the ITI Yamuna Nagar during Feb 1984.
I have not received any employment so far.
I have learnt that one post of Apprentice Draftsman (Civil) is lying vacant in your organisation at Chandigarh as Apprentice Draftsman.
If any Apprentice post of Draftsman (Civil) is lying at Chandigarh.
My bio-data is as under :-  Name : Vinod Kumar S/o Sh. Sadhu Ram.
Date of Birth : 4.5.1962.
Qualification : Matric  Technical qualification : Draftsman (Civil).
Thanking you.
Sd/-."
Thereupon with respect to his above application dated 17.2.1987, a letter of appointment dated 2421987 had been issued.
The relevant extract of the same is :-  "Ref:- Your application dt. 17.2.87.
You are hereby selected to undergo Apprenticeship Training under the Apprentices Act, 1961, which aims at providing opportunities to unemployed educated persons on the following terms and conditions :-  1.
The period of Apprenticeship Training will be for a duration of one year.
2.
During the period of training, you will be paid fixed stipend of Rs. 300/- per month.
3.
No Travelling Allowance will be admissible for journeys to be performed for joining the course of Apprenticeship.
4.
You will be required to execute the contract of apprenticeship immediately under Section 7 of the Apprentice Act.
If you fail to compelete the training in pursuance of the contract, you shall have to refund to the corporation the cost of training as determined by the Apprenticeship Advisor.
xx xx xx xx"  As already pointed out above, the respondent-workman had served the petitioner as a daily wager only upto August, 1985.
The fact that precipitates clearly shows that it was a case of voluntary abandonment rather than a case of retrenchment.
Section 2(oo) of the Act defines retrenchment and procedure in this regard has been prescribed under Section 25-F of the Act.
It will not be applicable in case of voluntary abandonment.
The reasons that prompted this Court to come to the conclusion that it is a case of voluntary abandonment of the job are obvious; namely:-  (a) As noticed above the respondent-workman worked only upto 1681985 with the petitioner.
Till February, 1987 he did not raise any dispute.
If he had been retrenched without following the due procedure, he would have approached for an industrial dispute at the earliest.
(b) The respondent-workman as noticed above, in February, 1987 applied to be appointed as Apprentice Draftsman (Civil).
He even served the petitioner for about one year as Apprentice Draftsman (Civil).
After having undergone such a training and not having raised the dispute, leads to the logical conclusion that he had abandoned his service as a daily wager.
(c) It also leads to the conclusion that there was no voluntary act of the petitioner terminating the services of the respondent-workman.
Therefore, it cannot be held that it was retrenchment contemplated under Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Consequently, the impugned award thus cannot be sustained.
7.
For these reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned award is quashed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.