Iqbal Singh, J - The petitioner-Company has preferred this revision petition against the order dated 26.11.1980 passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Gurdaspur (exercising the powers of Commissioner under the Workmen Compensation Act) (for short `the Act') whereby the application filed by the petitioner-Company for setting aside the ex parte order dated 13121978 passed under the Act was dismissed.
2.
The facts of the case are as under :-  One Jugal Kishore is one of the registered partners of the petitioner-firm.
Respondent Ram Bilas filed an application for compensation for suffering an injury during the course of his employment.
An ex parte order was passed on 13121978 for payment of compensation to the respondent amounting to Rs. 14112/-.
It has been alleged that the petitioner-firm came to know about the ex parte order when it received notice regarding the execution of the ex parte order on 20/21.5.1979 and upon further enquiring from the Court on 261979.
The petitioner firm alleged that it was never served in the case and its absence was not intentional and, accordingly, application for setting aside the ex parte order was filed on 14.6.1979.
3.
The said application was resisted by respondent Ram Bilas on the ground that the same is barred by limitation : that the order dated 13121978 could be challenged by way of filing appeal: and that the petitioner-firm was intentionally avoiding payment of the amount of compensation.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues besides that of relief were framed :-  "1.
Whether there are sufficient grounds for setting aside the ex parte order ?
OPA 2.
Whether the application is within limitation ?
OPA 3.
Whether the application is not maintainable ?
OPR The Senior Sub Judge decided issue Nos. 1 and 2 against the petitioner-firm.
Issue No. 3 was not pressed and was, accordingly, decided against the respondent.
In view of its findings on issue Nos. 1 and 2, the trial Court dismissed the application.
5.
The evidence of Process servers Krishan Gopal (RW1) and Dharam Pal (RW3) to the effect that the petitioner-firm refused to accept service on 1631978 duly proves the Service of summons.
Proclamation was issued thereafter by beat of drum and, therefore, it cannot be said that service is not complete.
Accordingly, the ex parte order on 20/21.5.1979, but no reason has been put forth why it did not approach the Court immediately for setting aside the ex parte order.
Prem Nath, partner of the petitioner-firm appeared as AW 1 and stated that he got knowledge of the ex parte order on 2451979.
Therefore, the contention of the petitioner-firm that it got knowledge of the ex parte order on 20/21.5.1979 is not correct.
The finding of the trial Court that M/s Gobind Stone Crushing Company was served in this case but they did not appear in Court intentionally for the reasons best known to them, cannot, under the circumstances, be said to be wrong.
Accordingly, the order whereby the petitioner-firm was proceeded ex parte cannot be said to be illegal.
6.
Besides, the application for setting aside the ex parte order was made much beyond the period of 30 days of the passing of the order and, therefore, is barred by limitation.
A (sic) an application for setting aside of an ex parte order is required to prove sufficient cause for delay in making such an application, which the petitioner-firm has failed to do in the present case.
7.
In view of the above facts, I do not find any merit in this revision petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.