HS Bedi, J - Respondent No. 1 Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Medical Science and Research, Amritsar (hereinafter called the respondent) issued a prospectus for admission to the MBBS Course (1997-98) in October/November, 1997.
The last date for the receipt of the applications fixed therein was 6111997 whereas November 10 and 11, 1997 were fixed for interviews for the open merit category and the payment seat respectively.
These dates were modified by a corrigendum dated 9111997 Annexure P.1 to the petition and 17111997 was fixed as the last date for the receipt of the applications and 13111997 and 23111997 were fixed for the interviews.
The prospectus further stipulated therein the eriteria for selection to the course by providing that the selection would be based on the inter se merit in the PMT conducted by the Punjabi University in 1997 on behalf of the Punjab Government.
The prospectus further provided for the distribution of the 50 seats available for the MBBS Course, and 25 seats were directed to be reserved for category I (Merit) whereas the balance 25 seats in Category II (payment) were further apportioned and sub-divided as under :-  (a) Open  7 (b) Rural 6 (c) Donor Body Seats  4 Selection to the Donor Body seats will be made exclusively on the basis of the certificate issued by the  + + President (Shrimani Gurdwara Parbhandak Committee) + + (d) NRI/NRI sponsored  8 2.
In the corrigendum Annexure P.1, it was further provided that the un-filled seats would be shifted to the General Category.
The petitionr who fulfilled all the conditions of eligibility, applied within time for admission to the course and also took the PMT examination and was placed at merit No. 703.
The merit list for the category II payments 25 seats was displayed on the notice board of the respondent on 19111997 and the petitioner's name was put at Serial No. 12 in the order of merit in the open category.
The interview for these seats was held as programmed on 20111997 and all the 7 available seats were offered for admission but one of the candidates did not deposit the fee.
This seat was accordingly offered to the candidate in the order of merit at serial No. 8.
It is petitioner's case (and remains uncontroverted) that he came into the waiting list at serial No. 2.
It appears from the pleadings in the writ petition that against the 4 Donor Body seats only 2 candidates were available with the result that the remaining 2 seats were to be put in the general category as provided by the corrigendum Annexure P.1 and that if this exercise had been carried out, the petitioner would be entitled to admission against one of these two seats.
The petitioner's grievance, however, is that these two seats were given to NRI/NRI sponsored candidates i.e. respondents No. 3 and 4 after taking huge amount of Rs. 216 lakhs as fee in terms of the prospectus.
The petitioner has accordingly come to the court claiming that the two unfilled Donor Body seats should have gone to the category II Open (Payment) candidates.
3.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and respondent No. 1 has filed a reply whereas respondent No. 4 first filed a reply dated 12.2.1998 through his counsel Shri SP Sharma and subsequently this respondent as also respondent No. 3 filed a separate reply through their counsel Miss Urvashi Dhugga.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 1, it has been pointed out that the MBBS Course had been started for the first time in the respondent institute this year and that no seat under the Donor category had been left vacant as all the seats had been duly filled in before the last date and as such the question of converting the two seats to the open category did not arise.
Respondent No. 4 in the reply filed by him on 12.2.1998 first specifically admitted in para 2 thereof that he had been given admission as an NRI candidate but this assertion was retracted by him in the subsequent written statement filed through Miss Urvashi Dhugga Advocate in which the stand taken by the respondent was accepted and it was stated that the two respondents had also got admission against the Donor category seats.
When specifically called upon to explain the departure in the stand of respondent No. 4, Mr. SP Sharma Advocate who had filed the earlier written statement stated in court that he had done so on his own without instructions from respondent No. 4.
The petitioner's counsel however persistently urged that the averments made in the written statements of respondent No. 1 and the joint written statement of respondents No. 3 and 4 were not correct and the record pertaining to the admission was accordingly summoned and has been produced before me in court today.
4.
Mr. Balram Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that it had been provided in the prospectus when read along with the corrigendum Annexure P.1 that seats belonging to various categories that were left unfilled would be shifted to the General category and as such the action of the respondents in offering these two seats to NRI candidates was wholly unjustifiable.
He has also argued that the assertion made in the written statement filed that respondents No. 3 and 4 were not NRI/NRI sponsored candidates but also belonged to the Donor category, was erroneous and for this purpose, the record needed to be carefully scrutinised.
As against this, Mr. Mattewal appearing for the respondents has placed before me the entire record pertaining to admissions.
He has pleaded that respondents No. 3 and 4 had applied to the President of the SGPC seeking admission under the Donor category and the President of the SGPC had allowed them admission as candidates belonging to that category.
When faced with this situation, Mr. Balram Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that even assuming that these two respondents had got admission under the Donor category yet here too their admission was wholly untenable.
In this connection he has referred to the Corrigendum Annuxure P1 dated 19111997 detailing the procedure/eligibility criteria to be followed for admission against the Donor Body seats.
The relevant extract is reproduced below :-  "DONOR BODY SEATS  1.
SGPC Donor Body Certificate :-  That the candidate is real son/daughter, grandson/granddaughter of an elected SGPC member.
The affidavit to be signed on a stamp paper attested by Ist Class Magistrate giving signature, name, relationship, constituency and complete address of the SGPC member.
It is to be verified and signed by the President of the SGPC only."
5.
Mr. Gupta has accordingly contended that the two private respondents did not fulfil the criteria laid down above.
At this Mr. Mattewal has produced before me a decision taken by the respondent on 5111997 in which it had been resolved that if the number of applicants in the Donor Body category for MBBS admission in the Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Science and Research, Amritsar, for the Session 1997-98 fell short of the seats offered the applicants fulfilling the pre-corrigendum requisites could also be considered on the merit of the PMT with the rider that the total seats would not in any case exceed the number provided in the Prospectus.
The argument is that the two private respondents were therefore entitled to admission, as Donor category candidates.
6.
I have considered the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
Although a serious doubt does exist with regard to the category under which respondents No. 3 and 4 have got admission, yet I have chosen to deal with Mr. Gupta's alternative argument.
It will be noticed that the criteria fixed by Annexure P.1 for filling in of the Donor Body Seats had been substantially modified and it was in accordance with the modification made on 5111997 that respondents No. 3 and 4 were liable to be considered for admission.
The applications made by the two respondents to the President of the SGPC have been produced before me in the Court and photocopies thereof have been kept on the file.
It is apparent that they do not fulfil the qualifications laid in corrigendum Annexure P.1.
Moreover, as the resolution dated 5111997 was not brought to the notice of the General Public enabling other prospective candidates to apply against the vacant Donor Body seats its applicability is open to serious criticism.
Any attempt to make a back door entry must be seriously discouraged.
Moreover, the applications seeking admission dated 7111997 and 8.11.1997 with respect to respondents No. 3 and 4 respectively were in fact received on 18111997 (as would be evident from the diary number thereon) and these could not have been entertained at that stage, as the last date for the receipt of applications had been notified as being 17111997.
7.
Mr. Mattewal, the learned counsel for the respondents has then argued that it had been provided in the criteria given in the Prospectus that in case some seats remained unfilled, the same were to be shifted to the General category i.e. General Category I (merit) and as the petitioner's claim could have only relevance if the seats were shifted to Category II (payment seats), the writ petitioner in any case, could not succeed.
As against this Mr. Balram Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out 50 seats in all had been notified and that the 25 category II payments seats had been sub-divided into Open, Rural, Donor Body Seats and NRI category and as the possibility of any seat remaining vacant under category I (merit) was remote, the unfilled seats visualised were only in the payment category (II) and that in any case a seat remaining unfilled was to be retained within that category.
8.
I have considered this argument of the learned counsel in the light of the record produced in court.
The total number of seats and their distribution have been given in the prospectus as under :-  1.
Category I (Merit) 25 2.
Category II (Payment) 25 a) Open  7 b) Rural 6 c) Donor body seats 4 d)  NRI/NRI sponsored 8 9.
As per the corrigendum issued on 9111997, the unfilled seats were to be shifted to the General category.
As the Donor Body seats referred to in sub- category (c) have been plead in category II (Payment) seats, I am of the opinion that these seats were to be retained in the said category itself and could not be thrown open under category I (Merit) on remaining unfilled, as has been contended by Mr. Mattewal.
There also appears some merit in Mr. Gupta's assertion that the possibility of any seat remaining vacant in category I was extremely remote considering the demand for seats in the MBBS Course and the respondents were therefore fully alive to the situation that some seats in Category II could possibly remain unfilled on account of paucity of candidates, falling within some of those sub-categories.
10.
The inter se merits of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 and 4 must now be considered as it is the admitted position that the candidates were to be admitted on the basis of their merit in the PMT.
The petitioner's claim that he stood at merit list No. 703 has not been denied.
It is also evident from the applications made by respondents No. 3 and 4 Simran Grewal and Sukhjinder Singh before the President of the SGPC that they stood at merit No. 3225 and 5538 respectively.
I am therefore of the opinion that going by the criteria fixed in the Prospectus, respondent No. 4 Sukhjinder Singh must make way for the petitioner.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the admission of respondent No. 4 Sukhjinder Singh is quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioner be granted admission against Category II (Payment Seat).
The petitioner who had already been granted admission in the BDS course run by the respondent will be shifted to the MBBS Course, as the course of study in the Ist year for the BDS & MBBS are substantially overlapping and he will accordingly have the benefit of his attendance in the BDO Moreover, the course started only in January, 1998 and the petitioner who had come to this court as early as on January 8, 1998, cannot be denied relief on the plea that some part of the course stands completed.
A further direction is issued that the fee taken from respondent No. 4 shall be proportionately refunded to him forthwith.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.