V K Bali, J - Petitioner herein is a victim of bad luck.
His case was finally considered for migration when he so applied and admittedly his name was struck off from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana way back on December 8, 1992 and initially he was permitted migration to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, but later when he was refused, he obtained an interim order for his provisional admission in Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh which has still not been complied with, thus, compelling the petitioner to be in such a position so as not to pursue his studies at all even though he had appeared up to third semester of the course while studying at Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana.
Let us examine the facts of the case to see how and in what manner petitioner is in such a difficult situation and as to under the facts and circumstances of this case, can he be granted any relief.
2.
Petitioner was admitted to BE (Electrical) Course in Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana (hereinafter to be referred to GNE College, Ludhiana) in the year 1986.
At the time when petition was filed i.e. on January 11, 1993, he was taking his third semester examination of the said course.
He applied for migration from GNE College, Ludhiana to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred to as PEC, Chandigarh) because of grave security threats faced by him.
The brother of petitioner is an I.P.S.
Officer and he had remained on number of sensitive posts in Punjab in the past few years and at present he is Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Sangrur.
Petitioner had been receiving threats to his life through threatening letters/telephonic calls from the extremists, anti-social and anti-national elements.
At one point of time when large number of relatives of the police personnels were being killed in Punjab one after the other, security threats to petitioner became so grave that he had to discontinue his studies and he could not take some of the semester examinations.
Some details of the security hazards faced by petitioner need to be noticed.
Petitioner's brother, Mr. Jasminder Singh remained posted as Assistant Superintendent of Police, Majitha, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Patti, Superintendent of Police (D), Jalandhar, Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Kapurthala, Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Faridkot and is now Sr.
Superintendent of Police, Sangrur.
The Police Officer-petitioner's brother had, thus, worked on the said posts when terrorism was at its peak in Punjab.
During his tenure of these posts, the Officer led various police parties in which certain hardcore militants were killed.
As late as on January 1, 1993, he led a police party in which Jasbir Singh Jassa, the Deputy Chief of KCF (Panjwar) was killed.
In another recent encounter, he led a police party in which Lakhbir Lakha, a hardcore militant of KCF (Zaffarwal) group was killed.
In another major encounter on November 18, 1992, he led a police party in which ten hardcore militants including Jaswinder Singh alias Johal of Babbar Khalsa were killed.
Not only that, on April 16, 1992, when he was proceeding towards Chandigarh along with his pilot and escort vehicles, in a determined bid to kill him, the militants arranged a bomb blast on the road leading to Chandigarh from Ludhiana.
He, however, escaped attempt on his life.
Petitioner, who was studying at GNE College, Ludhiana, thus, was under grave security threat.
It is pleaded that GNE College Campus is notorious for militant activities.
On September 6, 1988, there was firing on the GNE College Campus in Hostel No. 3 in which one person was injured.
On June 8, 1989, F.I.R. No. 15 was registered at Police Station Sadar, Ludhiana in which case was registered against Jaljot Singh son of Gurmail Singh, a student of IInd year engineering course.
According to the F.I.R., dreaded militants like Gurjant Singh Budhsinghwala, Chief of KLF, Jarnail Ghawaddi, hardcore Area Commander and Ajmer Singh Lodhiwal used to visit Room No. 177 in Hostel No. 1 which was allotted to Jaljot Singh.
This was not the solitary incident and in fact in the premises of the GNE College, Ludhiana there were many such incidents.
An other incident which needs mention is of July 25, 1988 in which two young Sikh boys went on scooters and started firing by AK 47 rifles killing Sohan Singh, Head Granthi of Darbar Sahib, Amritsar and Bhan Singh Bhaura, Secretary, SGPC This incident had taken place within the campus.
Thereafter also one Rachhpal Singh Chhadran, Chief of KCF(P) was killed virtually on the gate of the College campus.
The fact that petitioner's brother as also his whole family inclusive of petitioner himself were under lot of strain on account of threats extended to them, is also clear from various documents attached with civil misc. application which was filed on December 22, 1993 supported by an affidavit.
Annexure A1 attached with the said application reveals that Kaur Singh, who was a known police helper and was in reality in league with terrorists had informed the terrorists on April 14, 1992 during night meeting at his house about the visit of S.S.P., Faridkot to Chandigarh on April 16, 1992.
Annexure A-2 is a letter from the Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur to the Inspector General of Police (Intelligence), Punjab wherein it is mentioned that on March 4, 1988 near village Kahri 32 persons were killed by KCF gang of Makhan Singh @ Gabuli.
This was a sensational incident that occurred in the area of Police Station Sadar, Hoshiarpur.
Tangible achievement was made in the case and as per available information, ISI had given fresh instructions to KCF to eliminate police personnels involved in anti-terrorist operation.
It is further mentioned that Zaffarwal had planned to send more weapons to India.
It is also mentioned in the letter that Jasminder Singh IPS, who is brother of petitioner, was the main target of attack by terrorists because of his efforts in tracing the aforesaid case.
Annexure A-3 is a communication from Deputy Superintendent of Police, Nakodar to the S.S.P., Jalandhar.
It is mentioned in the letter aforesaid that since the terrorists stay in GNE College Campus, there is danger to the life of Jasminder Singh, IPS's brother.
Annexure A-4 is a letter written by Shri KPS Gill, Director General of Police, Punjab to the Advisor, UT, Chandigarh.
It is stated in the letter aforesaid that petitioner son of Dayal Singh, student of BE 3rd year (Electrical) GNE College, Ludhiana, is younger brother of Shri Jasminder Singh, IPS, SSP, Faridkot.
His migration from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana is required on extreme security grounds in view of threat perception to the lives of family members of senior police officers in the present situation.
Annexure A-5 is still another letter written by the D.G.P., Punjab to the Vice-Chancellor of Punjab University, Chandigarh.
It is stated in the letter aforesaid that the request made by petitioner for his migration was genuine and he deserved sympathetic consideration.
He strongly recommended his case and requested to order migration of petitioner from GNE College, Ludhiana to PEC, Chandigarh.
Annexure A-6 is a letter written by Shri KPS Gill, DGP, Punjab to brother of petitioner, Jasminder Singh wherein he has appreciated the services of latter and, in particular, meticulous planning and proper execution of his work in eliminating two terrorists belonging to KCF.
Annexure A-7 is again a letter written by the D.G.P., Punjab to brother of petitioner appreciating his notable success as a result of which ten terrorists were killed besides recovery of huge quantity of arms and ammunition.
Annexures A8 and A9 are also similar letters.
Annexure A-10 is a letter from SSP, Jalandhar to Inspector General of Police, Intelligence, Punjab.
The letter reads thus :-  "Panthic Committee is reported to have directed all militant organisations to demoralise Punjab Police, as Punjab Police has given a jolt to terrorist activities.
A fresh list of some police officers has been prepared.
BTFK, KLF and KCF (Chandran group) have drawn out a list of such officers.
As per interrogation reports, Gurjant Singh Budh Singh Wala has been visiting GNE College, Ludhiana Hostel.
Bhan Singh Bhoura, Sohan Singh Granthi and Mall Singh Ghuman of SGPC were attacked on college campus of GNE College (Ludhiana).
Relations of police officers studying in GNE College Ludhiana may be on the target."
Annexure A-11 is letter from SSP, Jalandhar to SSP, Tarn Taran and the same reads as under :  "One gunman of Sh. Jasminder Singh, IPS, ASP, Patti, Police District Tarn Taran is reportedly mixed up with terrorists.
The name of the gunman is Const.
Jarnail Singh.
Since this particular gunman is with Sh. Jasminder Singh right since he joined IPS, Sh. Jasminder Singh, IPS may be alerted accordingly.
The gunman knows all family members and movements of Sh. Jasminder Singh, IPS."
Annexures A-12 to A-25 all reveal either involvement of the brother of petitioner in eliminating terrorists or threat extended to him and his family members by the latter.
3.
It is in the wake of the circumstances fully detailed above that petitioner applied for his migration from GNE College, Ludhiana to PEC, Chandigarh.
Before that, he was admitted to BE (Electrical) Course in GNE College, Ludhiana in the year 1986 and at the time when he applied for migration, he was taking third semester examination of the said course.
His request for migration was forwarded by the Director General of Police, Punjab and other concerned authorities.
The DGP, as mentioned above strongly recommended his case and the matter was investigated by appropriate authorities, including the Home Secretary and the Registrar of Punjab University, Chandigarh, respondents No. 1 and 2 herein.
The matter was also placed before the Syndicate of the Punjab University, Chandigarh.
After giving due consideration to the matter, the Home Secretary, UT, Chandigarh and the Punjab University allowed petitioner to be migrated from GNE College, Ludhiana to PEC, Chandigarh.
On December 3, 1992, Registrar of the Punjab University wrote a letter to the Principal that petitioner be allowed migration to 3rd Semester of the course.
Even though all formalities were complete, all concerned had made strong recommendations for migration of petitioner and when his name was struck off from the rolls of GNE College, Ludhiana, petitioner was to be in big shock when his admission at Chandigarh was refused.
Petitioner was also in for further trouble when in spite of interim order having been issued in his favour by this Court consequent upon his writ petition on account of refusal for migration in PEC, Chandigarh, he was to remain confined to his house neither studying at Ludhiana nor at Chandigarh.
Before, the facts leading to non-grant of admission to petitioner in PEC, Chandigarh are detailed, it will be useful to mention that Principal of the PEC, Chandigarh had refused migration of petitioner on the ground that as per rules, he could not be migrated in 4th semester.
4.
This petition came up for motion hearing before the Division Bench on January 20, 1993 when the following order was passed :-  "Notice of motion.
At this stage, Mr. Anupam Gupta accepts notice on behalf of Punjab University-respondent No. 2.
Mr. Anupam Gupta concedes that a Division Bench consisting of A L Bahri and G C Garg, JJ.
has rendered decision in C.W.P.
No. 11966 of 1992, which squarely covers a case in which the University allowed migration to a student, and it was held that such migration must be given effect to by the College concerned.
Accordingly, subject to decision of this writ petition, we direct Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, to provisionally give admission to the petitioner to third semester of BE (Electrical Course).
To come up on 1621993 for further proceedings.
At this stage Mr. Rajan Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner states that as the University concerned was the same for both the colleges, the petitioner had already appeared in the third semester examination and the result is awaited.
It is, therefore, further directed that the petitioner shall be given admission in the Third Semester but will be allowed to continue in the Fourth Semester subject to the result of the examination of the Third Semester."
It appears from the records of the case that despite interim orders having been passed, as has been noticed above, petitioner was not given provisional admission and he was, thus, constrained to file petition under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 against the respondents.
The proceedings in this contempt petition were stayed by the Supreme Court and for that precise reason when the matter came up for hearing on February 18, 1993, the following order was passed :-  "Further proceedings in the contempt matter have been stayed by the Supreme Court.
Adjourned to 18.3.1993."
The matter, however, came up for hearing before the Division Bench on April 7, 1993 when the following order was passed :-  "Mr. Rajan Gupta vehemently contended that reference to stay order in the order of the Supreme Court dated February 22, 1993, does not relate to the petitioner in CWP No. 658 of 1993 for the short reason that no matter arising out of the order passed in that writ petition has been challenged in the Supreme Court.
It is also not disputed that the only contempt matter in connection with non-compliance of order to give effect to the decision of the University to allow migration relates to Satminder Singh petitioner in the said writ petition.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Senior Advocate, appearing for the Chandigarh Administration, submits that it would be necessary to see the copy of the Civil Misc.
Application on which the aforesaid order dated February 22, 1993, was passed.
He undertakes to produce the said copy on April 19, 1993.
To come up for arguments on that day."
On the adjourned date i.e. April 19, 1993, the following order was passed :-  "In this writ petition (No. 658 of 1993), the petitioner seeks a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to admit him to the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, respondent No. 3 in view of the migration already allowed by the Punjab University, respondent No. 2.
He also prayed for provisional admission to 3rd semester of BE (Electrical) Course in the said college.
Mr. Rajan Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, stated that petitioner's name was struck off the rolls from the previous college at Ludhiana about three months back and unless he was given provisional admission at Chandigarh, the petitioner was likely to lose one semester.
He further submitted that certain other students who were allowed migration by the University had been granted provisional admission by the college in compliance with the directions issued by various Benches of this Court in different writ petitions and those students were continuing their studies.
The prayer has been opposed on behalf of Chandigarh Administration and Punjab Engineering College, respondents No. 1 and 3.
Our difficulty in acceding to the prayer of Mr. Gupta arises on account of stay order granted by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in inter-locutory applications No. 1 to 5 in CA Nos. 545-549 of 1993 dated February 17, 1993.
The contention of Mr. Gupta is that the Administration had not filed any appeal against our order dated January 20, 1993, granting provisional admission to the petitioner pending further proceedings.
He further pointed out that the Administration had also not filed any appeal against order dated February 11, 1993, in COCP No. 122 of 1993 directing notice to Principal, Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, for disobedience of our order granting provisional admission.
He also submitted that he had made an application dated March 15, 1993 for intervention in CA No. 545 of 1993 but the same was disposed of with the oral observation that it may be explained to the High Court that Satminder Singh, the present petitioner, was not a party to any of the civil appeals pending in the Supreme Court.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Sr. Advocate, appearing for Chandigarh Administration, stated that at the time of hearing interlocutory applications No. 1 to 5 in CA Nos. 545-549 of 1993 an oral prayer was made that the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration as well as the Principal, Punjab Engineering College, were facing contempt proceedings.
It was on Mr. Kapil Sibal's oral prayer that their Lordships stayed further proceedings in the contempt matter.
Mr. Aggarwal further submitted that hearing in CA had since been concluded in the Supreme Court and judgment was awaited any day.
The material part of the order of the Supreme Court dated February 17, 1993, reads :- "This Court while directing to list the matters on 22nd February, 1993 DOTH ORDER  that the status quo as on today i.e. the 17th day of February, 1993 shall continue in all respects including contempt matter."
It is not disputed that the only contempt matter which was pending at the time of passing of the aforesaid order by the Supreme Court related to Satminder Singh, petitioner.
We, therefore, are of the view that on oral prayer of the learned counsel, their Lordships stayed further proceedings in the contempt matter even though Satminder Singh was not a party in any of the appeals pending before the apex Court.
We are, therefore, unable to take further action to secure provisional admission to the petition.
Adjourned to 1341993 to await further orders of the Supreme Court."
The Division Bench, in the circumstances as clearly made out from the reading of the order aforesaid, was unable to take further action even though respondents had not filed any appeal against the interim order granting provisional admission to petitioner nor against any order arising out of the contempt proceedings instituted by petitioner.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court was dealing with the matter of others against whom the respondents had gone in appeal before it.
It was while hearing those matters that on oral prayer made by learned counsel for the respondents there that the proceedings in the contempt petition instituted by petitioner were also stayed.
However, the case was being adjourned from time to time to await the decision of the Supreme Court and was admitted on October 5, 1993.
It was further directed while admitting the petition that the matter shall be listed for hearing on November 1, 1993.
This Court after hearing the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length on November 10, 1993 found it to be a very hard case.
Without, however, going into the merits of the case, interim direction was issued to consider the case of petitioner for admission to 3rd or 4th or any other semester which the Home Secretary might deem appropriate.
However, the Home Secretary has declined admission to petitioner vide order dated November 25, 1993, copy whereof has been placed on records of this case.
5.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be mentioned that when the Supreme Court was considering the appeals preferred by the respondents against interim orders passed in the cases of others, who had likewise sought migration, the Division Bench hearing the matter of others had finally disposed of the writ petitions.
The appeals arising from interlocutory orders, thus, became infructuous and the main appeals arising out of the final verdict of the High Court, were decided by the Supreme Court on July 21, 1993.
The judgment of the High Court was set aside but in view of the fact that respondent Nos. 1 to 4, who had been admitted to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh as far back as in September, 1992 and had been studying since then, were permitted to continue.
6.
In the wake of the circumstances that have been mentioned above, whereas the obvious contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that petitioner deserved migration in accordance with the Rules governing the field and which have been approved by the Supreme Court as also that the case of petitioner is quite distinguishable from those who were seeking migration in the case leading to judgment given by the Supreme Court, reference of which has been given above, the contention of learned counsel for the respondents is that the matter is covered against petitioner in judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 545 of 1993 Home Secretary, UT, Chandigarh v. Darshjit Singh Grewal & Ors., 1993(4) SCT 415 (SC).
7.
The facts of the case culminating into order of the Supreme Court deserve to be, thus, noticed.
Darshjit Singh Grewal and others, who were involved in litigation culminating into judgment passed by the Supreme Court, were admitted in the affiliated colleges which were run by private managements and inasmuch as the said private colleges were permitted to fill up a certain number of seats, designated as Management Quota, on their own, they were given admission in the Management Quota only.
Admissions to Engineering College, whether constituent or affiliated, in the State of Punjab, are made on the basis of Joint Entrance Test (hereinafter referred to as J.E.T.).
Darshjit Singh Grewal and others had obtained less than minimum marks that were required for admission in various Engineering Colleges.
Having obtained admission in management quota in affiliated colleges, some of which were even situated away from Chandigarh, their effort was always to have themselves transferred to colleges located centrally like the Chandigarh Engineering College.
Darshjit Singh Grewal had obtained 10925 marks whereas Surjit Kapur had obtained only 28 marks.
Whereas, Anil Kr.
Batra had obtained 15275 marks, Subhadya Yadav had obtained 1185 marks and Rohit Tangri had obtained 17325 marks in J.E.T.
The marks obtained by the last candidate in the relevant faculty in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, were 24050, 228, 21725, 18375 and 20225 respectively.
It shall, thus, be seen that none of the students, who sought their migration, was at all eligible for migration as one of the cardinal rules permitting migration is that the student seeking migration must have obtained more marks than the last candidate in the relevant faculty in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
All the students, referred to above, who sought migration, were simply admitted in various colleges located in Punjab on account of favouritism.
The particulars of the students and their parentage leave this Court with no manner of doubt that they had influence in the corridors of power and were able to secure admission in management quota and by seeking migration to PEC, Chandigarh, were clearly intending to have a back-door entry.
Observations of the Supreme Court in the judgment are also to the same effect.
In the backdrop of the facts and circumstances that have been detailed above, I do not wish to go any further even though it rather appears to be clear that there was hardly any security hazards staring at them.
8.
Petitioner, Satminder Singh, on the other hand is a competitor.
He appeared in J.E.T.
and was given admission in GNEC, Ludhiana on the basis of his merit in the J.E.T.
It is proved to the hilt and this Court would like to mention that the counsel appearing for respondents, during the course of arguments, from the impressive array of the facts, had no choice but to candidly admit that this was perhaps the only genuine case which required to be considered on compassionate grounds.
It shall, thus, be seen that petitioner had secured admission in GNEC Ludhiana on the dint of his merit.
He had not secured admission in management quota and was really facing threats to his life and his continuing study at Ludhiana was not free from all kinds of dangers.
That apart, the case of petitioner once again was distinguishable as he had secured 68 marks in PET in 1986 whereas the last candidate admitted in PEC, Chandigarh had secured 56 marks.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has shown me and has requested that the proceedings considering the case of petitioner for migration be placed on records.
Since the authenticity of this document is not disputed, the same has been placed on records of this case.
It clearly mentions in the remarks column which deals with the merit of the case that case of petitioner was covered under Rule 2(d) at page 276 of Punjab University Calendar, Vol. III, 1990.
As mentioned above, the first eligibility condition for migration is that the student concerned must have obtained more marks than the last candidate admitted in the college where he had to be migrated in the discipline concerned.
If once again the particulars of petitioner and those who were involved in the litigation before the Supreme Court, are compared, it shall be seen that none of the students had secured more marks than the last candidate admitted in the relevant discipline and rather they were far far below than the last candidates, who were admitted in the PEC, Chandigarh.
With this background, it is now time to see the pre-requisites for migration as spelled out from various Rules and Regulations.
This Court, however, would not like to go into the details of Rules and Regulations governing migration as the same have been given in extenso by the Supreme Court in Home Secretary, UT Chandigarh v. Darshjit Singh Grewal & Ors. (supra) and after reproducting the same, the apex Court has laid down the fulfilment of the following conditions before migration could be allowed :-  "(i) Principals of both the colleges should agree to it; (ii) there must be a vacancy available in the relevant faculty in the transferee college; (iii) transfer shall be permitted only in third and fifth semesters; (iv) the student being transferred should not have obtained (in the J.E.T.)
less marks than the last student admitted in that faculty in the transferee college; (v) transfer is permissible only on the ground of security or medical grounds; and  (vi) the student seeking transfer should not have been admitted in any quota i.e. he should have been admitted on merit."
9.
In so far as condition Nos. (iii) to (vi) are concerned, the parties are ad idem that the petitioner answers the same.
However, Mr. Aggarwal contends that the marks of petitioner have to be compared with the last student admitted in the year when migration is asked for and not the year when petitioner was actually admitted.
It requires to be mentioned that petitioner took admission in 1986 and sought migration in 1992.
It is the marks of the last student admitted in 1992 in the concerned discipline which are sought to be compared by the respondents.
However, such an interpretation is not forthcoming from the Rules at all.
That apart, there is no logic for comparing the marks of the last student admitted in the year when migration is sought.
The comparison can only be between the last student admitted when the student seeking migration was admitted in the College.
10.
Petitioner is asking for his migration in 3rd or 5th semester even though he had already appeared in 3rd semester examination.
He certainly obtained more marks than the last candidate admitted in the concerned faculty and the ground of security reasons is more than adequately made out in his case.
He is also not a student who was admitted in any quota and he actually got his admission in GNEC Ludhiana on merits.
The only discordant view expressed by learned counsel for the respondents is that there is no vacancy available in the relevant faculty in the transferee college.
11.
Petitioner has filed replication wherein he has averred that in the prospectus for the year 1992-93 it has been clearly mentioned that 10% seats were reserved for failed and migrated candidates as also that a seat was available in the Electrical discipline in the P.E.C., Chandigarh.
He further pleads that an additional seat was created by the Punjab University in his case.
He further pleads that the seat asked for by him would be within the sanctioned quota and for this he prays this Court for summoning the records of the college.
It is further his case that the Administration had conveyed its approval for his migration in 3rd semester subject to approval of Panjab University and creation of additional seat for him and the very fact that his migration was approved by all the concerned authorities, thereafter, it had necessarily resulted into creation of an additional seat for him.
It is further pleaded and so argued by learned counsel that the Vice-Chancellor of the University had discretion in the matter and could create an additional seat particularly when the additional seat was being offered on merits and it was not a case of dolling out a favour to a chosen favourite.
12.
As compared to that, the case of respondents as evidenced through pleadings as also the order passed by the Home Secretary on November 25, 1993 is that the present strength of the 3rd semester is 64 against sanctioned strength of 64 and the case of petitioner cannot be considered in the 4th semester because migration is permissible only in 3rd or 5th semester and not in 4th semester.
It shall, thus, be seen that it has not been mentioned as to what is the strength of students in the 4th semester and what is its sanctioned strength.
Even though there are rival claims made by the parties with regard to sanctioned strength and on the basis of that availability of the seats, one-thing is clearly made out and, in particular, from the order passed by the Home Secretary on November 25, 1993, that petitioner can be admitted in the 4th semester but, as is made out by the respondents, this course cannot be permitted inasmuch as the rules permit migration either in 3rd or 5th semester.
This Court cannot go into the disputed questions of fact and, therefore, it shall have to be presumed for the purpose of deciding this case that there is no vacancy available in the third semester and inasmuch as the sanctioned strength of 4th semester has not been given, it shall be deemed as if the seat is available there.
However, it has to be seen as to whether petitioner can be admitted in 4th semester as the rules do not permit migration in the said semester and on the other hand they permit only in 3rd or 5th semester.
The facts, as have been detailed above, clearly reveal that petitioner had actually appeared in 3rd semester examination in GNEC, Ludhiana and he was praying for his migration in 3rd or 5th semester in 1992 when he made an application for the said purpose.
The Motion Bench directed that he should be admitted in 3rd semester and allowed to attend classes of 4th semester subject to decision of writ petition.
Whereas, in the case of all others respondents went in appeal even though they were given provisional admission as ordered by the High Court, petitioner was not granted provisional admission irrespective of the fact that there was no stay against the order so passed.
Positive case of the petitioner is that he made an application for intervention before the Supreme Court but he was orally advised to explain the position to the High Court.
Be that as it may, the High Court in wake of the circumstances mentioned above, could not proceed any further in contempt matter and it is in this manner that those who have been found ineligible for migration but in whose case interim orders were complied with, have succeeded in their ultimate goal even though on law point mooted out by them, they have miserably failed.
Petitioner who was far higher in merit than all those who had asked for migration and in whose case there was no appeal, has practically lost his cause.
As mentioned above, he is neither studying at Ludhiana nor at Chandigarh.
He was not a party even before the Supreme Court.
This Court is in doubt that if his claim had also been before the Supreme Court, then those who were far below in merit than him and who had successfully endeavoured for backdoor entry, could not have been given precedence over and above the case of petitioner.
In such a situation, either migration of the person, who was last in merit, would have been cancelled or the petitioner too would have been accommodated irrespective of availability of the seat.
In any case, the claim of petitioner, who is higher in merit than those who have been allowed migration and are continuing and whose interest has been protected by the Supreme Court, cannot be ignored.
In the circumstances it has to be construed as if the seat actually available for the petitioner has been usurped by the student who was last in merit.
If in his case interim order had not been passed or even passed but complied with, it is clear from the judgment of the Supreme Court that he would not have been allowed migration, thus, making room for the petitioner for whom the seat, thus, would have been available.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, petitioner thus deserves to be allowed migration either in 3rd semester by creating an additional seat or in 4th semester, wherever respondents might deem it appropriate.
Any other course, if adopted in this case, would completely ruin the whole career of petitioner.
He has already suffered immense loss in his academic career as admittedly he has neither been able to study at Ludhiana nor at Chandigarh right from 1992 till date.
13.
This petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
The directions given by this Court be complied forthwith.
Copies of this order be given to learned counsel for the parties dasti under the signatures of the Reader of this Court.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.