TS Doabia, J - Arguments in this petition were heard on 24th day of March, 1998.
It was indicated that order would be passed on 25th March, 1998.
This is how this petition has been taken up for final disposal.
The petitioner submits that a Notification was issued by the respondent- authorities.
This is dated 17th July, 1995 (Copy of this is annexure-P-1A).
Applications were invited for making appointments to Gazetted Service in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Appointments were also to be made to the vacancies available in the hierarchy of Service known as Kashmir Administrative Service.
The petitioner submitted his application.
His application was not entertained.
He came to this Court.
An interim order was passed.
This order was to the effect that his application be entertained and he be permitted to take part in the preliminary examination.
This order came to be passed on 18th Oct 1995.
The petitioner submitted that he had taken part in the preliminary examination.
As the result of the preliminary examination was not being declared, the petitioner filed a Miscellaneous Petition in this Court.
An order came to be passed by this Court on 11th July, 1996.
A direction was given that the result of the preliminary examination of the petitioner be declared.
Accordingly, the result in the preliminary examination was declared.
Thereafter, the petitioner took part in the Main examination.
The result of the same has been declared.
This was done in pursuance of a direction given by this Court on 31st Dec 1997.
The petitioner submits that he has since qualified in the Main examination.
This is not disputed.
He is awaiting to be interviewed.
The only question which arises for determination in this petition is as to whether the petitioner fulfils the conditions regarding the age eligibility.
Age requirement has been fixed in the notification.
It would be apt to notice paragraph 5 of the notification which lays down the conditions of age eligibility.
For facility of reference, this cause is reproduced below :-  "Conditions of eligibility :- In order to be eligible to compete in the examination, a candidate must satisfy the following conditions namely :- i) x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x  ii) must have attained the age of 21 years and not attained the age 28 years as on Ist January of the year in which notification inviting application is issued by the Commission.
iii) x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x" The further submission is that as per the notification, applications for the above posts were to be submitted latest by 31st Oct 1995.
Thereafter examination was to be held.
This was held in the year 1996.
It is submitted that the petitioner cannot be made ineligible on account of conditions incorporated in the aforementioned clause.
It is submitted that for determining age eligibility Service Rules should be taken into consideration.
As per the petitioner, the age of eligibility is to be determined by taking into consideration this age as on first day of January of the year in which examination is to commence.
For this reliance is being placed on Rule 17 of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
For facility of reference, this Rule is being noticed.
This Rule reads as under :-  "Qualification - No person shall be eligible for appointment to any service by direct recruitment unless - (a)..... (b) The age of candidates for appointment to Govt. service shall be subject to the following maximum and minimum limits as on first day of January of the year in which the competitive examination is held or applications are invited for said posts."
Reference is also being made to the Recruitment to the Gazetted Services Procedure Rules.
In this the age of eligibility for seeking appointment to direct Gazetted Services is said to be First Kartik of the year in which competitive examination is held.
The equivalent of Indian month of Kartik would be October of Christian Era.
On the basis of what has been noted above, it is submitted that fixation of age in the notification inviting applications and more so in the clause-5 reproduced above is not in accordance with rules.
The clause which has been noted above as per the petitioner comes in conflict with Service Rules referred to above.
It is, accordingly, submitted that the petitioner who is eligible under the Service Rules cannot be made ineligible.
The only question which is thus required to be gone into is as to whether the age which has been fixed in the notification, which notification has been noted above, is in accordance with Service Rules.
The Service Rules have also been noticed above.
The reading of Service Rules makes it apparent that the age of 21 years should be there as on Ist of January of the year in which the examination is to commence.
The examination in this case was to commence in March, 1996.
Petitioner's Date of Birth is 9th of March, 1974.
He attained the age of 21 years on 9th of March, 1995.
He would thus be eligible under the Service Rules.
With a view to sustain his claim, reliance is also being placed on a decision given by this Court in the case reported as Raja Ali v. State & Ors, 1997 KLJ 196.
In paragraphs 6 and 7, it was observed as under :-  "6.
It is common ground that the petitioner had not attained 18 years as on 1.1.95 and was short of six months.
But the fact that applications were invited ten months later and he had attained 18 years at the time of submitting application and, that, he was selected also, it would be unjust to deprive him of appointment now which would make no sense and, on the contrary, cause enormous prejudice and injustice to him.
After all, the prescription of an age limit for employment is supposed to have some rationale behind it.
A candidate cannot be deprived of his employment or his selection cannot be defeated on a second thought that he was falling short of few months in the minimum prescribed age limit anterior to the issuance of the advertisement notice."
"7.
The fact that he had earned his selection on merit and, that he had attained the requisite age on the date when he sought consideration, entitled him to appointment."
It is as such submitted that on the basis of the Rules and also on the basis of judicial precedents noticed above, the petitioner cannot be debarred from taking part in the process of selection.
After having gone through the pleadings and after hearing the petitioner in person and Mr. DC Raina, Advocate, who appeared in this Court on 24th of March, 1998, I am of the opinion that there is merit in the contention of the petitioner.
When the Services Rule fix the eligibility criteria, then Executive Authorities should have taken note of this aspect of the matter.
A person seeking to take part in the process of selection has to be 21 years of age in the year in which examination is to be held.
The examination was held in the year, 1996.
Therefore, the prescription of age qualification to the contrary cannot be upheld.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
The petitioner who was permitted to take part in the examination at his own risk and responsibilities would be well within his legal rights to take part in the process of further selection.
He has already taken part in the preliminary and Main examinations.
He would now be interviewed.
It is stated that the process of interview is still on.
In case the interview process has come to an end, even then respondent-authorities would make arrangement with a view to interview the petitioner.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.