GS Singhvi, J - These petitions are being decided by a common order because the issues of fact and the principal question of law that arise for determination by the Court are common to both the cases.
2.
The petitioners were initially appointed on the posts of Junior Accountants (later on redesignated as Senior Assistant - Accounts) in the service of the erstwhile Punjab Housing Development Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board').
Vide order dated 20.4.1993 passed by the Housing Development Commissioner, they were promoted as Section Officer (Works) (earlier known as Senior Auditor) on ad hoc basis subject to the passing of the departmental/SAS examination.
They have filed C.W.P.
No. 15776 of 1994 to challenge the legality and correctness of the order dated 791994 issued by the Housing Development Commissioner of the Board declaring that as per note 4 of Rule 49 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, the Section Officer (Works) promoted provisionally or on ad hoc basis would be granted annual increment only from the date of their passing the test.
In C.W.P.
No. 78 of 1995, the petitioners have prayed for quashing the order dated 22121994 issued by the Housing Commissioner reverting them from the posts of Section Officer (Works) to those of Senior Assistant (Accounts).
3.
In order to appreciate the grievance of the petitioners in a correct perspective, it will be useful to notice the various orders and resolutions passed by the Board and the grounds on which they have challenged the orders dated 791994 and 22121994.
4.
The Board was established under Section 3 of the Punjab Housing Development Board Act, 1972.
Section 98 of that Act empowered the State Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act and Section 99 thereof empowered the Board to make regulations for the same purpose.
In terms of Section 99(2)(c), the Board could frame regulations for recruitment and other conditions of service, including remuneration of its officers and employees.
However, the Board did not frame regulations to regulate recruitment and the conditions of service of officers and employees.
Instead, the mode of recruitment as well as the conditions of service of the employees used to be regulated as per the resolutions passed by the Board from time to time.
The record produced by Shri PS Patwalia shows that vide resolution dated 2371984 passed in its 70th meeting, the Board constituted a committee of Finance and Accounts Member and Chief Accounts Officer to examine issues relating to departmental test for promotion to the post of Senior Auditor in the service of the Board.
The committee suggested that the examination proposed by it shall be held twice in a year and seniority of the officials should not be disturbed provided senior candidates qualify the papers within 3 years of promotion to the post of Senior Auditor (i.e. in six chances).
The Board did not accept this recommendation of the two-member committee and in the 72nd meeting of the Board, it was resolved that the posts of Senior Auditors shall be filled 25% by direct recruitment and 75% by promotion from among Junior Accountants.
In pursuance of the Board's decision, the Housing Development Commissioner issued order dated 1231986.
The syllabus framed by the committee was circulated among the Junior Accountants of the Board along with the order dated 1231986, the relevant portion of which is extracted below :  "PUNJAB HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BOARD CHANDIGARH OFFICE ORDER In supersession of the office order issued vide endst.
No. PHB-Admn.
6/81/5628-55, dated 1921981, it has been decided that in future, the procedure for appointment to the posts of Senior Auditors shall be as under:  1.
25% of the posts shall be filled by direct recruitment and 75% of the posts shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Jr Accountants.
2.
The Junior Accountants who have 3 years' regular services of the Board will be eligible to sit in the departmental test for promotion.
3.
The inter-se seniority of Jr. Accountants who is promoted to the post of Senior Auditor and qualify the test within first three consecutive chances available to him after his appointment to such post, shall, on his promotion to the post of Senior Auditor be assigned seniority in the cadre of Senior Auditor in accordance with his seniority in the cadre of Jr. Accountants.
Provided that if a person fails to qualify the test within the first three chances, he shall on his promotion, be assigned seniority in the cadre of Senior Auditor from the day he is promoted as such.
4.
The test shall be in 2 parts consisting of 4 papers each carrying maximum of 100 marks with 3 hours duration.
The detailed syllabi is at Annexure to this order.
The qualifying marks for the various papers will be 35% in individual papers and 40% in aggregate.
This has the approval of the Board vide agenda Item No. 7205.
Dated, .S.
SODHI, Chandigarh OUSING COMMISSIONER the March 12, 1986.
Endst.
No. PHB-Admn.EA-7/86/3935 dated 8.3.86 A copy is forwarded to the following for information and necessary action, along with its enclosure : 1.
Chief Engineer, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
2.
All the Superintending Engineers, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board.
3.
Sr.
Architect, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
4.
Chief Accounts Office, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
5.
Manager Estates, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
6.
Legal Adviser, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
7.
All Divisional Engineers, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board.
8.
P.A.
(Works)/C.E., Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
9.
PRO, Pb.
Housing Dev.
Board, Chandigarh.
10.
Accounts Officer (Pre-Check Cell), Ludhiana, Chandigarh, Jalandhar and Patiala.
11.
EA -1 to E.A -6 (Adm.Wing) The enclosed syllabus may please be circulated among the Jr Accountants working under them.
Administrative Officer,  for Housing Commissioner.
Endst.
No. PHB-Admn.EA-7/86/3936 dt. 18386  A copy is forwarded to:  1.
P.A./Chairman, for the information of Chairman;  2.
P.S./H.C., for the information of Housing Commissioner.
3.
PA/F& AM, for the information of F&AM Administrative Officer, for Housing Commissioner.
Endst.
No. PHB-Admn.EA-7/86/3937 Dt. 18386 A copy of the above is forwarded to Store-Keeper (AdmWing) for pasting a copy of these instructions on the Notice Board for the general information and compliance of all concerned.
Administrative Officer, for Housing Commissioner."
5.
On 1881987, the Housing Commissioner of the Board circulated the decision of the Board that the employees may be allowed to appear in SAS examination conducted by the Finance Department of the government.
The relevant extract of the order dated 1881997 is reproduced below:  "Subject: SAS Examination.
The matter with regard to the extension of the govt. instructions regarding SAS Examination to the Board employees was under consideration of this office.
After careful consideration it has now been decided that the employees of the Board who want to appear in the SAS examination may be allowed to do so on the specific condition that the period spent by them in connection with the examination will not be treated as duty.
Furthermore they would have no claim for promotion to the post of Sr. Auditor/S.O.
(W) in the Punjab Housing Development Board on the basis of their having qualified the SAS examination.
3.
These instructions may please be brought to the notice of all employees working under you for their information.
Sd/- (J.S.
Bath) Administrative Officer, for Housing Commissioner."
6.
On 451989, the Housing Commissioner circulated the decision of the Board that the Assistants (Accounts) will be considered for promotion only when they qualify the SAS examination and that Section Officers who had been promoted provisionally subject to qualifying departmental test will also be required to qualify the test or SAS examination for grant of regular pay scale.
The relevant extract of the order dated 451989 reads ads under:  "Subject: Promotion to the post of Section Officer from the post of Assistant (Accounts).
The matter with regard to the Departmental Examination of Section Officers who were promoted provisionally subject to qualifying departmental test has been under consideration.
It has now been decided that as provided in draft service regulations, the Jr Accountants (now designated as Assistant (Accounts) of the Board will be considered for promotion to the post of Section Officer only when they qualify the State SAS Examination regularly held by the State Finance Department.
2.
Those Section Officers who were promoted provisionally subject to qualifying departmental test in the scale of Rs. 700-1200 are also required to qualify the test of SAS Examination for placing them in the regular scale.
These instructions may please be brought to the notice of all concerned working under you for their information.
(RK Tandon), Administrative Officer for Housing Commissioner."
7.
On 521993, the Housing Commissioner circulated the decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on 28101992.
The same reads as under: "PUNJAB HOUSING DEVELOPMENT BOARD CHANDIGARH.
(Administrative Branch) To All the heads of the office of the Board.
No.PHB-Admn-AS-7-93/246/2597-43 Subject: Regarding promotion to the post of Section Officer (Works) from the post of Senior Assistant (Accounts).
In the meeting of the personnel Committee held on 28101992 it has been decided that for promotion to the post of Section Officer (Works), it is essential for every Senior Assistant (Accounts) to pass either the SAS examination or the equivalent departmental examination conducted by the Board.
It has also been decided by the personnel Committee that the Senior Assistants who have already been promoted to the post of Section Officer (Works) without passing any examination and in case the condition is imposed to pass the examination in their promotion orders, they will also have to pass this examination.
The decision of the personnel Committee has been approved in the meeting of the Board of Directors vide resolution No. 10414 held on 23.12.1992.
It is, therefore, requested that the above decision of the personnel Committee which has been approved by the Board of Directors, be brought to the notice of all the officials working under you.
Sd/-Supdt.
(Admn-2) for Housing Development Commissioner."
8.
Vide letter No. PHB-Admn.As-7/240-93/8375-8425 dated 3131993, the Housing Development Commissioner circulated the syllabus once again in view of the impending departmental examination.
The relevant extract of this letter is reproduced below:  To  All the Heads of the office of the Board  No. PHB-Admn.AS-7/240-93/8375-8425 Dated 3131993.
Subject: Departmental examination for the post of Section Officer (Works).
This is to inform you that the departmental examination for promotion to the post of Section Officer (Works) from amongst the Senior Assistant (Accounts)/Senior Assistants working in the Punjab Housing Development Board is going to be held in the third or fourth week of April, 1993.
It is also made clear here that the Senior Assistant (Accounts)/Senior Assistants of the Housing Development and Urban Development Department Punjab who are on deputation with the Board can also sit in the aforesaid examination.
The officials who have passed BA with Economics as one of the subject and BCom.
and have minimum experience of three years as Senior Assistants are eligible to appear in the aforesaid departmental examination.
The syllabus for the aforesaid departmental examination is attached herewith.
The officials who have obtained the degree of BCom.
and MCom.
are exempted from appearing the following papers:  i) Advanced Accounts and Auditing.
ii) Costing The aforesaid examination will be taken in two parts and the officials can give their options to appear either in one or both the parts.
The officials who secure more than 50 per cent marks in any of the papers are exempted from appearing in the said paper in the next examination conducted in the Board.
You are, therefore, requested that this circular be brought to the notice of all the officials working under you and the option of the officials who are willing to appear in the aforesaid departmental examination be sent to this branch by 1641993 at the latest.
Receipt of this letter be acknowledged.
Superintendent (Admn-2)  for Housing Development  Commissioner."
9.
FACTS RELATING TO THE PROMOTIONS OF SENIOR AUDITORS/SECTION OFFICERS (WORKS).
Soon after the issuance of circular letter dated 1231986, the Housing Commissioner of the Board issued order dated 30.4.1986 promoting Sh. Sohan Singh and Sh. Charanjit Singh as Senior Auditors.
However, as neither of them had passed the departmental examination, their promotions were described as provisional and were made subject to the passing of departmental examination with a further rider that they will be reverted in case they fail to qualify the examination.
After about 7 years of their promotion, Sh. Sohan Singh and Sh. Charanjit Singh filed C.W.P.
No. 14431 of 1993 but failed to convince the Court that a mandamus be issued directing the respondents to treat their promotion as regular.
Some of the observations made in the order dated 581994 passed by a Division Bench while dismissing C.W.P.
No. 14431 of 1993 are reproduced below:  "The petitioners were promoted as Senior Auditors vide order dated April 30, 1986 on provisional basis subject to qualifying the departmental examination of the prescribed standard.
It is the case of the petitioners that till November 1993, no departmental examination was held by the respondent and, therefore, the question of petitioners appearing in any such examination did not arise.
Now the point put forth is that since the petitioners have worked on the promotional posts almost for eight years and are still continuing on the posts, they should be deemed to have passed the examination or in other words, the condition of qualifying the departmental examination should be deemed to have been relaxed.
In support of his argument, learned counsel for the petitioner cited BN Saxena v. New Delhi Municipal Committee and others, 1990(2) RSJ 512 and Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development, 1990(1) RSJ 255 to contend that if a person when initially appointed lacked some qualifications and gains sufficient experience on the post, then his services cannot be terminated on the ground that he lacked some qualifications.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The petitioners were promoted provisionally specifically on the condition that they will have to qualify the departmental examination.
We are told that according to the Board's Executive Order, three chances are given to clear the departmental examination.
Petitioners did not appear in the departmental examination held in November, 1993.
Petitioners cannot be treated to have been regularly promoted till they pass this departmental examination.
The authorities cited by learned counsel for the petitioners have no relevance to the point in issue.
In those cases, there was no such condition imposed as in the present case when the petitioners in those cases were appointed.
Consequently, we find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed."
10.
By an order dated 1121988, some persons who had passed SAS Examination conducted by the Finance Department but were junior to one or the other petitioners were promoted as Section Officers.
That order has been challenged in C.W.P.
Nos. 8639 of 1938 and 326 of 1989 which are said to be still pending.
By another order dated 7.12.1992, five persons, two of whom had passed Intermediate examination conducted by ICWA and the remaining three had passed SAS examination conducted by the Finance Department, were promoted as Section Officers (Works).
On 30.11.1993, Sh. Rajinder Kumar Bansal and Sh. Amit Garg, Senior Assistants (Accounts) who are junior to the petitioners in that cadre, were promoted as Section Officers (Works).
The facts relating to SAS examination/departmental examinations held after the ad hoc promotion of the petitioners on the posts of Section Officers (Works).
(i) SAS examination was conducted by Finance Department in July, 1993.
(ii) Departmental Examination was conducted by the Board in November, 1993.
(iii) SAS examination was conducted by the Finance Department in December, 1993.
(iv) Departmental examination was conducted by the Board in June and August, 1994.
(v) SAS examination was conducted by the Finance Department in June/July, 1994.
11.
Vide office circular letter No. PHB-Admn.
AS-5-93/17348-17434 dated 1781993, the Board declared that the departmental examination will be held for Senior Assistant (Accounts)/Senior Assistants in October, 1993.
This was postponed to November, 1993 and then to January, 1994 (paper Part-II).
Vide letter No. PHB-Admn.AS-5/93/23952-99 dated 29101993, the Board circulated the schedule of 3 years for holding examinations in November, 1993 and January 1994, May 1994 and July 1994, November 1994 and January 1995, May 1995 and July 1995, November 1995 and January 1996 and July, 1996.
Vide circular letters dated 1041994, 10.5.1995 and 2051995, the Board twice postponed the departmental examination (Part-II) and ultimately cancelled it with the direction that the candidate should appear in SAS examination (Part-II) to be held by the Finance Department.
12.
In the first departmental examination held by the Board in November, 1993, 14 officials appeared but all of them failed.
In the second departmental examination (Part-I) held in June, 1994 and (Part-II) held in August, 1994, 8 persons qualified.
13.
The stage is now set for considering the contentions urged by the learned counsel for the parties.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram invited my attention to the averments made in para 10 of C.W.P.
No. 78 of 1995 and argued that the order dated 22121994 reverting the petitioners to the posts of Senior Assistants (Accounts) be declared arbitrary, capricious and discriminatory because the Board cannot revert the petitioners before the exiry of 3 years' period counted from the date of their promotion within which they are entitled to get 6 chances to clear the departmental examination.
Learned counsel laid emphasis on the fact that the Board could not organise six dapartmental examinations and submitted that the petitioners cannot be made to suffer due to fault of the Board.
Shri PS Patwalia vehemently controverted the submission made on behalf of the petitioners that the Board had decided to give 6 chances to the employees for the purpose of clearing the departmental examination.
According to Shri Patwalia, there does not exist any policy decision of the Board to give 6 opportunities to an employee to clear the departmental examination and, therefore, the action of the competent authority to revert the petitioners keeping in view their failure to pass the departmental/SAS examination cannot be declared illegal, arbitrary or unconstitutional.
Shri Bajwa supported the argument of Shri Patwalia and pleaded for the dismissal of the writ petition on the ground that the petitioners have no right to hold the posts of Section Officers (Works).
14.
A careful reading of the pleadings of the parties shows that the assertion made by the petitioners about the Board's decision to give 6 chances to each employee to clear the departmental examination in two parts has been specifically controverted by the respondents No1 and 2.
In para 1 of the preliminary objections and para 10 of the main written statement filed in C.W.P.
No. 78 of 1995, these respondents have categorically and unequivocally averred that the petitioners are guilty of having made false statement in para 10 of the writ petition.
They have pleaded that the Board never decided to give 6 chances to the employees to clear the examination.
In para 3 of the preliminary objections, it has also been averred that the petitioners did not appear in the SAS examinations and the departmental examinations conducted in July, 1993, December 1993, June and July 1994.
In para 4 of the main written statement, the respondents No. 1 and 2 have stated that the first chance came in the way of the petitioners in July 1993, when the SAS examination was conducted by the Finance Department, the second chance came to them in November, 1993, when the Board conducted SAS examination.
Similar examinations were conducted by the Board and the Finance Department in December 1993, June, July and August, 1994.
However, for the reasons best known to them, the petitioners did not appear in any of these examinations.
The petitioners have neither controverted the clear and unequivocal assertions made in the written statement of the respondents No. 1 and 2 nor have they placed any document on the record to substantiate their plea that the Board had taken a policy decision to give 6 chances to every employee to pass the departmental examination.
Rather, the perusal of the record produced by Shri Patwalia shows that the recommendation made by the committee for giving 6 chances to the employees to clear the departmental examination was not approved by the Board.
Therefore, I am unable to accept the contention of Shri Rajiv Atma Ram that the action of the Board to revert the petitioners from the posts of Section Officers (Works) should be declared arbitrary.
15.
I also do not find any merit in the contention of Shri Atma Ram that the petitioners should have been allowed 3 chances to appear in the departmental examination.
A bare reading of the orders dated 1231986, 1881987, 451989 and 521993, the relevant extracts of which have been reproduced hereinabove, shows that the departmental examination to be conducted by the Board and the SAS examination were not exclusive of each others.
In fact, a conjoint reading of the various orders shows that the employees were given option to clear the departmental examination or the SAS examination.
In other words, an employee who cleared the SAS examination was not required to pass the departmental examination.
Likewise, the employee who cleared the departmental examination was not required to pass the SAS examination and by clearing either of the examinations, the employee concerned became eligible to be considered for regular promotion.
In view of this, the petitioners, who failed to clear the deparmental examination/SAS examination by non-appearance in 3 chances which were available to them, lost their right to hold the posts of Section Oficers (Works).
The non-appearannce of the petitiones to appear in the SAS examination conducted by the Finance Department and the departmental examinations conducted by the Board will have to be treated as equivalent to their failure to pass the examination.
Therefore, I do not find any illegality in the order dated 22121994.
16.
Another facet of the petitioners' challenge to the order of reversion is their plea of discrimination.
In para 24-A of the writ petition, it has been averred that S/Sh.
RK Jaidka, Amarjit Singh and Amarjit Singh-II have passed the departmental examination and are eligible to be promoted as Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers but they have been made to await posting orders even though S/Sh.
KK Jain, SK Gandha, NS Shembi, Piara Lal etc. are being continued on such posts despite their failure to pass the examination but similar treatment has not been accorded to the petitioners.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 have averred that the issue of promotion of S/Sh.
RK Jaidka, Amarjit Singh-I and Amarjit Singh-II is pending consideration.
In my opinion, the petitioners cannot succeed in their plea of discrimination on the ground that some of the persons selected for appointment/promotion as Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers are being made to await posting while others who have not passed departmental examination are being continued on the higher posts.
Although, the respondents have pleaded that this issue is under consideration, in my opinion the Board's failure to give posting to Shri RK Jaidka etc. cannot in any manner be justified.
However, on the basis of the one alleged illegality committed by the Board, no writ can be issued directing the Board to allow the petitioners to hold the posts of Section Officers (Works) in spite of the fact that the candidates who cleared the examination are awaiting posting.
The law has never recognised the Court's right to issue a writ to a public authority to pass an illegal order merely because in Come other cases such an order has been passed.
Likewise, the Court cannot invalidate or quash an order which is otherwise legal and proper merely because in some other case similar order has not been passed.
17.
Applying the above-mentioned principle to the facts of this case, I have no hesitation to hold that the petitioners do not have the right to be continued on the posts of Section Officers (Works) and no writ deserves to be issued directing the Board to frustrate the right of those (i.e. the non- official respondents) who have become entitled to be promoted as Section Officers, in view of the fact that they have cleared the SAS/departmental examinations.
18.
In view of the above conclusion, C.W.P.
No. 78 of 1995 deserves to be dismissed and I order accordingly.
However, it is made clear that if during the pendency of the writ petition any of the petitioners has cleared the SAS examination/departmental examination, then instead of reverting him the respondent-Board should adjust him against the available vacant post of Section Officer (Works) having regard to the seniority and suitability of such person.
19.
The challenge to the order dated 791994 by which the Board has directed that the employees promoted on provisional/ad hoc basis shall earn annual increment only after clearing the departmental/SAS examination is founded on the argument that note 4 of Rule 49 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, to which reference has been made in the impugned order, cannot be applied to the petitioners.
In my opinion, there is no merit in the petitioners' challenge to the order dated 791994.
What the Board has done by the impugned order is to declare that the persons promoted on provisional/ad hoc basis will not get increments till they pass the prescribed departmental examination.
No doubt, note 4 appended to Rule 49 does not, in strict terms, apply to the case of provisional/ad hoc appointees but the ratio of the government's decision can certainly be applied by the Board for grant of increments to its employees from the date of passing of the examination.
20.
I am of the opinion that the Board can lay down the requirement of passing of departmental examination/SAS examination a condition precedent for grant of annual increment to an employee because successful clearance of the departmental examination adds to the efficiency of the employee.
21.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are dismissed subject to the direction that if any of the petitioners has passed the departmental examination during the pendency of the writ petitions, then he shall be considered for regular promotion against the post, if any, available in accordance with the seniority and shall not be reverted if vacant post of Section Officer (Works) is available.
Petitions dismissed.