HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Panchayat Secretary on 981957.
The Panchayat Samities were thereafter taken over by the State of Haryana and the petitioner's services were also provincialised as a Panchayat Secretary.
The petitioner retired from service on 18101975 vide Annexure P-1 after attaining the age of 55 years.
It is the admitted position that after provincialisation of the petitioner's service, the respondent-State of Haryana issued instructions on 22111991, Annexure P-2, which provided that pension was to be made payable to certain categories of employees who had been absorbed in government service.
As there was some confusion with regard to the interpretation of these instructions, the matter came to this Court in a number of writ petitions and the same were allowed in favour of the employees of District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samities.
The petitioner also submitted a representation Annexure P-3 to the petition praying that he too be granted pension in the light of the government's policy decision dated 22111991.
This representation was rejected vide order dated 611997, Annexure P-5 to the petition, on the ground that the petitioner had never been absorbed in government service and, as such, the government instructions dated 22111991 (Annexure P-2) were not applicable to his case.
Aggrieved thereby the petitioner has filed the present petition.
2.
In the written statement filed, in response to the notice of motion, the respondents in addition to what has been mentioned in the impugned order Annexure P-5, have placed reliance on Annexure R-I, dated 221972, in which it has been provided that a Panchayat Secretary, who was to be considered for absorption in government service as a Gram Sachiv, was required to fulfil two conditions; first that he had to be Matriculate or a person having not less than seven years experience as Panchayat Secretary and, second, he should not be more than 45 years of age on 131971.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not fulfil the second qualification as he was more than 45 years of age as on 131971.
3.
Mr. Maharaj Kumar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the only reason for denying the petitioner's claim to absorption in Government Service as a Gram Sachiv, was that he had not been more than 45 years of age on 131971, but has argued that this condition was applicable only to such employees who were joining as Gram Sachivs for the first time.
He has also argued in the alternative that in paragraph 2 itself, which laid down the two conditions aforesaid, a relaxation clause with regard to these conditions has also been provided and the State Government was, therefore, required to consider this aspect of the matter as well, before passing the order against the petitioner.
4.
As against this, Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State, has argued that the condition in paragraph 2 of Annexure R-1 with regard to the educational qualification, experience and age pertained specifically to the cases such as the petitioner's for absorption in government service as Gram Sachiv and, as such, the petitioner could not claim a right to absorption unless he fulfilled the condition laid down in Annexure R-1 and in that eventuality the order Annexure P-5 was fully justified in law.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
Paragraph 2 of Annexure R-1 is reproduced below :  "The existing Gram Sevaks will become Gram Sachiv on the re-designation of their posts as such without any effect on their seniority, pay etc. As regards the appointment of new Gram Sachivs, it has been decided that the Deputy Commissioners shall be the appointing authority for the Gram Panchayat Sachivs in his district, further, you may appoint the Sachiv on ad hoc basis such of the Gram Panchayat Secretaries as are suitable and fulfil the following conditions :-  (a) Matriculates or persons having not less than seven years experience as Panchayat Secretary; (b) Not more than 45 years in age on 131971.
If necessary these qualifications may be relaxed at the time of selection in individual cases, for which the approval of Govt. should be obtained.
The ad hoc appointment of such Gram Sachivs should be made on the recommendation of a screening or selection committee in each district which should consist of :-  (a) Deputy Commissioner as Chairman; (b) Deputy Director of Panchayats of the district; (c) Block Development and Panchayat Officer of the Block for the Panchayat Secretaries, working under him".
6.
It will be seen from a mere reading of paragraph 2 that it specifically provides that such Gram Panchayat Secretaries, as are suitable and fulfil the two conditions laid down therein, may be appointed Gram Sachivs on ad hoc basis by a selection committee consisting of the Deputy Commissioner as Chairman, Deputy Director of the Panchayats and the Block Development and Panchayat Officer.
It is apparent, therefore, that the two conditions aforesaid, pertained to the case of absorption in service.
The petitioner was admittedly more than 45 years of age on 131971 and could not, therefore, as a matter of right, claim absorption.
I am, however, of the opinion that the State Government was in duty bound to consider the petitioner's case in the light of the relaxation clause given in paragraph 2 itself, and this aspect has not received consideration at the hands of the respondent-State while making the order Annexure P-5.
It bears specific notice that virtually all the employees of the District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samitis have been granted pension in terms of the Government instructions dated 22111991, Annexure P-2 to the petition, as interpreted by this Court in various judgments from time to time; one such judgment being Annexure P-6 to the present petition.
The petitioner, who retired from service in the year 1975 at the age of 55 years, is almost 80 years of age now and has come to this court for the second time to secure a pension and has also been representing his case for the last six years.
I do realise the limitations placed on this Court in the exercise of the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, as the relaxation clause must be given consideration if at all, by the competent authority and not by this Court, but I am clearly of the view that the petitioner's case must be considered sympathetically; the more so (as already pointed out above) that almost all the employees of institutions such as District Boards/Zila Parishads/Panchayat Samities have been granted pensions for the services they have put in before their absorption into government service.
7.
This petition is accordingly allowed; the order dated 611997, Annexure P-5, is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioner in the light of the observations made above, within a period of two months from the date that a certified copy of this order is made available to them.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.