GD Sharma, J In this 2nd appeal substantial question of law which has been formulated is whether the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is ousted when the dispute revolves around the termination of the services of an employee of a Co-operative Bank by virtue of the provisions of Sec. 63 of the Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (hereinafter to be referred as Act).
The learned counsel for the respondents has raised a preliminary objection for the maintainability of this appeal by asserting that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is ousted by virtue of SRO 233 dated 871988.
The said rule according to him is the statutory rule framed by the Govt. by virtue of the provisions of Sec. 124(2) of the Act.
2.
In order to buttress his arguments, the learned counsel has referred to Rule (2) which provides that "they shall be applicable to all societies which are at present functioning or which will be created."
3.
Rule 24 deals with service record.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 24 envisages that when an employee is transferred to another Society, his SErvice Book shall be sent to that Society to which the employee is transferred and not made over to him nor shall it be given to him when proceeding on leave.
There is an explanation appended to this rule which states that the term "other societies" means Co-operative Societies, Co-operative Industrial Societies, Co-operative Bank and the like.
Under Rule 19 various punishments are provided which can be imposed on an employee of a Co-operative Society which includes termination of services and Rule 21 lays down that an appeal against such an order imposing penalty shall lie before the Joint Registrar or the Registrar within 30 days from the date of the passing of the order.
Thus under Rule 21 the appeal in this case could lie before the Joint Registrar or the Registrar within the period specified therein and when the suit was filed before the Civil Court, it had no jurisdiction.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has controverted these arguments by stating that Co-operative Bank is a distinct entity and cannot be termed as a co-operative society.
He has derived support to his arguments from sub-rule (o) of Rule 2 of the said rules, wherein word "society" has been defined which means Co-operative District Wholestore Society/Co-operative Marketing Society/Co-operative Sale and Supply Society/Co-operative Multipurpose Societies/Co-operative Service Society.
The counsel has contended that these rules are applicable to only societies which have been mentioned in sub-rule (o) of Rule 2 and as the Co-operative Bank has not figured anywhere so the rules have no application to govern the service conditions of the employees.
Similarly, the note appended to Rule 24 has application to the maintenance of service record of the transferred employees and an employee of Co-operative Society can avail himself the benefit of getting the service record maintained in terms of that rule, but his service conditions are governed by the Citizens Co-operative Bank Ltd Employees Services Rules of 1981.
It is lastly contended that Co-operative Bank is a creature of the Co- operative Banks Act and it is also registered under the same Act.
5.
After considering the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, it has to be seen at the threshold as to what is legal significance of the rules made under SRO 233 as well as the Citizens Co-operative Bank Ltd Employees Services Rules of 1981.
Rules under SRO 233 are the outcome of delegated legislation and were framed on July 8, 1988 whereas the rules which are called "Citizens Co-operative Bank Ltd Employees Services Rules of 1981" do not have their source of any delegated legislation.
In this view of the matter, rules framed under SRO 233 of 1988 which are later in time have preference over the former.
Now the question which remains is whether a Co-operative Bank is a Co- operative Society or not and in support of the contention that it is a creature of Co-operative Bank Act and registered under the said Act no law has been produced.
Rather, the Citizens Co-operative Bank Ltd Employees Services Rules of 1981 incorporate that those rules were to be registered with the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, J and K. It has been vehemently contended by the counsel for respondents that the bank is a Co-operative Society and registered with the Registrar of Co-operative Societies.
This contention finds support from Rule 24 and the note appended thereunder which shows that its employees are transferable to other co-operative societies and vice-versa.
The explanation to the term "other societies" have been given in the note which includes Co-operative Society, Co-operative Industrial Co- operative Societies, Co-operative Bank and the like.
Under Section 2, sub- clause (e) of the J and K. Act, "the Co-operative Society" has been defined which means a society registered or deemed to be registered under that Act.
As the Bank on facts is found to be registered under the Act, so it is a Co- operative Society.
In the definition part of Rule 2 of the said rules (made under SRO 233) under clause (o) the word "Society" has been defined which does not include Co-operative Bank but this omission has not to be read in isolation, but in conjunction to the import of other rules framed under the said SRO.
Rule 1 envisages that the rules apply to all the societies and Co- operative Bank is also admittedly a society.
Rule 24 along with note appended thereunder lends support to his view that it is as society.
While interpreting the provisions of law it has to be borne in mind that provisions are in harmony and supplement each other.
They are not deemed to be contradicting each other and creating confusion and chaos.
6.
From the above said discussion, it can thus be safely stated that the service conditions of the employees of the respondent-Bank are governed by the rules framed under SRO 233 and these rules provide the forum where the appeal or review lies.
The Civil Court has no jurisdiction either to hear the appeal or review and in this view of the matter, it is held that the view taken by the learned District Judge that Civil Courts have no jurisdiction is sound in law.
There is found no force in this appeal which the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.