Sat Pal, J - These two appeals are being disposed of by a common judgment as both the appeals are directed against the same judgment dated 6.10.1986 passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court.
By this judgment the learned Single Judge accepted the writ petition filed by the writ petitioners and quashed the impugned orders dated 631986 (copy Annexure P16 with the writ petition) and order dated 2941986 (copy Annexure P-17/A) by which the representations filed by the writ petitioners were rejected and the seniority of Assistant Town Planners from Sr. No. 1 to 35 was made final.
Against the aforesaid judgment passed by the learned Single Judge, L.P.A. No. 858 of 1986 has been filed by S/Sh.
SK Mahindru, Jit Kumar Gupta, JP Singh and DR Goyal who were the private respondents in the writ petition.
LPA No. 71 of 1987 has been filed by the State of Punjab against the said judgment.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the appointment to the post of Assistant Town Planners in the Town and Country Planning Department Punjab Government is governed by Punjab Town Planners (State Service Class I) Rule, 1972 (in short referred to as `the Rules').
Under Rule 8 of the Rules, 20% of the vacancies are filled up by promotion from amongst the Planning Assistants who have an experience of working as Planning Assistants for a minimum period of three years and remaining 80% of the vacancies are filled up by direct recruitment.
As per Appendix A of the Rules, there are total 21 posts of Assistant Town Planner.
Thus in terms of Rule 8, four posts out of these 21 posts can be filled by promotion from amongst the Planning Assistants and the remaining 17 posts are to be filled by direct appointment.
In June, 1970 the said four posts meant for the departmental promotees were manned by S/Sh.
VK Sachdeva, JS Jhas, VS Puri and KL Dham.
Sh. VK Sachdeva was promoted as Divisional Town Planner (in short DTP) on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
31.12.1971.
Similarly Sh. JS Jhas and Sh. VS Puri were promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
8th October, 1972.
As per para 9 of the written statement filed on behalf of the State Government in the writ petition, Sh. JS Jhas retired as ad hoc DTP on 31.8.1977 and Sh. VS Puri was still working as DTP on ad hoc basis on the date of filing of the written statement i.e. 1681986.
Sh. VK Sachdeva became regular as DTP on 18101975.
Vide Annexure R.3 filed with the written statement of the State Government, two writ petitioners namely Sh. Sudershan Pal and Sh. Baldev Parsad Kessar were promoted as Assistant Town Planner purely on ad hoc basis for a period of 6 months or till the recommendees of the Public Service Commission (direct recruits) join in the Town and Country Planning.
It is not disputed that the said two officials continued holding the post of Assistant Town Planner on ad hoc basis till they were regularised vide order dated 891983 and vide order dated 2941985, their regularisation took place w.e.f.
12.3.1974 and 341974.
Similarly the third writ petitioner Sh. RS Garcha, who is reported to have left the department was initially promoted as Assistant Town Planner on ad hoc basis and he continued to hold the post on ad hoc basis till he was regularised.
3.
All the appellants, who were private respondents in the writ petition were appointed on 631974 whereas all the writ petitioners who were appointed as Assistant Town Planner prior to 631974 though on ad hoc basis and they were made regular w.e.f.
the dates which were subsequent to 6th March, 1974.
Since the writ petitioners were made regular from the date/dates which were subsequent to 631974, the date on which the appellants were appointed as Assistant Town Planner as direct recruits, all the writ petitioners were shown junior to the appellants.
Thereafter, the writ petitioners filed representation dated 8th August, 1985, wherein they claimed that since they were appointed as Assistant Town Planner prior to 631974, they should be shown senior to the private respondents (appellants herein).
Their representations were, however, rejected by the State Government vide memo dated 631986 and 29486 copies of which have been annexed as Annexures P-16 and P-17/A with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the rejection of their representations, the writ petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1989 of 1990, which was allowed by the learned Single Judge vide his judgment dated 6.10.1986, which has been challenged in the present appeals.
4.
Relying on a judgment of the Supreme Court in PS Mahal v. Union of India, 1984(2) S.L.R.
498, the learned Single Judge held that since the vacancies in the promotees' quota which had become available after the promotion of three Assistant Town Planners as DTP prior to the appointment of the private respondents (i.e. 631974), the writ petitioners shall be deemed to have been promoted against these three vacancies, though in their promotion orders it was stated that they had been promoted against the quota of direct recruits.
5.
Mr. Balram Gupta, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants drew our attention to Note-I, under Rule 10 of the Rules and submitted that Rule 10 is not applicable to a member appointed on purely provisional basis, pending his approval by the Commission.
He, therefore, contended that since the writ petitioners were initially appointed as Assistant Town Planner, on ad hoc basis, they could not be given seniority in the cadre of Assistant Town Planner from the date of their ad hoc appointment and they could be given seniority only from the date when they were appointed as Assistant Town Planner on regular basis which was admittedly subsequent to the date of appointment of the appellants (i.e. 6th March, 1974).
The learned counsel further submitted that even the order of promotion dated 731972 (copy of which is Annexure R-3 with the written statement) shows that the writ petitioners were promoted purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the recommendees of the Public Service Commission join in the Town and Country Planning Department, whichever is earlier.
He, however, admitted that the writ petitioners continued to hold the post of Assistant Town Planner on ad hoc basis till they were appointed on regular basis.
6.
The learned counsel further submitted that from the records, it is clear that S/Sh.
VK Sachdeva, JS Jhas and VS Puri, who were holding the post of Assistant Town Planner against the promotees quota, were promoted as DTP purely on ad hoc basis and as admitted in Para 19 of the written statement filed on behalf of the State Government, till 631974 they were holding the post of DTP on ad hoc basis when the appellants were appointed against direct quota.
He, therefore, contended that the learned Single Judge was not correct in holding that three posts of Assistant Town Planners held by these three officials had become available prior to 631974 when they were promoted on ad hoc basis.
The learned counsel further submitted that the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of PS Mahal (supra) was not applicable to the facts of the present case.
He submitted that in the case of PS Mahal (supra) it was found by the Supreme Court that a vacancy arose on account of the incumbent going on deputation for a reasonably long period and there was no reasonable likelihood of the person promoted to fill such vacancy having to revert.
He submitted that in the facts of that case it was noticed that 20 to 25% of the Executive Engineers were continuously on deputation and even if one Executive Engineer came back on termination of his deputation, another was to be sent in his place.
7.
The learned counsel for the State reiterated the submissions made by Mr. Balram Gupta.
8.
Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the private respondents referred to Paras 18 and 19 of the written statement filed on behalf of the State in the writ petition and submitted that from these paragraphs, it is evident that S/Sh.
JS Jhas and VS Puri (incumbents on promotee quota) were promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
8.10.1972 and till 1681986 when the written statement was filed, Sh. VS Puri was still working as DTP on ad hoc basis and Sh. JS Jhas had even retired as ad hoc DTP on 31.8.1977.
He submitted that from the written statement, it was further evident that Sh. VK Sachdeva, who was also a promotee, was promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
31.12.1971 and continued to hold this post on ad hoc basis till 18101975 when he became regular.
He, therefore, submitted that from these facts, it is clear that the posts of Assistant Town Planner held by these officers had become vacant for a reasonably long period and thus these posts were subject to the quota rule in terms of the law laid down by the Apex Court in the case of PS Mahal.
9.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
10.
Under Rule 8 of the Rules governing the appointment to the post of Assistant Town Planner, 80% of the vacancies are to be filled by direct appointment and remaining 20% of the vacancies by promotion from amongst the Planning Assistants who have an experience of working as Planning Assistants for a minimum period of three years.
It is the admitted case of the parties that as per Appendix A of the Rules, there are total 21 posts of Assistant Town Planner and thus four posts can be filled by promotion from amongst the Planning Assistants.
From the records, we find that in the month of June, 1970, four posts of Assistant Town Planner meant for promotees were held by S/Sh.
BK Sachdeva, JS Jhas, VS Puri and KL Dham.
It is also an admitted fact that Sh. VK Sachdeva was promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
31.12.1971 and continued to hold this post till 18101975 when he was made regular as DTP From the written statement filed on behalf of the State in the writ petition, we further find that S/Sh.
JS Jhas and VS Puri were promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
8.10.1972 and Sh. JS Jhas retired as ad hoc DTP on 31.8.77 and Sh. VS Puri was still working as DTP on ad hoc basis on 1681986 when written statement was filed.
From these facts, it is abundantly clear that though S/Sh.
VK Sachdeva, JS Jhas and VS Puri were promoted as DTP on ad hoc basis but they continued to hold these higher posts on ad hoc basis for a period ranging from four years to 14 years.
From these facts, the only conclusion which can be drawn is that the vacancies caused on account of promotion of these three officers as DTP though on ad hoc basis will have to be treated as regular vacancies or vacancies available".
In the case of PS Mahal (supra) the Supreme Court held as under :-  "It is, therefore, obvious that if a vacancy arises on account of an incumbent going on leave or for training or on deputation for a short period, it would be a fortuitous or adventitious vacancy and the quota rule would not be attracted in case of such a vacancy.
But where a vacancy arises on account of the incumbent going on deputation for a reasonably long period and there is no reasonable likelihood of the persons promoted to fill such vacancy having to revert, the vacancy would be subject to the quota rule, because it would be a regular vacancy in the post of Executive Engineer and the person promoted to fill the vacancy would be an officiating Executive Engineer who would continue as such without reversion until confirmed and his promotion would, therefore, by way of recruitment to the cadre of Executive Engineers."
In the present case, as stated hereinabove, three vacancies on account of promotion of the above-mentioned three officers namely S/Sh.
VK Sachdeva, JS Jhas and VS Puri as DTP though on ad hoc basis had arisen for a reasonably long period and these persons were never reverted and as such these vacancies would be subject to the quota rule.
11.
As regards the contention of the learned counsel of the appellant that Rule 10 of the Rules shall not apply to the writ petitioners in terms of Note I under Rule 10, we are of the opinion that this contention is without any basis as it was not disputed by the learned counsel that even the promotion of the writ petitioners on ad hoc basis was duly approved by the Commission from time to time.
We also do not find any merit in the submission made by the learned counsel of the appellants that ratio of the judgment in the case of PS Mahal (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
On the contrary, we are of the considered opinion that the present case is fully covered by the said judgment and the learned Single Judge has rightly relied on this judgment as in the case of PS Mahal (supra), a vacancy arising on account of the incumbent going on deputation was for a reasonably long period.
In the present case also, the vacancies arising on account of the promotion of S/Sh.
VK Sachdeva, JS Jhas and VS Puri as DTP, have arisen for a reasonably long period and in fact these persons were never reverted.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any infirmity or illegality in the well reasoned judgment passed by the learned Single Judge.
Accordingly both the appeals are dismissed with no orders as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.