RC Gandhi, J - The appellants are the selected candidates, who were granted provisional admission for undergoing B.Ed.
Correspondence Course by the Respondent No. 3, Director, Institute of Correspondence Education, University of Jammu.
During the training period the Respondent No. 3 under his letter No. IC/B.Ed./89/7122-29 dated 2771990 communicated to the appellants to collect the Roll Numbers from the Institute in person before 7.8.1990 and while collecting the Roll Numbers the appellants are required to produce duly attested copy of the Certificate of recognition of Sant Mela Singh Public School, Poonch (for short School) and in failure whereof the appellants will not be allowed to appear in the examination.
The appellants (writ petitioners) approached the writ course seeking to quash the Communication dated 2771990 by issuance of writ of Certiorari and further seek a writ of mandamus to permit the appellants to appear in the B.Ed.
Examination.
2.
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that the Respondent No. 3 issued a Notification inviting applications for admission to the B.Ed.
Training Course for the year 1989-90.
The appellants amongst a large number of other candidates submitted their applications on the prescribed form.
The eligibility for consideration and selection to a Seat for B.Ed.
Training Course, according to the Brochure and Prospectus of the Institute of Correspondence Education, University of Jammu for the Session 1989-90 was as under :-  "Course No. 3 Admission to the B.Ed.
Course is open to such inservice teachers as are serving in government/private recognised institutions and to the defence personnel serving in educational branch as have minimum of three years teaching experience to their credit."
For appearing in B.Ed.
Correspondence Course, a teacher must be serving in government or private recognised Institute for a minimum period of three years.
3.
The respondent No. 3 after having considered the applications of the appellants granted provisional admission providing a stipulation that the provisional admission shall be subject to the submission of the documents and the balance dues.
One of the documents to be submitted was an affidavit to declare on solemn affirmation that the experience Certificate and other documents submitted to the Institute are genuine and correct.
The appellants fulfilled this stipulated requirement also.
During the period the appellants were undergoing Training Course, the respondents in order to verify and test the genuineness and authenticity of the Certificates furnished by the appellants addressed a communication to the DEO, Poonch as to whether the School is recognised by the Government under his No. CE/90/443 dated 21st of July, 1990 informed the Respondent No. 3, University Authorities, that the School is an un-recognised Institute and the Certificates issued under the seal and signatures of the ZEO/DEO Poonch or countersigned from his office may be treated as cancelled.
Upon discovering this fact, the respondent No. 3 issued communication dated 2771990 stating that in case appellants fail to produce the requisite Certificate, they shall not be allowed to appear in the examination.
Admittedly, the appellants could not produce the Certificate and approached the writ court presenting SWP No. 630 of 1990 seeking to quash the communication dated 2771990.
4.
Upon consideration of the writ petition, the writ court permitted the appellants to take the B.Ed.
Correspondence Course Examination and made it clear that the appellants are allowed to take the examination on their own risk and responsibility subject to the result of the writ petition.
The writ petition came to be dismissed by the writ court by an order made on November 20, 1992 and while dismissing, it also directed the Vigilance Commissioner of the State to investigate into the matter and leave no stone unturned in bringing to book the persons who might be connected with the offence.
It is this order which has been called in question challenging the legality and correctness of the order under appeal.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties, gone through the memorandum of appeal, the order under appeal and other evidence on the file.
6.
It is admitted case of the parties that the School has not been recognised by the Government and the Certificate issued by the School and countersigned by the authorities of the Government is not of a recognised School, conforming to the requirement of the respondent No. 3 for making the appellants eligible for consideration and selection against the Seats for undergoing B.Ed.
Correspondence Training Course.
This fact goes to the root of the matter and questions the very eligibility of the appellants.
The Certificate issued by the School has been counter-signed by the Zonal Education Officer, making the appellants and the authorities to believe that the Certificates being issued to the appellants and presented to the University are genuine.
At the same time the Respondent No. 3 after having found that the Certificates presented to him are not genuine, he has no option but to take an action for cancellation of the admission and preventing the appellants for appearing in the examination.
7.
While dealing with this situation, it is incumbent upon us to see as to whether the action of the Respondent No. 3 against the appellants though bona fide and genuine should succeed ?
It is not in dispute by the Respondent No. 3 that the appellants were not working as Teachers in the School.
The appellants perhaps under the wrong impression that the School is recognised and working teachers in the School applied for three experience Certificates, which were issued to them by the School.
The Certificates issued by the School have been counter-signed by the Education Officer of the State and a presumption arises that the Education Officer of the State has countersigned the Certificates only after verification of the record of according recognition to the school.
It is recorded by the learned Single Judge during the course of his order under appeal that the experience Certificates issued by the School and duly countersigned by the ZEO bear different numbers of the Government Orders showing the School has been recognised by the Government but since the District Education Officer, Poonch has conveyed that the School is un-recognised and the Certificates be treated as cancelled and therefore, proceeded to record the finding that the writ petitioners before the writ court are not entitled to the relief.
8.
It is further required to be seen whether the appellants or the University authorities are blame-worthy for granting provisional admission to the appellants; the University authorities have not formally cancelled the provisional admission of the appellants but has simply issued the communication dated 2771990 asking the appellants to produce the requisite certificates of the recognised School and that too at a time when the petitioners after undergoing full training course were to collect the Roll Numbers to sit in the final examination.
We feel the Respondent No. 3, University authorities while prescribing the eligibility condition that a teacher may be serving in Government or private recognised Institute for a minimum period of three years can seek consideration for selection to the B.Ed.
Correspondence Course, should have the mechanism available before granting provisional admission to verify the correctness and authenticity of the certificate or at least a list of the Schools recognised by the Government, or a time-bound schedule should have been devised within which period the Respondents must make the provisional admission as regular and not to linger on the provisional admission stretching over whole of the Session.
9.
The University authorities have stated in their reply to the writ petition that the applications of the candidates were scrutinized by a Selection Committee and thereupon the candidates including the appellants were granted provisional admission subject to some conditions.
While the University authorities have prescribed the eligibility condition of three years' experience from a recognised Institution and for scrutiny purposes by the University authorities, they should have with them a list of the Schools recognised by the Government in the State for proper check, verification and scrutiny.
It is though bona fide but surprising that at the end of the Session the University authorities communicated to the appellants to produce the recognition certificates of the School throwing their responsibility and blame on the Appellants.
The Certificates issued to the appellants and presented to the University have been duly counter-signed by the concerned officers of the Education Department of the State, upon which the University has granted the permission.
Since the University authorities have no proper mechanism befitting the requirement for which the University is to be blamed and on the contrary this blame cannot be shifted and cast upon the appellants at the final stage of the examinations when the appellants have completed the courses.
This aspect of the matter has not been considered by the learned Single Judge, whether under such circumstances the appellants have played a fraud with the University, if at all any fraud has been played, that is a matter for investigation.
However, prima facie the authorities of the School, Officers of the Education Department who have issued and counter- signed the certificates are to be blamed for making the appellants and the University to believe the genuineness of the Certificates.
The findings recorded by the learned Single Judge to that extent need to be interfered.
10.
Learned counsel for the appellants have further submitted and sought support from the Judgment reported in AIR 1976 SC 376, wherein it is held :  "It is, therefore, manifest that once the appellant was allowed to take the examination, rightly or wrongly, then the statute which empowers the University to withdraw the candidature of the applicant has worked itself out and the applicant cannot be refused admission subsequently for any infirmity which should have been looked into before giving the applicant permission to appear."
11.
The appellants have also appeared in the examination and their results have not been declared as directed by the writ court.
It is in this context also that it is a fit case where equity finds favour with the appellants for maintaining their admission.
The Judgment of the learned Single Judge is required to be interfered on this count also.
12.
Apart from the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge that issuance of the Certificates is a clear misuse of the power which seems to have perpetuated an act of forgery has substance.
The appeal of the appellants is being allowed on the principle of equity and fair-play but still the sin committed by the School authorities by issuing such Certificates and the Officers of the Education Department by counter-signing the Certificates and also whether the appellants have procured the Certificates in connivance with the authorities is a matter of concern and needs to be investigated.
The Judgment of the learned Single Judge to the extent directing the Vigilance Commissioner of the State to investigate into the matter is maintained.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, the communication No. IC/B.Ed./89/7122-29 dated 2771990 of Respondent No. 3 is set aside.
The appeal is allowed and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is modified to the extent as observed above.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.