GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves challenge to the orders passed by the Controlling Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972-cum- Assistant Labour Commissioner, Sangrur and the Appellate Authority.
2.
In order to decide whether the impugned orders dated 2171995 and 30.7.1996 are without jurisdiction or erroneous in law, it will be useful to notice some facts.
3.
After his retirement, the respondent No. 3 Shri Rehmat Ulla applied under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act of 1972') for payment of gratuity amounting to Rs. 70,892/- along with interest by asserting that he had served the Punjab State Electricity Board for 32 years and the Board was under an obligation to pay the amount of gratuity as per his claim.
4.
The Board contested the application of the respondent No. 3 on the ground that the applicant was only entitled to death-cum-retirement gratuity under the Punjab Civil Service Rules and not the amount of gratuity claimed by him under the Act of 1972.
5.
The Controlling Authority framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the application is not maintainable in the present form, in view of objection 7 ?
OPR 2.
Whether the applicant is not entitled to any amount keeping in view the objection particularly para No. 10 ?
OPA 3.
Relief, if any.
6.
After considering the rival contentions, the Controlling Authority held that the Board has failed to prove that the Act of 1972 is not applicable to its services and, therefore, the application was maintainable.
It also held that the applicant was entitled to gratuity amount of Rs. 60,340/- and after deducting the amount already received by him, the Board was liable to pay him Rs. 27,840/- along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
7.
In the appeal filed by it, the petitioner Board reiterated its objection to the maintainability of the application filed by the respondent No. 3.
While rejecting this objection on the ground that in similar cases the objection to the maintainability of the application had already been decided against the Board, the Appellate Authority reduced the quantum of gratuity payable to respondent No. 3 and directed that the Board should pay Rs. 17,500/- instead of Rs. 27,840/-.
8.
Shri JPS Sandhu, learned counsel for the petitioner repeated the objection to the maintainability of the application filed by respondent No. 3 under the Act of 1972.
He argued that the Board has adopted the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules and a person who is governed by those rules is not entitled to receive gratuity under the Act of 1972.
He relied on the decision of this court in Municipal Committee, Tohana v. The Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and others, 1994(2) SCT 732.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the submission of Shri Sandhu but are unable to agree with him that the Act of 1972 is not applicable to the Board's services.
The Board has been constituted under Section 5 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 which has been enacted with a view to rationalise the production and supply of electricity and for taking measures conducive to electrical development.
Section 3 of this Act imposes a duty on the Central Government to constitute the Central Electricity Authority which is required to carry out the functions and perform the duties enumerated in Section 3(1)(i).
Section 5 which falls under Chapter III provides for the constitution of the State Electricity Boards.
Chapters IV and V contain provisions relating to powers and duties of the State Electricity Board and General Companies.
Section 78(1) empowers the State Government to make rules to give effect to the provisions of the Act of 1948.
Sub-section (2) of Section 78 contains the details of particular matters with reference to which rule making power can be exercised by the Government.
Some of these relate to the powers of the Chairman and the term of office of the Chairman and other members of the Board, the conditions under which they shall be eligible for re-appointment, their remuneration, allowances and other conditions of service, the terms and conditions of appointment of members of State Electricity Consultative Councils and Local Advisory Committees etc. etc.
Section 78-A gives powers to the State Government to give directions on questions of policy and while discharging its functions, the Board shall be guided by such directions.
The dispute, if any, between the Board and the State Government whether a particular question is or is not a question of policy has to be referred to the Central Electricity Authority and the decision of the Authority is final qua the parties.
Section 79 empowers the Board to make regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act of 1948 and the rules made by the State Government.
These regulations relate to the duties of officers and other employees of the Board, their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service.
Clause (k) of Section 79 confers residuary power upon the Board to make regulations on any matter arising out of the Board's functioning under the Act.
Section 79-A requires that every rule made by the State Government under Section 78 and every regulation made by the Board under Section 79 shall be laid before the State Legislature.
10.
This survey of statutory provisions shows that the Electricity Board is an independent statutory autonomous body constituted under the Act of 1948.
It is required to carry out its functions and exercise various powers conferred upon it in accordance with the provisions contained in the Act of 1948.
No doubt, the State Government is vested with the powers to constitute the Board and it exercises substantial control over the working of the Board in the matters like the appointment of Chairman and its members, removal or suspension of members, constitution of the State Electricity Council, to declare certain transactions as void, making of the rules under Section 78 and giving of directions under Section 78-A, the Board can at the best be treated as an agency/instrumentality of the State for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution However, it cannot be treated as a department of the Government or a part thereof.
11.
The stage is now set to decide whether the application filed by the respondent No. 3 for payment of gratuity under the Act of 1972 was maintainable or not and whether the impugned orders suffer from any jurisdictional or legal error and on that account they are liable to be quashed.
12.
Before we deal with the argument of Sh. Sandhu on the maintainability of the application filed by the respondent No. 3, it will be useful to notice the relevant provisions of the Act of 1972 which is a social security legislation.
Section 2(e) defines the term `employee' and Section 2(f) defines the term `employer'.
Section 3 provides for appointment of Controlling Authority.
Section 4 requires the payment of gratuity to an employee on termination of his employment after he has served continuously for a period of not less than five years.
Section 7 lays down the procedure for determination of the amount of gratuity.
Section 14 gives overriding effect to the provisions of the Act of 1972.
For the purpose of this order, Sections 2(e), (f) and Section 14 are reproduced below :  "2.
DEFINITIONS :- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - xx xx xx (e) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied (and whether or not such person is employed in a managerial or administrative capacity, but does not include any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity).
(f) "employer" means, in relation to any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, planation, port, railway company or shop - (i) belonging to, or under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, a person or authority appointed by the appropriate Government for the supervision and control of employees, or where no person or  authority has been so appointed, the head of the Ministry of Department concerned,  (ii) belonging to, or under the control of, any local authority, the person appointed by such authority for the supervision and control of employees or where no person has been so appointed, the chief executive officer of the local authority.
(iii) in any other case, the person, who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, and where the said affairs are entrusted to any other person; whether called a manager, managing director or by any other name, such person; xx xx xx  14.
Act to override other enactments, etc. - The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument or contract having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act."
13.
The argument of Shri Sandhu is that being an employee of the Board, respondent No. 3 falls in the exclusion clause of the definition of employee and, therefore, the provisions of Gratuity Act could not have been invoked by him.
A careful reading of the definition of employee shows that it takes within its fold any person employed on wages in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work.
However, the following two categories of persons are not covered by the definition of the employee :  (i) An apprentice.
(ii) Any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity.
14.
The definition of employer specifies the competent authority in relation to different types of establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, planation, port, railway company or shop.
Section 14 contains a non-obstante clause and gives overriding effect to the provisions of the Act of 1972 as against any other enactment or any instrument or contract.
15.
If we hold that a person employed in the service of the State Electricity Board falls within the ambit of expression "who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government", then the contention of Shri Sandhu merits acceptance because there is no dispute between the parties that the rules which are applicable to the Government employees for payment of gratuity, namely, the Punjab Civil Service Rules have been adopted by the Board for its employees.
However, after thoughtfully considering the submission of Shri Sandhu, we are unable to agree with him that an employee of the Electricity Board holds a post under the State Government.
No doubt, the State Electricity Board is an instrumentality/agency of the State for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, but merely on that account persons employed in the services of the Board cannot be treated as the Government employees or the persons holding posts under the State Government.
An expression similar to the one used in 2(e) finds place in Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India.
In State of Assam v. Kanak Chandra Dutta, AIR 1967 SC 884, the question which arose for consideration before the Supreme Court was whether a Mauzadar in Assam Valley holds a civil post in the State of Assam and is entitled to the protection of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution.
After making reference to the provisions of part XIV of the Constitution, Bachawat J., who delivered the judgment on behalf of the Constitution Bench, observed:  "A person holding a post under a State is a person serving or employed under the State, see the marginal notes Articles 309, 310 and 311.
The heading and the sub-heading of part XIV and Chapter I emphasises the element of service.
There is a relationship of master and servant between the State and a person said to be holding a post under it.
The existence of this relationship is indicated by the State's right to select and appoint the holder of the post, its right to suspend and dismiss him, its right to control the manner and method of his doing the work and the payment by it of his wages or remuneration.
Relationship of master and servant may be established by the persons of all or some of these indicia, in conjunction with other circumstances and it is a question of fact in each case where there is a such relation between the state and the alleged holder of a post."
16.
In SL Agarwal v. The General Manager, Hindustan Steel Ltd, AIR 1970 SC 1150, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court dealt with the question whether a person employed in the service of a Government Company is entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Rejecting the claim of the petitioner that he is entitled to the opportunity of hearing as contemplated by Article 311, the Supreme Court observed :-  "The existence of share-holders, of capital raised by the issuance of shares, the lack of connection between the finances of the corporation and the consolidated fund of the Union rather make out a greater independent existence than that of the corporation in the English case.
We must, therefore, hold that the corporation which is Hindustan Steel Limited in this case is not a department of the Government nor are the servants of it holding posts under the State.
It has its independent existence and by law relating to Corporations it is distinct even from its members.
In these circumstances, the appellant, who was an employee of Hindustan Steel Limited, does not answer the description of a holder of a `civil post under the Union' as stated in the article."
17.
In Debi Prasanna Ghose v. The State, AIR 1956 Cal.
56 it has been held that the employees of a Government Company cannot claim to be holders of the post under the State even though the fundamental rules may be adopted by the employer for governing the employees.
18.
As far as respondent No. 3 is concerned, he was neither appointed by the State Government nor was he under its disciplinary control.
It was the Board and its officers who appointed respondent No. 3 and controlled his working during the period of employment.
The salary and the emoluments were paid to the respondent No. 3 from the funds of the Board and not by the State Government.
Thus, relationship of master and servant did not exist between the State and the respondent No. 3.
Rather, such relationship existed between the petitioner and the respondent No. 3.
Therefore, the respondent No. 3 cannot be held to be a person holding a post under the State Government.
As a logical corollary it must be held that the case of respondent No. 3 does not fall within the scope of the two exceptions incorporated in the definition of `employee' and he is covered by the main part of that definition.
In view of this, there is no escape from the conclusion that the application filed by the respondent No. 3 for payment of gratuity under the Act of 1972 was maintainable.
The fact that Punjab Civil Services Rules are applicable to the employees of the Board cannot be made basis for depriving the respondent No. 3 of his right to receive gratuity under the Act of 1972 in view of the overriding effect given to the provisions of that Act over other enactments etc. by virtue of Section 14.
19.
We, therefore, hold that the respondent No. 2 did not act without jurisdiction when he entertained and decided the application filed by the respondent No. 3 for payment of gratuity.
Likewise, the respondent No. 1 did not commit any error in rejecting the objection raised by the petitioner to the maintainability of the application filed by the respondent No. 3.
20.
With regard to the quantum of gratuity, learned counsel could not point out any infirmity in the impugned orders.
Therefore, there is no occasion for us to examine that aspect of the impugned orders.
21.
Now a word about the judgment relied upon by Shri Sandhu.
The facts of that case show that workman Bhagwan Das applied for payment of gratuity under the Act of 1972.
His claim was accepted by the Controlling Authority.
The appeal filed by the Municipal Committee was dismissed as not maintainable.
The argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner-Municipal Committee, which was accepted by this Court was that in view of the amendment made in the definition of an employee by the Amending Act No. 25 of 1984, the workman, who was entitled to payment of gratuity under the Haryana Municipal Employees (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982 is not entitled to avail benefit of the provisions of 1972 Act.
The Division Bench referred to the amendment made in the definition of employee and held that where in view of the specific rules which provide for payment of gratuity, the retired employee would be entitled to gratuity as per rules framed by the State Government and not under the Act of 1972.
22.
After having carefully perused that judgment, we are of the opinion that the same cannot be treated as an authority for the proposition that an employee of the State Electricity Board or similar other autonomous bodies are to be treated as persons holding posts under the State Government.
The question whether an employee serving under a Municipal Committee can be treated as a person holding a post under the State Government was neither raised nor decided by the Court.
Rather, the Bench appears to have proceeded on the assumption that an employee of the municipality holds a post under the State Government.
It also appears that the attention of the Division Bench was not drawn to Section 14 of the Act of 1972 which gives overriding effect to the provisions of the Act of 1972 vis-a-vis other enactments.
Therefore, the decision in Municipal Committee, Tohana v. The Appellate Authority (supra) will have to be read as confined to the facts of that case and the same cannot be treated as a precedent for the proposition that an employee serving in autonomous/independent statutory body holds a post under the State Government and, therefore, he is excluded from the definition of employee under Section 2(e) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
23.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.