GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the order dated 2041989, passed by the learned Single Judge, dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants for directing the respondents to allow them to appear in third semester Nursery Teachers Training Course.
2.
Before dealing with the appeal on merits, we consider it necessary to mention that by an order dated 21.12.1988 passed by the Motion Bench, the appellants were provisionally allowed to take the third semester examination.
That was subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
Similarly, while admitting the appeal, the Court had permitted the appellants to sit in the fourth semester examination which was to be held in June, 1989.
At the same time, it was directed that the result of the appellants will be withheld till further orders.
Pursuant to the directions given by the Court on 21.12.1988 and 1351989, the appellants appeared in the third and the fourth semester examinations.
They have already cleared the third semester examination.
With regard to the fourth semester examination, learned counsel for the appellants stated that although result of the examination has not been declared, he had unofficially learnt that all the appellants have passed in the examination.
3.
The respondent No. 3 is running various educational institutions in Northern India including Sohan Lal DAV College of Education, Ambala City.
In 1987, the Director, School Education, Haryana permitted the respondents No. 2 and 3 to start two years diploma in Pre-Nursery Education titled as Nursery Teachers Training Course.
This course consists of four semesters.
The petitioners and others applied for admission to the aforesaid course in response to the advertisement issued by the respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
In their application, the petitioners had clearly disclosed the details of their qualifications.
They were admitted to the course without any objection or reservation with regard to their eligibility and were allowed to appear in the first and the second semester, the results of which were declared on 2031988 and 2081988.
However, just before the commencement of third semester examination a dispute was raised regarding the appellants' eligibility and they were denied admission.
Therefore, they sought Court's intervention for directing the respondents to allow them to appear in the third semester examination.
4.
The respondent No. 1 contested the petition by stating that the petitioners were not eligible to be admitted to the course because they had not secured 45% marks in the matriculation examination.
It also pleaded that on the basis of admissions granted to them by mistake, the petitioners have not acquired the right to complete the course.
In a separate written statement filed by them, the respondents No. 2 and 3 pleaded that the appellants were not eligible to be admitted as per the syllabus prescribed by the respondent No. 1 and as such they cannot be continued in the course.
However, in order to minimise the hardship caused to them, a decision was taken to give them option either to appear in one year's recognised course or to accept the refund of the fee, pleaded the respondents No. 2 and 3.
5.
By relying on the order passed in C.W.P.
No. 7248 of 1987, Savita Rani v. DAV College of Management and Studies, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
6.
The first contention of Shri GS Bal is that the order of the learned Single Judge suffers from an error of law because the appellants' plea that the decision taken by the management of the institution in the year 1988 cannot be applied to their cases has not at all been considered by the learned Single Judge.
He submitted that the appellants could not have been removed from the rolls of the institution after completing two semesters on the ground that they did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility at the time of admission.
The second contention urged by the learned counsel is that the appellants ought not to have been deprived of the fruits of the studies undertaken by them.
He submitted that even if the Court comes to the conclusion that the appellants did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility, a direction should be issued to the respondents No. 2 and 3 to declare their result because no one will be adversely affected by the declaration of the result of the fourth semester in which the appellants had appeared in the year 1989 pursuant to the Court's order.
On the other hand, Shri Rajesh Gumber argued that the decision of the management of the respondents No. 2 and 3 not to continue the appellants in the course was correct and the appellants are not entitled to derive any benefit from their appearance in the examination.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the rival submissions and have perused the record of the case.
A look at Annexure P-2 shows that except the three appellants namely, Miss Sunita Kapoor, Miss Bindu Bala and Miss Partiksha, the other appellants were Graduates at the time of their admission to the Nursery Teachers Training Course.
One of them, namely, Miss Neelam was a Post Graduate.
Of the remaining appellants Miss Iqbal Kaur, Miss Parveen, Miss Meena Rani, Miss Neelam, Miss Bhupinder Kaur, Miss Pinki Rani, Miss Harpreet Kaur, Miss Upinder Kaur, Miss Naresh Gupta, Miss Uma Rani, Miss Dali Gujral, Miss Bindu Bala, Miss Paramjeet Kaur, Miss Ravinder Kaur, Miss Paramjit Kaur, Miss Shashi Bala and Miss Vandana Datta had passed Graduation with at least 45% marks.
Only 13 of the appellants had secured less than 45% marks.
It is an admitted fact that none of the appellants made any mis-representation to the respondents No. 2 and 3 regarding their educational qualifications or the percentage of marks secured by them nor did they play fraud with the respondents for the purpose of securing admission.
Thus, it is clear that the respondents No. 2 and 3 admitted the appellants knowing fully well that some of them had not secured 45% marks.
Perhaps this was done keeping in view the fact that 27 of the 30 appellants were Graduates.
In our opinion, for the alleged mistake committed by the respondents No. 2 and 3, the appellants cannot be penalised.
8.
The fact that 27 out of the 30 writ petitioners possessed qualifications higher than the minimum qualification prescribed for admission to the course has been completely ignored by the learned Single Judge while dismissing the writ petition and this has resulted in manifest injustice to the petitioners- appellants.
No doubt C.W.P.
No. 7248 of 1987 filed by Savita Rani was dismissed by a Division Bench but, in our opinion, that order could not have been made basis for dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants.
The learned Single Judge has mechanically invoked the dismissal of Savita Rani's petition for non-suiting the petitioners-appellants ignoring the fact that the two cases were not similar.
In this regard, it is to be noted that at the time of filing of the writ petition, the appellants had already cleared first and second semester examination and they were due to appear in the third semester examination.
In pursuance of the interim order passed by the Motion Bench, they had appeared in the third semester examination and passed the same.
This was not the fact situation obtaining in Savita Rani's case.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge should not have declined relief to the appellants by relying on the order passed in Savita Rani's case.
9.
Another development which has taken place during the pendency of the appeal and of which notice deserves to be taken by us is that the appellants have already appeared in the fourth semester examination under the order dated 3051989 passed by the Division Bench.
Thus as on date the appellants have already completed the training course.
In case they have passed in the fourth semester examination, then they will become qualified to be appointed as teachers.
Therefore, if at this stage the action of the respondents to cancel their admissions is upheld, grave injustice will be done to the appellants.
On the other hand, issuance of a direction to the respondents to declare the result of the fourth semester examination of the appellants will not cause injury to anybody.
The rights of third parties will not be affected in any manner.
Therefore, it is a fit case in which a direction deserves to be issued to the respondents No. 2 and 3 to declare the result of the fourth semester examination of the appellants.
10.
Consequently, we allow the appeal and set aside the order passed by the learned Single Judge.
As a logical consequence, the writ petition filed by the appellants is allowed.
The declaration of the result of the third semester examination in which the appellants had appeared pursuant to the interim order passed by the Court is validated and the respondents No. 2 and 3 are directed to declare the result of fourth semester examination within a period of 7 days of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.