NK Kapoor, J - Feeling dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 8111993, appellants have preferred this appeal.
2.
Appellants-the petitioners sought issuance of a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for selection of Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) and to declare their result in accordance with Rule 7 of the relevant Rules.
3.
It was the case of the petitioners that pursuant to advertisement dated 891990 for posts of Judicial Officers they too applied in the category of ex-servicemen.
They were subsequently called for interview but their claim for appointment has been declined primarily on the ground that they do not fulfil the requisite conditions as given in the amended Rules.
Challenging the applicability of the amended Rules, it was stated in the writ petition that as at the time of filing the application the earlier Rules were in force, any amendment in the Rules cannot take away the vested rights in them nor such a Rule can be made basis to deprive them of their rights.
4.
Learned Single Judge, however, found no merit in this contention of the petitioners holding that un-amended Rules i.e. Rules 7 and 8 were indeed found to be un-workable and so the amendment effected was with a view to fill up the lacuna and otherwise too was of a clarificatory nature.
So, the Court held that the amendment brought out in the year 1991 shall be deemed to be in existence in the Rules that were available prior to the advertisement and so no grievance can be made by the petitioners in this regard.
5.
Before examining the pleas advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants, it would be appropriate to reproduce hereunder the un-amended as well as the amended Rules :-  Unamended Rules  Amended Rules  "7 :- No candidate shall be credited with any marks in any paper unless he obtains at least 33% marks in it and no candidate shall be called for the viva voce test unless he obtains at least forty-five per cent marks in the aggregate of all the written papers which he has passed and thirty-three per cent marks in the language paper of Punjabi (in Gurmukhi script).''
7 :- No candidate shall be credited with any marks in any paper unless be obtains atleast thirty-three per cent marks in it.
(2) No candidate shall be called for viva-voce test unless he obtains atleast fifty per cent qualifying marks in the aggregate of all the written papers; Provided that the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes categories shall be called for the viva-voca test if they obtain forty-five per cent qualifying marks in the aggregate of all the written papers.
(3) The minimum qualifying marks in the language paper Punjabi (Gurmukhi Script) shall be thirty-three per cent.
The standard of a language paper will be that of Matriculation examination of the Punjab School Education Board or its equivalent.
"8.
No candidate shall be considered to have qualified in the examination unless he obtains at least fifty-five per cent marks in the aggregate of all papers including viva-voce test and at least thirty-three per cent marks in the language paper of Punjabi (Gurmukhi Script).
The standard of the Language Paper will be that of Matriculation Examination of the Punjab School Education Board or its equivalent to it.''
(8) The merit of the qualified candidates shall be determined by the Punjab Public Service Commission according to the aggregate marks obtained in the written papers and viva- voce.
Provided that in the case of two or more candidates obtaining equal marks, the candidate older in age shall be placed in higher in order of merit."
6.
A bare perusal of un-amended Rules reveals that a candidate has to secure not less than 33% marks in each paper and to maintain an overall percentage of 45% in the aggregate of all written papers before he could be called for viva-voce test.
Under Rule 8 (un-amended) a candidate is not to be considered to have qualified unless he obtains at least 55% marks in the aggregate of all papers including viva-voce test.
Total marks for written papers were fixed at 900 and for viva-voce at 100.
These Rules were found to be un-workable by a sitting Judge, who was appointed as an expert and rightly so.
Taking an instance; in case a candidate secures 45% marks in aggregate in written papers, his total score will come to 405 out of 900 and even if a candidate scores 100 out of 100 marks in the viva-voce test yet he cannot fulfil the other pre-requisite of Rule 8 i.e. a candidate has to secure 55% marks in aggregate of all papers including viva-voce test, before he can be said to have qualified the examination.
It is in the light of this anomaly the authorities amended the Rules, now making it 50% as qualifying marks in the aggregate of all written papers.
Exceptions regarding candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes need not be adverted to.
Vide amended provisions the merit of the qualified candidate is to be determined by the Public Service Commission according to the aggregate marks obtained in the written papers and viva- voce, So, as per amended provisions candidate in the first instance has to secure 50% marks in the aggregate of all written papers so as to qualify in the interview else he cannot be permitted to participate in viva-voce test.
It so happened that in view of some direction given by this Court in CWP No. 9071 of 1991 the appellants (petitioners in the writ petition) though had not secured 50% marks in the aggregate in the written papers were, however, called for interview.
That by itself cannot be construed as diluting or varying the mandate of the amended Rules.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellants has, however, argued that as Rule 8 (un-amended) has been found to be un-workable the case of the appellants ought to have been examined as Rule 8 was not in existence i.e. to consider their case under Rule 7 (un-amended) and since they have secured 45% marks in the aggregate of all papers, add marks as per their viva-voce test and draw a list, thus, filling up the vacancies in the case of ex-servicemen quota.
Counsel has placed reliance upon the decision of the Apex Court in NT Devin Kutti etc. v. Karnataka Public Service Commission and others, 1992(1) RSJ 630 : 1992(2) SCT 578 (SC) and drawn our attention to para 11 of the judgment, which reads as :-  ``There is yet another aspect of the question.
Where advertisement is issued inviting applications for direct recruitment to a category of posts, and the advertisement expressly states that selection shall be made in accordance with the existing Rules or Government orders, and if it further indicates the extent of reservations in favour of various categories, the selection of candidates in such a case must be made in accordance with the then existing Rules and Government Orders.
Candidates who apply, and undergo written or viva-voce test acquire vested right for being considered for selection in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the advertisement, unless the advertisement itself indicates a contrary intention.
Generally, a candidate has right to be considered in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in the advertisement as his right crystallises on the date of publication of advertisement, however he has no absolute right in the matter.
If the recruitment Rules are amended retrospectively during the pendency of selection, in that event selection must be held in accordance with the amended Rules.
Whether the Rules have retrospective effect or not, primarily depends upon the language of the Rules and its construction to ascertain the legislative intent.
The legislative intent is ascertained either by express provision or by necessary implication; if the amended Rules are not retrospective in nature the selection must be regulated in accordance with the Rules and orders which were in force on the date of advertisement.
Determination of this question largely depends on the facts of each case having regard to the terms and conditions set out in the advertisement and the relevant Rules and orders.
Lest there be any confusion we would like to make it clear that a candidate on making application for a post pursuant to an advertisement does not acquire any vested right for selection, but if he is eligible and is otherwise qualified in accordance with the relevant Rules and the terms contained in the advertisement, he does acquire a vested right for being considered for selection in accordance with the Rules as they existed on the date of advertisement.
He cannot be deprived of that limited right on the amendment of Rules during the pendency of selection unless the amended Rules are retrospective in nature.''
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for a considerable time and have also gone through the relevant Rules.
There is no manner of doubt that Rules 7 and 8 (un-amended) indeed were unworkable.
This defect was pointed out by the Hon'ble Judge, who was associated as an expert in this selection and so the Rules were amended.
Amendment was effected on 4.6.1991.
Petitioners were, however, called for interview on 1871991.
This precise point came for consideration before a Division Bench in CWP No. 10314 of 1991 decided on 1611992 Ravinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab through Chief Secretary, Punjab Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh and another, 1992(2) RSJ 480, wherein the Court held that rules would apply to 1991 examination.
Court further held that it was lacuna in the Rules which now stands removed and so the amended Rules shall be deemed to be in existence even prior to the advertisement pursuant to which the examination has been withheld.
This judgment has attained finality.
We agree with the view taken by the Bench.
9.
Appellants' case could be considered either under the un-amended Rules or under the amended Rules.
Concededly, the appellants do not fulfil the essential condition of securing 55% marks in aggregate of all papers including the viva-voce test.
So, on their own showing they could not be selected even as per un-amended Rules.
It is the authorities on their own when found Rule 8 to be unworkable, chose to amend the Rules and thereafter examine the case of all the candidates in the light of amended Rules.
There has been no discrimination between the appellants and other candidates.
Each one of the candidates has been evaluated in the light of amended Rules, which envisage securing of 33% marks in each paper and maintaining an overall of 50% marks in the aggregate of all the written papers; such a candidate can be called for viva-voce test.
Since the appellants secured less than 50% marks their participation on account of some direction in writ petition No. 9071 of 1991 cannot be construed as to diluting the purport of the amended Rules.
10.
Decision in NT Devin Kutti's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants does not advance the case of the appellants in any manner.
No doubt the Court has held that generally a candidate has a right to be considered in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in the advertisement as his right crystallises on the date of publication of advertisement; however he has no absolute right in the matter.
If these recruitment Rules were amended retrospectively during the pendency of selection, in that event selection must be held in accordance with the amended Rules.
11.
Thus, as per the facts of the present case as the earlier Rule was found to be un-workable so amendment was effected in the Rules and it is thereafter the candidates were interviewed and list as per their merit was drawn.
We find this approach of the authorities to be just and proper.
Finding no merit in the appeal, same is consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.