VK Bali, J - Jagdish Singh Raghava, Clerk in the Treasury Department of the State of Haryana through present writ petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India calls in question orders Annexures P-1, P-3 and P-8.
Vide Annexure P-1 dated August 25, 1989, there came to be recorded adverse remarks in the Confidential Report of the petitioner for the year 1988-89.
The petitioner was described to be `below average' and his integrity was also found to be doubtful.
On all other counts, his work and conduct was not found to be satisfactory.
Vide Annexure P-3 dated February 16, 1995, the representation of the petitioner against adverse remarks contained in his Confidential Report for the year 1988-89 was rejected whereas vide Annexure P-8 dated November 21, 1995, he was given pre-mature retirement.
2.
Brief facts on which the orders referred to above are sought to be quashed need a necessary mention.
Petitioner was appointed as Clerk in Treasury Department on ad hoc basis in the year 1975 and his services were regularised in the year 1977 by the Services Selection Board, Haryana.
It is the positive case of the petitioner that ever since 1975 till 1989 there was no adverse report against the petitioner except Annexure P-1 which came to be recorded by Sh. BD Sharma, Treasury Officer, respondent No. 3 herein.
It is further the positive case of the petitioner that adverse remarks came to be recorded in his report Annexure P-1 as respondent No. 3 was vindictive and had deliberately with mala fide intention recorded such adverse remarks for simply wreaking personal vengeance.
The petitioner was earlier posted in Nuh Sub Treasury where respondent No. 3 was A.T.O.
The petitioner made a complaint against respondent No. 3 stating therein that respondent No. 3 demanded money from the petitioner and since the same was not given, he used abusive language against him.
The complaint was enquired into by Mr. KG Jatrana, Treasury Officer.
It was for this reason, it is pleaded that respondent No. 3 became inimical.
Later on, the petitioner was posted at Gurgaon.
Respondent No. 3 joined as Treasury Officer in 1987.
Respondent No. 3 started issuing letters to the petitioners and even a false F.I.R. was lodged against him by respondent No. 3 in 1988.
In the wake of this F.I.R., the petitioner was suspended but the F.I.R. was later on withdrawn for lack of any evidence.
Petitioner thereafter was charge-sheeted for his remaining absent for one day and after inquiry his one increment was stopped.
Petitioner again made a complaint against respondent No. 3 on March 17, 1988.
It is the case of the petitioner that an inquiry was made and the Administrative Officer found the allegations made by the petitioner to be correct.
It is further the case of the petitioner that in fact integrity of respondent No. 3 was itself doubtful.
A raid was conducted on him by the S.D.O.
(C) Ferozepur Jhirka and SDM Gurgaon on May 12, 1988.
Respondent No. 3 remained under suspension in 1994 relating to bungling of some bills.
It is further the case of the petitioner that the report with regard to doubtful integrity is not at all supported by any facts and is contrary to the Haryana Government instructions dated December 12, 1985.
Petitioner against the adverse remarks contained in his confidential report for the year 1988-89 filed a representation but the same was dismissed by respondent No. 2 after six years and conveyed to the petitioner on February 24, 1995.
On November 22, 1995, on the basis of adverse remarks contained in Annexure P-1, petitioner as mentioned above, has been prematurely retired.
3.
Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that not only that the adverse remarks contained in the confidential report for the year 1988-89 are sans facts supporting the allegations made against the petitioner but also that, adverse remarks came to be recorded by respondent No. 3 who was inimical to the petitioner.
She also contends that as per instructions issued by the Government of Haryana dated December 12, 1985, if an official is suspected to be corrupt or is believed to be corrupt, the opinion should generally be fortified by reasons.
She also contends that but for the adverse remarks contained in the confidential report for the year 1988-89, there is not a single adverse entry against the petitioner either earlier to that or thereafter and, in fact, the record of the petitioner is without any blemish right from the date he entered into service in 1975.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
It has been pleaded that annual confidential report is a matter of satisfaction of the officer concerned on the basis of actual work and conduct and in the very nature of things the correctness of the report cannot be gone into.
Petitioner remained negligent and acted in a manner unbecoming of a government servant despite verbal and written directions.
The petitioner was also involved in a theft case of government record during the period under report i.e. for the year 1988-89.
Respondent No. 3 was justified in recording the adverse remarks in the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1988-89.
It is further pleaded by the respondents that there were adverse remarks in A.C.R.
for the year 1993-94 which were conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated January 18, 1995.
While giving details of F.I.R. it has been pleaded that it was theft of 16 treasury challans pertaining to Gurgaon Treasury and for this offence F.I.R. No. 459 dated July 30, 1988 was lodged with the local police.
However, the case was filed untraced by the police.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1987 and was finally awarded punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect and period of absence i.e. July 30, 1988 was treated as leave without pay.
The allegations of mala fide against respondent No. 3 have been denied.
Respondent No. 3 Shri BD Sharma has filed a separate affidavit denying the allegations against him.
From the facts as have been mentioned above, Mr. SM Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General contends that there is absolutely no warrant calling for setting aside the adverse remarks recorded in the confidential report of the petitioner and inasmuch as even one report of doubtful integrity is enough to sustain an order of pre-mature retirement, the Government was justified in giving pre-mature retirement to the petitioner.
4.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and gone through the records of the case.
The original record of the petitioner in particular pertaining to his confidential reports has been perused.
As mentioned above, it is the positive case of the petitioner that but for the confidential report for the year 1988-89, there is not a single adverse entry contained in his confidential reports since he joined the service in 1975.
It is not disputed even by the respondent-State during the course of arguments that there is no adverse entry recorded in the confidential record of the petitioner from 1976 i.e. when he joined the service till 1984-85.
Summary of A.C.R.
of Jagdish Singh petitioner herein for the last ten years from 1984-85 to 1993-94 is as follows :-  "1984-85 Good 1985-86 Good 1986-87 Good 1987-88 Good 1988-89 Below Average Integrity doubtful (1488 to 7888) (Adverse remarks conveyed) 8/88 to 2/89 Suspension period 1989-90 Very Good 1990-91 Very Good 1991-92 Good 1992-93 Very Good 1993-94 Very Good Very Good = 4 Good = 5 Below Average = 1" A bare perusal of summary of A.C.R.
of the petitioner would clearly reveal that only one confidential report i.e. for the year 1988-89 contained adverse remarks whereas all his other reports are either good or very good.
The contention of Mrs. Abha Rathore, the learned Counsel representing the petitioner that neither before 1988-89 nor after 1988-89, there is any adverse remark contained in the confidential record of the petitioner is, thus, found to be factually correct.
That being the position, what is left against the petitioner is adverse remarks in his confidential report for the year 1988-89, a case of theft regarding which F.I.R. was lodged against the petitioner and unauthorised absence of one day for which his one increment was stopped.
In so far as theft case is concerned, it is conceded that F.I.R. was filed as untraced.
That case, therefore, could not come in way of the petitioner for visiting him with consequences such as pre-mature retirement.
There is no need at all to give finding on the allegation of mala fide against respondent No. 3.
However, the fact remains that this officer alone has found the petitioner to be lacking in all aspects.
As mentioned above, against every column in the confidential report for the year 1988-89, the petitioner has been described as average or below average.
All other reporting officers did not at all comment adversely upon work and conduct or any of the qualities in any of the columns in the reports either before or after the report of the year 1988-89.
The petitioner was pegged down in all his qualities and the final remarks in his confidential reports from good to very good became average or below average and his integrity was also found to be doubtful.
The adverse remarks in the confidential report of the petitioner, therefore, in view of the facts as are available do raise a suspicion.
Petitioner has been assessed as Very Good for the years 1989-90 and 1990-91.
In fact, out of five reports i.e. for the years 1989-90 to 1993-94 petitioner has been assessed as Very Good in four reports.
Looked into this background, if the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that such adverse remarks should be supported by facts is examined, it would appear that in this particular case at least the Government ought to have come up with reasons which persuaded respondent No. 3 to give adverse remarks against the petitioner in his confidential report for the year 1988-89.
If no reasons were forthcoming from the report itself, same could have been mentioned in the written statement by gathering the same from the service record of the petitioner.
Nothing of the kind has, however, at all been done.
Neither the report contains reasons supporting the adverse remarks recorded in the confidential report for the year 1988-89, nor the same are even now made available to the Court.
At this stage it may be mentioned that the Government of Haryana vide instructions dated December 12, 1985, has clearly asked the reporting authorities to fortify their opinion by reasons while commenting upon integrity of an employee.
The said instructions read as follows :-  "(Copy of C.S. Haryana No. 61/20/85-S(1) dated 121285)  I am directed to invite your attention to Para 4 of the consolidated instructions regarding confidential reports, which is reproduced below :-  "Report regarding integrity : A special mention should invariably be made regarding the integrity of the officer to which Government attach the greatest importance.
It should be clearly stated if the officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt and this opinion should generally be fortified by reasons, which may be in the possession of the reporting officer.
Any ill-considered remarks in this respect may do a lot of mischief and harm.
On the other hand, reporting officers be quite honest and frank and discuss an officer's worth from the point of view of his integrity openly and frankly in the column `Defects' if any or elsewhere.
Government observe that reporting officers are still following the practice of making non-committal entries in the column relating to integrity should cease.
Reporting Officers should give a definite opinion on the integrity of their subordinates while writing their confidential reports.
Further, instances have come to the notice of Govt. in which even though officers are being proceeded against for serious forms of corruption, their confidential report for the same period certify their integrity to be good.
It is felt that contradictions of this type arise only because reporting officers are failing in their duty to make entries in the columns relating to integrity forthrightly and without hesitation.
In case an officer has been given a good report for integrity which is later proved to be wrong, the reporting officer will run the risk of earning Government's displeasure.
Ordinarily, inference would be that either he did not exercise proper supervision or he was in dishonest collusion with his subordinate.
The intention of Govt. is that the truth about subordinates should be known to reporting officers and brought to the notice of higher authorities.
This would not, however, justify the entering of ill-considered remarks based on inadequate observation."
In a recent decision the Apex Court in State of UP v. Yamuna Shanker Misra, 1997(2) SCT 234 : JT 1997(4) 1 (SC) observed as follows :-  "Before forming an opinion to be adverse the reporting officers writing confidentials should share the information which is not a part of the record with the officer concerned, have the information confronted by the officer and then make it part of the record.
This amounts to an opportunity given to the erring/corrupt officer to correct the errors of the judgment, conduct, behaviour, integrity or conduct/corrupt proclivity.
If despite giving such an opportunity, the officer fails to perform the duty, correct his conduct or improve himself necessarily, the same may be recorded in the confidential reports and a copy thereof supplied to the affected officer so that he will have an opportunity to know the remarks made against him.
If he feels aggrieved, it would be open to him to have it corrected by appropriate representation to the higher authorities or any appropriate judicial forum for redressal.
Thereby, honesty, integrity, good conduct and efficiency get improved in the performance of public duties and standards of excellence in services constantly rises to higher levels and it becomes successful tool to manage the services with officers of integrity, honesty, efficiency and devotion."
In yet another decision, the Apex Court in UP Jal Nigam v. Prabhat Chandra Jain, 1996(2) SCT 227 (SC) : JT 1996(1) SC 641 held that while writing the confidential reports, if the official were to be downgraded from the previous report, the authority recording confidentials is to record reasons for such downgrading on the personal file of the officer concerned and inform him of the change in form of advice.
5.
In view of the discussion made above, this Court is of the view that the adverse remarks contained in the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1988-89 are neither justified nor have been recorded in tune with the instructions dated December 12, 1985 nor the same are in consonance with law established by the Supreme Court in the manner referred to above.
In fact, the procedure adopted by respondent No. 3 in recording adverse remarks in the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1988-89 are against all settled norms of law.
That being the situation, the adverse remarks contained in the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1988-89 are quashed and inasmuch as the pre-mature retirement of the petitioner is based exclusively on the adverse remarks contained in the confidential remarks for the year 1988-89, order Annexure P-8 is also likewise quashed.
This writ petition is, thus, allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 2,000/-.
In consequence of setting aside of order of the compulsory retirement of petitioner Annexure P-8, the consequential benefits that naturally accrue to the petitioner are also granted to him.
The directions contained in this judgment be complied with within two months from today.