Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed questioning the order Annexure P-4 passed by the punishing authority reducing the petitioner in rank and the order passed by the appellate authority Annexure P-6 dismissing him from service.
2.
During the course of arguments, counsel appearing for the petitioner confined his challenge to the order Annexure P-6.
The only point which survives for consideration is whether the appellate authority can enhance the punishment awarded to an employee by the punishing authority without giving an opportunity, to show cause or to explain as to why the punishment be not enhanced.
3.
Petitioner who was serving in the Haryana Police and was posted as Assistant Sub Inspector at Police Station City Kaithal in June 1992, was charge-sheeted on the ground that he tried to save Shri Ram Phal Inspector the then SHO City Kaithal by filing a false affidavit which amounted to gross indiscipline and carelessness lowering the image of the Police Department.
Allegation against Ram Phal Inspector was that he had kept in illegal custody one Shri Chaman Lal and his two sons Vinod Kumar and Rajesh Kumar from 22.6.1992 to 23.6.1992 and petitioner challaned Shri Chaman Lal and his two sons under sections 107/151 Cr.PC On a complaint filed by Shri Chaman Lal, Government appointed Shri OP Gupta, District and Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra as Chairman of the Inquiry Commission.
Before the Inquiry Commission petitioner had tried to save Ram Phal Inspector the then SHO Police Station City Kaithal by filing an affidavit which was found to be false.
A departmental enquiry was initiated and Mr. Amir Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Headquarters was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
Petitioner was exonerated of the charge by the Inquiry Officer vide its order dated 2221994 Annexure P.1.
4.
After the receipt of the report of the Inquiry Commission, Govt. of Haryana ordered a departmental enquiry against Ram Phal Inspector.
Shri Chaman Lal and his two sons filed CWP 9899 of 1994 Chaman Lal Saraf etc. v. State of Haryana and others, in this Court claiming compensation from the petitioner and others for keeping them in illegal custody.
This petition was dismissed on 1321995 by this Court.
Shri Chaman Lal and others filed Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court of India which was taken up for hearing on 921996 and the following order was passed :-  ``It appears that the State of Haryana - respondent No. 1 is not bestowing as yet the requisite attention to this matter and it has also chosen not to place the full facts before this court relating to the action taken and that which is proposed to be taken in pursuance of the findings recorded in the report of Enquiry Commission.
In view of the gravity of the findings recorded by the Commission, we consider it necessary, that the matter should be examined more closely and, if necessary directions are issued to ensure discharge of the legal obligations by all the concerned authorities including the State Govt. At the request of counsel for the State of Haryana, we adjourn the matter and it be listed on 1221996.''
5.
Petitioner in the meanwhile stood transferred to Bhiwani.
After the passing of the above said order by the Supreme Court of India, Superintendent of Police, Bhiwani, issued a notice to the petitioner dated 1521996 to show cause as to why the penalty of dismissal should not be imposed on the petitioner.
He recorded his reasons for disagreeing with conclusions arrived at by the Enquiry Officer in respect of the charges levelled against the petitioner.
Along with the show cause notice, a copy of the reasons showing the disagreement with the finding of the Inquiry Officer was also supplied to the petitioner.
Petitioner filed his reply to the show cause notice.
Superintendent of Police, Bhiwani, acting as punishing authority after affording due opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner concluded that punishment of dismissal would be too severe and decided to impose the punishment of reduction in rank for the acts of omission and commission of the petitioner for which he had been charge-sheeted.
Copy of the said order has been attached as Annexure P-4.
6.
Petitioner being aggrieved filed an appeal against the order before the Deputy Inspector General, Hisar Range, Hisar.
Appellate authority came to the conclusion that the punishment of reduction in rank to the petitioner as Head Constable was not commensurate with the charge levelled against the petitioner and decided to enhance the punishment and dismiss him from service.
Appellate Authority passed the order Annexure P-6 dismissing the petitioner from service which has been impugned in this writ petition.
7.
Although the orders Annexure P-4 and P-6 were challenged on a number of grounds but during the course of arguments counsel appearing for the petitioner confined his argument challenging the order Annexure P-6 on the limited ground that no order enhancing the punishment can be passed without issuing show cause notice and affording an opportunity of hearing to an employee.
It is alleged that the order enhancing the punishment was passed by the appellate authority without issuing any show cause notice or affording an opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner.
8.
In the written statement respondents have stated that an attempt was made to inform the petitioner about in the hearing of the appeal filed by him but he absented himself from duty without leave.
A message was left with his wife at his village to inform the petitioner that he should present himself for personal hearing before the appellate authority on 2341996.
As the petitioner did not appear before the appellate authority on 2341996. another message was sent to him to appear before the appellate authority on 2541996.
Message was sent to the petitioner's home at his village which was delivered to his wife Ompati but the petitioner did not avail the opportunity of personal hearing for the reasons best known to him; that petitioner was afforded a chance to appear before the appellate authority but he did not avail of the same.
Pleadings of the parties perused and counsel for the parties have been heard.
9.
Rule 16.28(3) of the Punjab Police Rules, provides as under:  ``In all cases in which officials proposed to enhance the award they shall, before passing final orders, give the defaulter concerned an opportunity of showing cause, either personally or in writing why his punishment should not be enhanced.''
10.
Admittedly no show cause notice proposing to enhance the punishment was issued to the petitioner.
T.P.M.
message which was sent by the appellate authority through the Superintendent of Police asking the petitioner to appear before the appellate authority on 2341996 and 2541996 was perused from the record produced in court.
In this message, there is no mention of the proposal to enhance the punishment.
Counsel for the respondents failed to show from the record that there was any proposal to enhance the punishment or that any notice was proposed to be issued to the petitioner, for enhancing the punishment.
Appellate Authority had also not recorded any reasons disagreeing with the punishment awarded by the punishing authority on the file.
Petitioner was not informed of the proposal to enhance the punishment.
In the absence of a show cause notice proposing to enhance the punishment and without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner; the punishment could not be enhanced being in violation of a specific provision of the Punjab Police Rules as well as in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The impugned order Annexure P-6 is, therefore, quashed and the case is remitted to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar being the appellate authority to redecide the appeal filed by the petitioner in accordance with law after affording due opportunity to him.
11.
If the appellate authority prima facie comes to the conclusion that punishment should be enhanced then it should record its reason on the file and issue a show cause notice to the petitioner proposing to enhance the punishment.
The above observation shall not be taken to be a suggestion to the appellate authority to either enhance the punishment or not to do so.
The suggestion is simply to observe the mandate of Rule 16.28(3) of the Punjab Police Rules and observe the principles of natural justice.
12.
This writ petition stands allowed to the extent indicated above with no order to costs.