T.N.C.
Rangarajan, J - This writ petition is directed against the order dated 2751995 by which the petitioner was transferred.
2.
The petitioner Smt. A Rama Rani was working as a Teacher in Telugu in the AP Residential School for Girls, Hasanpathy, Warangal District.
By the impugned order she was transferred to APR School for Girls, Vangara and Smt. A Bharathi, the 2nd respondent was transferred and posted to APR School for Girls, Hasanpathy in her place.
The petitioner made a representation dated 461995 as soon as the order was communicated to her pointing out that her husband was working at Hanamkonda as a Teacher in the Government aided Bapuji School, which was not a transferable post, that she has very small children and very old in-laws to look after, the therefore, the transfer should be cancelled.
Since there was no response to her representation, she filed the present writ petition.
It was admitted on 1461995 and there was a direction to continue the petitioner in the same place.
Since that order was not given effect, the petitioner filed a Contempt Case No. 466/1995 which was admitted and a direction was given on 25.9.1995 to continue the petitioner.
It is stated that since then the petitioner is being continued in the same place.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned order was vitiated because it was made only to favour the 2nd respondent and that if offended the general rule that the husband and wife should be posted in the same place.
He also submitted that while taking note of the request of the 2nd respondent, the petitioner was denied a similar opportunity to place before the authority the circumstance requireing retention of the petitioner in the same place.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, argued that the impugned order should be cancelled.
4.
The learned Government Pleader supported the impugned order and relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in B. Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka, AIR 1986 SC 1955, submitted that a transfer is an incident of service and a transfer order should not be interfered that unless there was an abuse of that order.
The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that the impugned order was a routine order of several transfers made at the beginning of the academic year and on the face of it cannot be said to be an abuse of power.
He submitted that the children of the 2nd respondent were studying at Hanamkonda which was 5 kilometrs from Hasanpathy where the husband of the 2nd respondent was posted after being transferred from Mulakanur where he was working earlier.
It is also submitted that Hanamkonda was the native place of the 2nd respondent where they had their family residence and that she had made a request for that transfer on 251994.
According to the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent, the petitioner cannot have a right to remain in the same place for ever and since she has been in that place ever since 1987 except for absence due to maternity leave and a short transfer of two weeks to Kesargutta, there was nothing wrong in the impugned order replacing her with the 2nd respondent, who also needed to be in the same place with her husband.
The learned counsel also pointed out that ever since the interim order was given effect, no posting has been given to the 2nd respondent.
To a query, whether both the petitioners and the 2nd respondent could be accommodated in Warangal District, the learned Government Pleader stated that at present there are no vacancies available for making such an adjustment.
5.
It is no doubt true that the transfer has been regarded as an incident of service and that the appointing authority has a discretion in the matter and he is the best judge to decide how to distribute and utilise the services of the employees.
At the same time, it must be remembered that particulary in public service, Human Resource Development is a clear objective of the service and in order to conserve and develop the resources, the service conditions have to be modulated to remove the obstacles to such development, even if it is not immediately possible to encourage such development.
It is because of this objective, that one of the guidelines is to see that the family life of the employee is not disrupted and where the husband and wife both are working, efforts are made to see that they are both posted at the same place.
It would follow that where the couple is already working in a particular place, any order disturbing them must take into account the possibility of keeping them together in the new place.
The existence of the guideline that the husband and wife will be permitted to work in the same place itself gives rise to a legitimate expectation that they will not be disturbed without notice and that their situation will be taken into account and in the new place also in may be made possible for them to stay together.
The legitimate expetation is in a sense, fair play in administrative action which affects the lives of those in respect of whom adverse orders are made.
6.
In general, there is no particular reason why any teacher should not remain in the same school for his entire career.
I believe that in the United States the posts are advertised with reference to the place to be filled up with the understanding that there will be no shift during the career since such long tenure helps to develop a sense of community and repport between the teachers and the students.
Interestingly in a recent decision the Court of Appeal held in Meade Hill v. The British Council, 1996(1) ALL.
ER 79(CA) that the mobility clause in the service contract of a working woman amounts to indirect sexual discrimination.
Assuming that regular transfers are required, they are generally to be less frequent and the public interest sought to be served should be apparent.
Though the transfer order is called a routine transfer, it is seen that the proceedings of the Secretary Rc.
No. 212/C-1/95/6 dated 2751995 refers to the applications from the individuals and orders the transfers.
The body of the order also states since the transfers are made at the request of the individuals, they are not eligible for T.T.A.
and joining time.
Clearly, therefore, the impugned order cannot be termed as an order passed on public interest but only to favour those who made a request for transfer and this is acknowledged by the fact that they are denied the T.T.A.
and joining time.
This being the position, the necessary implication is that the person, who is dislodged for accommodating the request of the person who is transferred to any particular place, can certainly complain that it is arbitrary and without notice, as he has no opportunity of placing before the authority concerned his personal situation.
Though generally there is a wide discretion for effecting transfers and the person affected may not have a right to be heard, I am of the opinion that in a case of transfer at the request of one person which results in shifting of another person, the person so shifted does have a legitimate expectation that he will not be disturbed unfairly.
It cannot be said that the decision in this case was taken fairly and objectively when the petitioner had no notice and no opportunity to place her situation vis-a-vis the situation in which the 2nd respondent sought a transfer.
7.
The learned counsel for the second respondent pointed out that this view will go against the grain of the decision of the Supreme Court in Mrs. Shilpi Bose.
v. State of Bihar, 1993(3) SCT 564 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 532.
No doubt, in that case the Supreme Court held that where the competent authority issues transfer orders with a view to accommodate a public servant to avoid hardship, the same cannot and should not be interfered with by the Courts merely because the transfer orders were passed on the request of the employees concerned.
But then, in that case, it was found that the transfer orders were made in public interest and for administrative reasons in pursuance of the policy to accommodate the lady teachers posted in distant areas to avoid hardship to them.
In the present case, I have found that the order was not made for administrative reasons and was also not made in public interest.
It was made to accommodate the 2nd respondent who requested for a posting near a District Head Quarter Hospital.
The case of the petitioner is only that the 2nd respondent could be accommodated without disturbing the petitioner as the 2nd respondent could be accommodated in any other place where medical attention is available.
This decision also states that the affected party should approach the higher authority in the Department.
That was exactly what the petitioner did in the present case but the representation of the petitioner was completely ignored.
In this background, I am of the opinion that an exception has to be made to the general rule laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of transfers made to accommodate a public servant.
Post-decisional hearing may not suffice and the doctrine of the legitimate expectation would require that a prior hearing of the affected party is called for in the interest of justice in this type of cases.
8.
The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent also drew may attention to the Supreme Court decisions in Rajendra Roy v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1236 : 1993(2) SCT 65(SC) and Union of India v. NP Thomas, AIR 1993 SC 1605 : 1994(1) SCT 46 (SC).
These cases also stated that general principle that transfer orders which are not passed mala fide and in violation of statutory rules should not be interfered with and that if there is a personal hardship, representation should be made to the Department concerned.
In the first case, it was a transfer in public interest unlike the present case.
In the second case, it was a transfer on promotion.
As mentioned earlier, I am convinced that the law in this area requires to develop the need to give a fair hearing to the affected party before a public servant is shifted for the purpose of accommodating another person as the competing needs of both the persons have necessarily to be weighed and that cannot be done unless the authority concerned has before him the personal situation of the persons affected.
9.
The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that she had sought a transfer because she was suffering from Asthma and the doctor had recommended that she should be near a District Head Quarter Hospital.
He further stated that her children and her family residence were at Hasanpathy which was five kilometres from the District Head Quarter Hospital, and therefore, the 1st respondent was right in conceding her request.
As against this, the complaint of the petitioner is that she has been deprived of the company of her husband which was very much required to bring up small children and that she will be forced to maintain a double establishment since he had to look after his old parents also as they were staying with them and he is not eligible for transfer.
The petitioner had made a representation putting forward her difficulties but the respondent had not cared to look into it at all.
As long as the guidelines relating to posting of husband and wife remain in force, good administration required that it should act to implement that promise and such implementation necessarily requires the 1st respondent to give an opportunity to the petitioner to state her case and consider the same before passing an order which goes against the guidelines in respect of the petitioner while favouring the 2nd respondent particularly when that order is not an order prima facie in public interest.
I am, therefore, convnced that the impugned order was untenable and it is violative of the doctrine of Legitimate Expectation of the sense of affording a fair hearing before taking an adverse decision.
I have, therefore, no hesitation in quashing the impugned order.
10.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.