VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to order, Annexure P-2 dated April 16, 1984, vide which the petitioner, who was a Watchman in the Food Corporation of India, was dismissed from service as also the appellate order, annexure P-4, dated July 6, 1985, dismissing his appeal preferred against order, annexure P-2.
2.
There is no dispute on facts.
Petitioner joined as Watchman in the Food Corporation of India on July 7, 1973.
In the year 1980, when he was posted at the Food Storage Depot, Jandiala, a criminal case under section 380/457 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him.
It was tried by Shri Amrik Singh Kathuria, PCS, Judicial Magistrate, Amritsar.
Learned Magistrate, vide judgment dated March 20, 1984, sentenced him to regorous imprisonment for a period of one year and also imposed a fine of Rs. 250/-.
Aggrieved, the petitioner filed an appeal which came to be disposed of by the learned Sessions Judge, Amritsar, on March 31, 1984.
The petitioner was granted the benefit of the Probation of Offenders' Act, 1958 and was released on probation.
However, on conviction of the petitioner, an order dismissing him from service was passed by respondent No. 3 on April 16, 1984.
The order reads thus:-  "Whereas Shri Gurmukh Singh, Watchman has been convicted of offence of Criminal misconduct in connection with theft of one truck load of rice while posted at Jandiala depot on the night of 13/14.3.1980.
And whereas the said Shri Gurmukh Singh Watchman has been convicted for one year imprisonment alongwith fine of Rs. 250/- as per the court order pronounced on 2931984 by Shri AS Kathuria, Judicial Magistrate Amritsar.
And whereas, it is considered that the conduct of the said Shri Gurmukh Singh, Watchman which has led to his conviction, is such as to render his further retention in the public service undesirable.
Now, therefore, in exercise of powers conferred by Regulation 63 read with Regulation 54 of the FCI Staff Regulations, 1971, the undersigned hereby dismisses the said Shri Gurmukh Singh, Watchman from service which shall be disqualification for further employment under the Corporation.
This order shall take effect from the date of said conviction i.e. Twenty-ninth day of March, 1984."
The appeal, preferred by the petitioner met with no success and, as mentioned earlier, it is these two orders which have been challenged in the present petition.
3.
The sole contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner is that in ultimate analysis petitioner was let off under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act.
He was given the benefit of the provisions contained in the said Act and it shall be deemed that he was not convicted.
In the same context, it is being argued that letting off an offender under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act does not amount to conviction and if the impugned order terminating the services of the petitioner is only on account of the petitioner having been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment, the same deserves to be set aside.
It is further the contention of the learned counsel that in any case while terminating the services of the petitioner, his conduct leading to his conviction ought to have been considered which was not at all done in this case, thus, vitiating the order of termination, Annexure P-2 and appellate order, Annexure P-4.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is not at all convinced that any of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner has any force.
It has been held by the Apex Court in Union of India and others v. Bakshi Ram, 1990(3) RCR(Crl.)
133 (SC) : 1990(2) SLR 65 that "in criminal trial the conviction is one thing and sentence is another.
The department punishment for misconduct is yet a third one.
The Court, while invoking the provisions of Sections 3 of 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act does not deal with conviction; it only deals with the sentence which the offender has to undergo.
Instead of sentencing the offender the Court releases him on probation of good conduct.
The conviction, however, remains untouched and the stigma of conviction is not obliterated.
In the departmental proceedings the delinquent could be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on criminal charge.
Insofar as contention of the learned counsel with regard to non-consideration of conduct of the petitioner by the Punishing Authority is concerned, the same is factually incorrect.
The order of dismissal has been reproduced above.
The Punishing Authority has definitely taken into consideration the conduct of petitioner leading to his conviction.
Nothing more is required to be said but for to say that the conduct of the petitioner was totally reprehensible.
He being a Watchman to protect a particular property, had himself committed the theft.
The conduct of the petitioner, in view of this Court, called for deterrent punishment and dismissing him from service was the only view that could be taken in this case.
There is absolutely no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed Leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.