Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in this group of eight petitions complain that their services have been arbitrarily terminated.
They pray that the orders of termination be quashed and that the respondents be directed to allow them to continue in service.
They further pray that their services be regularised.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in Civil Writ Petition No 19328 of 1996.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners were appointed as Beldars/Barkandaz by the Superintending Engineer, Uppar Bari Doab Canal Circle, Amritsar.
A copy of the order dated August 21, 1996 issued to petitioner No. 2 regarding his appointment has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
On October 23, 1996, the Chief Engineer observed that the appointments had been made by the Superintending Engineer in violation of the instructions issued by the State Government.
In pursuance of the directions of the Chief Engineer, an office order dated November 22, 1996 was issued by which the petitioners were given 30 days' notice at the expiry of which their services were to be "deemed to be terminated w.e.f.
20.12.1996".
A Copy of the order issued to petitioner No. 2 has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It has been averred that similar orders were issued to the other petitioners as well.
The petitioners allege that their appointments had been made in conformity with the past practice.
Some of the persons who had been similarly appointed by the Superintending Engineer are still continuing in service.
In spite of that, their services have been terminated without the issue of any show cause notice or the grant of any opportunity whatsoever.
The action is, thus, violative of the principles of natural justice and the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
It has been pointed out that the appointments were made by the Superintending Engineer without issuing any advertisement or sending any requisition to the Employment Exchange.
The case was not referred to any "competent selecting agency".
No interview was held.
Thus, the appointments were wholly illegal and violative of "the doctrine of equality".
Consequently, these were ordered to be terminated after serving a 30 days' notice in accordance with the directions given by the Chief Engineer.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioners that the order of appointment vested a right in them to hold their respective posts.
This right could not have been taken away by the respondents without affording them an opportunity.
None having been provided, the impugned orders of termination of services cannot be sustained.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Shridhar v. Nagar Palika, Jaunpur and others, 1990(1) RSJ 30, the claim was controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
5.
The Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matter of appointment to any office or post under the State.
The competent authority has the undoubted right to lay down such qualifications and conditions of eligibility as the duties of a post may warrant.
However, all such persons as are eligible have a right to be considered.
It is the duty of the competent authority to afford them an opportunity to compete.
It is under an obligation to consider their claims.
It cannot obtain applications and make appointments in a cloistered manner.
6.
What is the position in the present case ?
The posts were not advertised.
No requisition was sent even to the Employment Exchange.
Applications were never invited.
No interview was held.
Yet, the letters of appointment were given to the petitioners.
This is not the way to fill-up posts under the State.
The Superintending Engineer acted in a wholle illegal and arbitrary manner.
He violated the guarantee of equality enshrined in the Constitution.
The appointments were made in derogation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
These were illegal.
On coming to know of the orders issued by the Superintending Engineer, the Chief Engineer issued appropriate instructions.
He only rectified a mistake.
He committed no wrong.
7.
Counsel for the petitioners refers to the decision of the Apex Court in Shridhar's case (supra).
In this case, the post of Tax Inspector was filled up by direct recruitment after making proper selection.
Yet, the appointment was set aside without giving any notice or opportunity to him.
In this situation, it was observed by their Lordships that "the order of appointment conferred a vested right... to hold the post of Tax Inspector..." which "could not be taken away without affording opportunity of hearing to him.
Any order passed in violation of Principles of natural justice is rendered void."
In the present case, it is clearly established on the record that no selection was held.
The appointments were clearly illegal.
This position was not even disputed before the Court.
In this situation, the grant of an opportunity would have served no purpose.
It would have been an exercise in futility.
8.
The factual position in the present case being totally different from that in Shridhar's case, the petitioners can derive no advantage from the decision.
9.
It is true that a person has a right to be heard before an order can be passed to his prejudice.
It enables the authority to know the other man's view-point and to pass a proper order.
However, the factual position as pointed out in the written statement having not been controverted on behalf of the petitioners, it is apparent that the appointments were not made in conformity with law.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the failure of the Chief Engineer to give a notice to the petitioners caused any prejudice to them.
It also deserves notice that the Chief Engineer on whose directions the orders of termination were issued, has not even been impleaded as a party.
10.
In the writ petitions, it has been inter alia alleged that certain persons who were similarly situate as the petitioners were still continuing in service.
The allegation has been controverted.
It has been stated that the services of all persons who were similarly placed have been terminated.
It was probably in view of this position that the learned counsel had not raised any submission in this behalf.
However, even if certain persons whose appointment was illegal had been allowed to continue, the petitioners would be entitled to no relief.
This court in the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 shall not compel any authority to perpetuate any wrong or illegality.
11.
It may also be mentioned that in response to the notice of motion, the written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents only in three petitions.
It was, however, pointed out that the factual position had been clearly explained.
Consequently, all the writ petitions are being disposed of together even though in some of these, the counter had not been filed on behalf of the respondents.
No other point was urged.
12.
In view of the above there is no merit in these petitions.
Resultantly, all the petitions are dismissed.
The interim orders, if any, passed by the Bench shall stand vacated.
However, there will be no order as to costs.