VK Bali, J - SN Ahlawat and three others appointed on the post of Coach in the Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai, seek pay parity with the Coaches of the Sports Department in the State of Haryana.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that they had done graduation and diploma from Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, Patiala.
The eligibility for joining the diploma course in the institute is only open to those who had either played at the national or international level or at the Inter- University level and those who are graduates.
They were appointed on the post of Coaches during the period from 1974 to 1977.
The qualifications that they hold is the same that are required for appointment as Coaches in the Sports Department of the Government of Haryana.
Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, Rai is stated to be a Government School of the State of Haryana as the same was set up for providing necessary teaching/coaching to the young students in the field of sports.
In so far as the Coaches of the respondent- State are concerned, it is the case of the petitioners that the State had been maintaining a joint Cadre of the Coaches and District Sports Officers.
In spite of the fact that joint cadre was being maintained, vide order dated 2nd of October, 1984, the State revised the pay scale of the District Sports Officers from Rs. 700-1250 to Rs. 800-1600 with effect from September 28, 1984.
In this revision of pay scale, the Coaches of the State as also the Coaches of the Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, Rai were ignored.
This action of the respondent-State was challenged by the Coaches of respondent- State through Civil Writ Petition 5036 of 1984 and the same was allowed by this Court on July 24, 1990.
During the course of arguments, it is stated that, even the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State against the judgment has been dismissed by the Supreme Court.
Even though this was the position, insofar as the Coaches in the Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, are concerned, they were ignored in the matter of pay scale of Rs. 800-1600.
3.
Earlier in point of time the petitioners had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3950 of 1995 which was, however, dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to file fresh one by giving more particulars.
This writ petition was dismissed on February 12, 1996.
4.
From the pleadings that have been detailed above, it is the contention of Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel representing the petitioners that Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, Rai is the Government School of the respondent- State and that being so, when Coaches employed by the State Government in the department of Sports are getting a particular scale, the petitioners who were also Coaches in a Government School, should be entitled to the same and non- grant of the said pay scale to the petitioners would be hostile discrimination against them.
It is further his contention that now since Special Leave Petition preferred by the State in the matter of some other Coaches employed by the State who also sought pay parity with their counter parts has been dismissed, nothing comes in the way for grant to the petitioner the pay scale asked by them which may be commensurate to the Coaches employed by the Government.
5.
The matter has been contested on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 who have filed written statement through the Principal and Director, Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, Rai, in which it has been inter alia pleaded that sports school is designed on the lines of public school and controlled by a Special Board headed by the Governor of Haryana.
The rules and regulations framed by the Special Board are made applicable to the school.
The Coaches employed in the School cannot be treated at par with the Sports Coaches employed in the State of Haryana in the matter of pay scales.
Petitioner have been provided two promotional avenues/higher standard pay scales after completion of 10 and 20 years of satisfactory service and which has been allowed to the petitioners as per details in paragraph 2 of the written statement.
It is further the case of the respondents that the Coaches of the School are being provided with the additional facilities such as rent-free furnished accommodation and free food during term time with the students, free units of electricity upto some extent and children's education at concessional rates which are not being provided to the Coaches in the Sports Department of Haryana.
It is also their case that Motilal Nehru School of Sport, Rai is a separate department and the Principal/Director is the Head of the Department so far as the School is concerned.
It has, however, been reiterated that Sports Department Haryana and Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai are separate departments under the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Sports & Youth Welfare Department, Haryana.
Coaches of Sports Department and Coaches of Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai have different types of cadres, pay scales and perks.
6.
The matter came up for hearing on October 11, 1996.
This Court was informed that the Special Leave Petition preferred by the State of Haryana has been dismissed on 12121995.
The matter was adjourned to 17121996 for arguments and in the meantime the respondent-department was directed to take final decision in the matter.
The Government had taken a decision and rejected the claim of the petitioners for pay parity.
When matter came up for hearing on 17121996.
Counsel for the respondents placed on record copy of the fax message vide which the claim of the petitioners for being equated with the Coaches of the Sports Department has been rejected on the ground that the Coaches in the Sports Department are Class II Posts whereas Coaches working in Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai, are Class III posts.
The matter was then adjourned for arguments.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel representing the parties and are of the view that based upon the material that has been placed on record and on the strength of the contentions raised by Mr. Balram Gupta, no relief can possibly be granted to the petitioners.
It is not at all necessary to give the detailed facts to go into the question whether Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai is a department of the Government or has independent status even though Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel representing the petitioners on the basis of the appointment letters of the petitioners and other data endeavoured to show that Motilal Nehru School of Sport Rai is a Government School of the respondent-State.
The matter with regard to pay parity between the Coaches employed in various departments is also of no relevance inasmuch as pay parity in the said case was sought by the persons absolutely similarly situated.
So far as the case of the petitioners is concerned, it is certainly distinguishable.
It could not be disputed during the course of arguments that so far the petitioners are concerned, they are holding a Class II post whereas Coaches of the Sport Department are holding Class III posts.
That apart, what really clinches the issue is that Coaches employed in Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai are getting number of substantial perks which are not admissible to the Coaches of the sports department.
Rent-free furnished accommodation, free food during term with the students, free units of electricity upto some extent and education of children at the concession rates are facilities of very substantial nature.
If these facilities are converted into money, the pay of petitioners may even go higher than that of the Coaches of the Sports Department.
During the course of arguments a suggestion was put to the learned Counsel representing the petitioners that if pay parity was granted to the petitioners, were they prepared to forego the facilities given to the petitioners which has been referred to above.
Naturally, no such suggestion could even the considered leave aside accepting the same at the end of the petitioners.
It is, therefore, not at all a case of discrimination as petitioners are in any case not at loss in the matter of emoluments permissible to them.
It is true that the Government at one stage deferred the decision with regard to pay parity of the petitioners with that of the Coaches of the Sports Department awaiting the decision of the Supreme Court but that does not necessarily mean that in case the Supreme Court was to reject the appeal preferred by the State the petitioners would automatically get pay parity with the Coaches of the Sports Department.
It could well be thought over by the Government that in case SLP preferred by the State was allowed, it may not even be a case for consideration.
At the most it can, therefore, be said that the Government deferred this consideration and that cannot be equated with their tacit acceptance of the claim of the petitioners, if SLP preferred by the State was to be dismissed by the Supreme Court.
In so far as the claim of the petitioners with regard to the promotion is concerned, Counsel representing the petitioners could not state as to on what possible post the petitioner could be promoted since the Coaches will remain Coaches only.
At the most they can be entitled to promotional pay scales.
It has been clearly averred in the written statement that the Government of Haryana has provided two promotional avenues/higher standard of pay scales after completion of 10/20 years of satisfactory service to the petitioners and it is not disputed that the petitioners have availed of the same.
We find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same.