Ashok Bhan, J - Present petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing order dated 27.12.1995 Annexure P6 declining the request of the petitioner for the grant of pay of the post of Driving Instructor against which he had been selected and appointed in 1984 by a duly constituted Departmental Selection Committee against which he has been/is discharging the duties for the last more than 12 years.
It has further been prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to pay the salary of the post of Driving Instructors in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 with further revisions of pay, if any.
2.
Petitioner joined as Helper in the year 1968 in the department of Transport, Punjab.
He was promoted to the post of Assistant Fitter and then as Fitter in the year 1970 and 1972 respectively.
He was further promoted to the post of Mechanic on 1121980.
Service conditions of the petitioner are regulated by the rules titled ``Punjab Roadways (Workshop) State Service Class-III Rules, 1977'' (hereinafter referred to as the Rules of 1977).
3.
Respondents as a matter of policy with the aim and object of streamlining the Department of Punjab Roadways headed by Director State Transport-respondent No. 2 decided to create a Driving Training School to impart training to the Drivers and the Conductors.
This was done to enlighten the Drivers and the Conductors of the Department regarding their duties to make the department more proficient.
As a consequence of this policy, and Driving Training School was set up at Mohali.
The following Ex-Cadre posts had been created for the said training School:-  "Name of post No. Grade Rs. 1.
Training Officer (Principal Training School) 1 350-900 2.
Instructors 2 200-450 3.
Driver Instructor 1 200-450 4.
Mechanic 1 140-300 5.
Steno-typist (for Principal) 1 110-250+ 25 S.P.
6.
Cleark-cum-Store keeper 1 110-250 7.
Chowkidar 1 79-95 8.
Sweeper 1 70-95 9.
Workshop Attendant 1 80-120 Their pay scales were revised from time to time.
4.
Respondent No. 2 decided to fill up the post of Driving Instructor by way of transfer from amongst the Head Mechanics/Mechanics working in the Punjab Roadways and accordingly invited applications from the willing and interested officials of the above said categories vide circular letter dated 1551984 Annexure P.1.
Petitioner being eligible as per the qualifications laid down in the letter Annexure P.1 applied for the post of Driving Instructor along with some other officials.
Respondent No. 2 constituted a Committee consisting of following persons for making selection of the Driving Instructor:  ``i) Director State Transport Punjab Chairman ii) Mechanical Automobile Engineer Member iii) Administrative Officer Member iv) Training Officer Driving Training School Member'' Interviews were held on 13.9.1984.
Petitioner was selected for the post of Driving Instructor to which post he was accordingly appointed by order dated 18.10.1984 Annexure P2.
He was relieved from his previous post of Mechanic on 23101984 by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, in pursuance to the /directions issued by respondent No. 2.
A condition was imposed in the letter of appointment to the effect that petitioner shall work ``in his own scale of pay of Mechanic''.
The appointment was on probation for a period of one year which the petitioner successful completed.
Petitioner filed a detailed representation claiming the scale of pay of the post of Driving Instructor on which he was working.
His representation was recommended by his immediate superior officer namely Principal Training School vide his letter dated 521986 Annexure P.3.
Thereafter, petitioner kept on filing representations and the last being dated 3151995 which stands rejected by the impugned order Annexure P6  5.
Present petition has been filed challenging order Annexure P6 inter alia on the ground that petitioner has been appointed as Driving Instructor by a duly constituted Selection Committee after considering the claim of all other applicants for the said post.
While inviting applications no condition that selected candidate would be appointed in the scale he was working was mentioned.
Any condition subsequently imposed in the order of appointment that the candidate would be appointed in his own scale of pay was illegal, arbitrary and, therefore, liable to be struck down.
The post of Driving Instructor was to be filled in, on regular basis in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 from amongst the Head Mechanics/Mechanics working in the department of Punjab Roadways.
Petitioner having been appointed to the post of Driving Instructor, of which post he has been discharging his duties since 1984, was entitled to pay of the Driving Instructor.
It has further been averred that after his selection and appointment as Driving Instructor, his name was removed from the list of Mechanics in the department of Transport.
He was allowed to cross the efficiency bar on the post on which he was appointed on 2511986.
Petitioner having actually worked on the post of Driving Instructor on which post he is still working, is lawfully entitled to the pay scale of the said post.
6.
Written statement has been filed.
It has been admitted that petitioner was working in the Transport Department as a Mechanic.
On a requisition sent for the appointment to the post of Driving Instructor, petitioner applied along with others.
Petitioner was selected the Departmental Selection Committee.
As no rules had been framed at the time of selection, he was told by the Departmental Selection Committee that no draft rules had been framed regarding the mode of appointment and qualifications and experience and the petitioner could be appointed/posted in his own pay scale of Mechanic till the rules are framed.
Petitioner having accepted the appointment in terms of his letter of appointment in his own scale of pay is not entitled to claim the scale of pay of Driving Instructor.
Averment that his application was recommended by his immediate superior officer for grant of pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 has been admitted.
It has further been submitted that impugned order Annexure P6 is perfectly legal and no vested right was created in the petitioner to claim higher scale of pay of the post of Driving Instructor.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
8.
At the outset it may be stated that at the time when the notice of motion was issued, counsel for the petitioner stated that he would not press the claim of the petitioner for arrears.
9.
Supreme Court of India in Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1983 Supreme Court 1060 , while considering the question as to whether an employee is entitled to the pay of the higher post of which he/she is discharging the duties, it was held:  ``..........We are unable to understand the reason given in the counter-affidavit.
She was promoted to the post of District Education Officer, a Class-I post on an acting basis.
Our attention was not invited to any Rule which provides that promotion on an acting basis would not entitle the officer promoted to the pay of the post.
In the absence of any rule justifying such refusal to pay to an officer promoted to a higher post the salary of such higher post (the validity of such a rule would be doubtful if it existed).
We must hold that Smt. Grover is entitled to be paid the salary of a District Education Officer from the date she was promoted to the post that is, July 19, 1976, until she retired from service on August 31, 1980.
The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs.''
Similarly, a learned Single Judge of this Court in Shri O.P. Bhagat v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) RSJ 249 : 1994(2) S.C.T.
530 where an employee had been appointed to a higher post of which he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar, the claim of salary for that post was allowed by holding:-  ``.........Therefore, it is neither legally permissible nor proper on the part of the State to deny to the petitioner the salary for the periods he was required to discharge the duties of the higher posts.''
In Subhash Chander Oberoi v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(3) RSJ 56 a single Judge of this Court relying upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in KL Goyal and another v. The State of Haryana and another, CWP 11486 of 1990 decided on 1931991, while striking down a similar condition of appointment in his own pay scale ``to the higher post'' held that he was entitled to the pay scale of the post to which he had been promoted and that he could not be compelled to work on a higher post in his own pay scale.
10.
In the present case, respondent No. 2 had categorically stated in the circular letter Annexure P.1 that post of Driving Instructor was proposed to be filled in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 from amongst the Mechanics/Head Mechanics of the department.
Petitioner had submitted his application for appointment to the post of Driving Instructor keeping in view the higher scale of pay and corresponding higher status of that post.
There was no stipulation that appointment to the post of Driving Instructor would be in the pay scale of the post previously held by the appointee.
Neither there was any stipulation in Annexure P.1 that selected and appointed incumbent will not be given the pay scale of Driving Instructor nor any option of the petitioner had been obtained for working in the pay scale of the lower post.
Condition imposed in Annexure P2 to the effect "in his own pay scale of Mechanic'' was contrary to the letter Annexure P.1 and, therefore, unsustainable.
11.
A perusal of Annexure P.1 reveals that post of Driving Instructor was to be filled in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 from amongst Head Mechanics/Mechanics working in the department of Punjab Roadways.
Petitioner has been discharging the duties on the higher post since 1984 and is, therefore, entitled to the pay scale of that post.
Simply because the respondents have failed to frame rules for the last 12 years, petitioner cannot be deprived of his right to claim the higher pay scales attached to the post to which he was appointed and on which he has been discharging his duties successfully since 1984.
12.
Contention of the counsel for the respondents that petitioner has retained his lien an Mechanic in his parent department is unsustainable in view of the seniority lists issued by the department Annexure P.7 and P.8 in which the name of the petitioner as Mechanic does not find mention.
Petitioner was allowed to cross the efficiency bar as a Driving Instructor.
13.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is allowed, order Annexure P6 is quashed.
Respondents are directed to grant the pay scale of the post of Driving Instructor (Rs. 570-1080) which now stands revised to Rs. 1500-2700 to the petitioner.
He would be entitled to this grade from the date he had joined that said post but he would not be allowed the arrears as he had given up his claim for the arrears at the time of issuance of notice of motion to the respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.