Swatanter Kumar, J - Surjan Singh appellant filed the suit for declaration to the effect that the plaintiff in the suit was entitled to get pension and pensionary benefits w.e.f.
1.4.1981 by counting his total service from 111956 on 3131981 as qualifying service.
2.
The respondents herein and the defendants in the suit contested the suit and took various preliminary objections.
It was stated in the written statement that the plaintiff was appointed as work charge/beldar and he joined service in 1956.
It is admitted that his services were regularised w.e.f.
15.8.1972 and thus the department wanted to count period from 1972 and not from 1956.
3.
The learned trial Court vide its judgment and decree dated 3041994 decreed the suit of the plaintiff and dismissed all the pleas raised by the defendants in the written statement.
4.
Being aggrieved from the Judgment and decree of trial Court, the State went up in appeal.
The Ist Appellate Court vide its judgment dated 2191995 dismissed the appeal with costs throughout.
5.
Still being dissatisfied from this decision, the State filed Regular Second Appeal.
The short contention of the learned counsel for the appellants is that the suit of the plaintiff was barred by time as the plaintiff had cause of action w.e.f.
1.4.1981 and he could have filed the suit in the year 1983 and as such, the suit was barred by time, limitation being of three years.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon the case of State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh reported as (1991) 4 SCC 1.
On the other hand the learned counsel for the respondent has argued that question of limitation does not arise in the case of pension and pensionary benefits because it is recurring cause of action.
This cause of action accrues in favour of the plaintiff every month and refusal on the part of the appellants to compute and pay benefit of pension or pensionary benefit to the respondent gives him continuing cause of action to approach the Court and consequently the suit is not barred by time.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the respondent relies upon the case of State of Punjab through Collector, (sic) Patiala and others v. Amar Singh Constable reported as 1990(1) SLR 763 and reported as 1996(1) S.L.J.
704.
Both the judgments confirm the principle that pensionary benefit is recurring cause of action and consequently is not hit by limitation of three years.
It is the settled principle of law that pension and pensionary benefit is kind of property of government servant and is not bounty on the basis of which the Department assumes its discretion and deny such benefit to the person.
Reference in this regard may be made to Full Bench of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, reported as 1988(5) SLR 27.
The Full Bench of this Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana through Financial Commissioner, Chandigarh and another, reported as 1995(3) PLR 411 : 1995(4) SCT 285(P&H)(FB) considered the question at great length and answered it in favour of the employee holding that the entire service rendered by the government employee which is in accordance with rules, and upon selection, has to be counted for the purpose of pension and pensionary benefit.
Learned courts below have followed the decision of the Full Bench and I find no legal or any other infirmity in the judgments of the Courts below.
Consequently this appeal is dismissed with costs assessed at Rs. 500/-.
Appeal dismissed.