VK Bali, J (Oral) - Shri Baljit Singh, Secretary, Market Committee, Amritsar, takes strong exception to the orders of suspension (Annexure P-6) handed over to him on 6th of October, 1995, which reads thus :-  "In pursuance of the directions received from the Govt. under section 41(a) of the Punjab Agricultural Proceduce Markets Act, 1961, conveyed vide memo No. 6/3/94/M.2(10345) dated the 6101995, Shri Baljit Singh, Secretary, Market Committee, Amritsar, is placed under suspension with immediate effect.
During the period of his suspension he will draw pay and allowances at such rates as are admissible to the employees under suspension as per the rules governing the service conditions of Shri Baljit Singh.
During the period of his suspension the headquarter of Shri Baljit Singh is fixed at Chandigarh."
As per the case set out in the petition, the order reproduced above come to be passed at the instance of Shri Dalbagh Singh, Minister of Agriculture, Punjab, Chandigarh, respondent No. 5, who died during the pendency of the writ petition.
This order has been challenged on number of grounds such as that the same is actuated on account of mala fide of respondent No. 5 which he entertained against the petitioner as also that there was neither any enquiry pending nor one contemplated and that being so that rule governing suspension i.e. rule 4(1) of Punjab State Agricultural Markets Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1988 did not empower either the State Government or the Chairman of the Board to pass such an order.
The order is also challenged on the ground that under the provisions contained in Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) it is only the Chairman of the Board, being an appointing authority of the petitioner, who could pass the order in question and not the Government.
2.
In so far as respondent-Board is concerned, it has not at all contested the claim of the petitioner.
Rather, the averments made in the petition have been admitted.
It has not been disputed in the written statement filed on behalf of the Board that any enquiry was either pending against the petitioner or the same was completed.
In fact, the conduct of the petitioner has been appreciated and he has been styled to be one of the best officers in the Board.
However, the matter has been contested by the State Government wherein it is pleaded that by virtue of provisions contained in Section 38 of the Act, the government can exercise superintendence and control over the Board and its officers and can call for such information as it may deem necessary and in the event of its being satisfied that the Board is not functioning properly or is abusing its powers or is guilty of corruption or mis-management, it may suspend the Board and till such time a new Board is constituted, make such arrangements for the exercise of the functions of the Board as it may think fit.
It is also placed that number of complaints were received and the allegations contained in the complaints aforesaid were being enquired into by the Vigilance Officer where a Regular Enquiry No. 22 dated 22nd of June, 1995 has been registered against the petitioner.
It is also mentioned in the written statement that the complaint subject matter of enquiry against the petitioner and the relevant file shall be shown to the Court at the time of hearing.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel representing the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records.
There is no need to go into all the points canvassed in support of the petition for setting aside the order of suspension dated 6th of October, 1995 as in considered view of this Court, the petitioner deserves the desired relief on the sole ground that at the time when order of suspension was passed against him there was neither any enquiry pending nor contemplated against him.
Rule dealing with the suspension i.e. Rule 41 reads thus :-  "4(1) The appointing authority or any other authority empowered in that behalf by the government by general or special order may place an employee under suspension :- (a) where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or pending, or (b) where a case against him in respect of criminal offence is under investigation, enquiry or trial."
The rule dealing with suspension empowers the appointing authority or any other authority empowered in that behalf by the Government to suspend an employee only if disciplinary proceedings against the concerned employee are pending or are contemplated or a case in respect of a criminal offence is under investigation, enquiry or trial.
As mentioned above, it is not even pleaded by the Government, leave aside the Board, that there was some criminal case against the petitioner in which there might have been some investigation, enquiry or trial.
4.
Employer of the petitioner is the Board and not the Government.
The order of suspension was passed by the Government.
In considered view of this Court, such an order ought to have been passed by the employer of the petitioner i.e. Punjab Mandi Board.
The Government, as mentioned above, has endeavoured to sustain the order of suspension on the strength of Section 38 of the Punjab Agricultural Proceduce Markets Act, 1961 which is reproduced as under :-  "38 :- The State Government shall exercise superintendence and control over the Board and its officers and may call for such information as it may deem necessary and, in the event of its being satisfied that the Board is not functioning properly or is abusing its power or is guilty of corruption or mismanagement, it may suspend the Board and, till such time as new Board is constituted, makes such arrangements for the exercise of the functions of the Board (and of its Chairman) as it may think fit."
A perusal of Section 38 reproduced above, shows that the State Government does exercise superintendence and control over the Board and its officers and can call for any information as it deems necessary.
In the event of its being satisfied that the Board is not functioning properly or is abusing its powers or is guilty of corruption or mismanagement, it can suspend the Board.
This power, thus, can be exercised only in respect of the Board and not an employee.
That apart, there is a specific rule i.e. Rule 4(1) which deals with suspension of an employee.
There being a specific rule dealing with suspension, the Government cannot rely upon Section 38 which deals with powers of the Government to suspend the Board.
In the present case, as has been mentioned above, the impugned order has been passed by the Government whereas Rule 4(1) empowers the appointing authority or any other authority empowered in that behalf by the Government to suspend an employee.
Admittedly, Government is not appointing authority of the petitioner and nothing has been shown to the Court to manifest the power, which was normally to be exercised by the appointing authority, was at any stage delegated to someone else.
The stand of the Government in support of the order endeavouring to show to the Court that it had jurisdiction to pass the impugned order under Section 38 is thus rejected.
5.
Even though order appears to have been,prima facie passed on account of mala fide entertained by respondent No. 5 against the petitioner, so sought to be made out from the averments made in the petition and canvassed by learned counsel for the petitioner, there is no need to determine the said issue as the petitioner can be allowed the relief on the grounds, indicated above.
The court is, thus, not inclined to go into this issue and determine the same one way or the other.
Suffice it, however, to mention that the Board in its written statement has fully supported the cause of the petitioner and as mentioned above, styled him one of the best officers of the Board.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and the order of suspension, Annexure P-6, is quashed.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.