B Rai, J - Facts first.
One Nafe Singh was working as Assistant Line-Man in Haryana State Electricity Board at Faridabad.
He expired on December 28, 1981 while on duty.
Plaintiff Balo Devi widow of Nafe Singh submitted an application on July 2, 1986 in the Office of Executive Engineer 'OP' Division, Haryana State Electricity Board, Sector 22, Faridabad for providing employment on compassionate grounds to her son Surinder Singh, who was at that time minor.
However, the application was rejected, being time barred, vide letter No. CH-35/NGR 1411, dated December 18, 1987 of defendant No. 1.
Feeling aggrieved by this action of the Authority, the plaintiff filed a suit for decree of declaration to the effect that the defendants be directed to provide employment to one of the dependents of the deceased husband of the plaintiff under Ex-gratia grant policy.
2.
The defendants contested the claim of the plaintiff by filing a written statement.
Factum of death of Nafe Singh while on duty was not disputed.
However, the stand taken up by the defendants was that employment to one of the dependents of the deceased could be given within three years from his death provided an application in that behalf was made to the Haryana State Electricity Board within period of one year from the death of the employee.
The defendants further defended their action by averring that the application made by the plaintiff for providing employment to her son Surinder Singh who was admittedly under age at the time of making the said application, being time-barred, could not be considered at that stage under the prevailing instructions of the Board and hence the said application was rejected.
3.
In the replication filed by the plaintiff, averments made in the written statement were controverted and those taken in the plaint were reiterated.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed the following issues :  (1) Whether one of the dependents of Nafe Singh deceased is liable to get employment ?
OPP (2) Whether the application for job is time barred, if so to what effect ?
OPD (3) Relief.
5.
Issues 1 and 2 being interconnected were taken up together.
Both the issues were decided in favour of the plaintiff by holding that the application filed by the plaintiff for providing employment to her son Surinder Singh was within time and that he be considered for employment against a suitable post under ex-gratia scheme.
The trial Court accordingly decreed the suit of the plaintiff vide its judgment and decree, dated November 22, 1990.
6.
The appeal filed by the Haryana State Electricity Board and others against the aforesaid decision of the Subordinate Judge III Class, Faridabad, was allowed, the judgment decree, dated November 22, 1990 of the trial Court were set aside and the suit of plaintiff Balo Devi was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Faridabad, vide his judgment and decree, dated December 17, 1991.
7.
Dissatisfied with the decision of the lower appellate Court, Balo Devi plaintiff-appellant has approached this Court to try her luck by way of the present Regular Second Appeal.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the material placed before me carefully.
9.
The policy of compassionate appointments evolved by the Government Board is to provide source of sustenance to a member of the family of the deceased who died in harness but that, of course, it not as a matter of course and is subject to certain conditions laid down by it.
I went through the instructions issued by the Haryana State Electricity Board from time to time with the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties.
The first circular instructions on the point were dated November 26, 1971 which have been referred to in letter dated September 14, 1983, Exhibit D4.
In this letter it has been mentioned that one of the members of the family of the deceased employee can be considered for employment in Board's service but that ex- gratia employment would be confined only to Class-III and Class-IV posts.
It had further been made clear in the letter, Exhibit D4, that those dependents, of deceased employees who opted for special pensionary benefits would not be allowed such benefits.
However, vide letter dated September 26, 1985, Exhibit D.3, it was further decided by the Board as under :  (i) That time limit within which the dependent of the deceased employee is to be provided employment be fixed as one year.
(ii) That request for employment be entertained only in cases in which the widows submit application for employment immediately after death of their husbands".
However by subsequent instructions dated October 1, 1986, Exhibit D5, the Haryana State Electricity Board further liberalised the conditions and it was provided that the time limit within which the dependent of the deceased was to be provided employment may be extended to three years provided a request for providing employment was made to the Board within a period of one year from the death of the employee.
In the present case admittedly the death of Nafe Singh occurred on December 28, 1981 and the application for providing employment to her son Surinder Singh was submitted by his mother on July 2, 1986, on which date Surinder Singh was minor.
The said application was therefore, rightly rejected in view of the prevailing instructions of the Board.
The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that an application prior to the aforementioned one was submitted by the plaintiff but was withheld by the Board, has no force in the absence of any evidence to that effect.
Such an argument appears to be an after-thought and a futile attempt to bring the matter within time limit prescribed by the Board.
It is no doubt true that at the time when Nafe Singh died on December 28, 1981, there were no instructions of the Board prescribing one year's time lime for submitting an application.
However, it is clear that instructions dated September 26, 1985, Exhibit D.3, prescribing one year's limitation had been issued before the filing of the application by Balo Devi on July 2, 1986.
In other words, the restriction of one year had already come into being prior to the filing of the application by Balo Devi.
Moreover, Balo Devi had not clarified that she as a dependent of Nafe Singh had not opted for special pensionary benefits within the ambit of instructions dated September 14, 1983, Exhibit D4.
Nowhere it has been so mentioned in the plaint as well.
11.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed here that providing employment to one of the dependents of the employee of the Board who dies in harness is as a gesture of goodwill under ex-gratia scheme and the idea behind it is that the dependents do not suffer.
It would also be apt to mention here that if Balo Devi was really in need of employment, she could submit an application for her employment but instead she made an application and waited for five years for getting employment for her son when he grew major, which goes a long way to show that she was not in need of employment and the application so submitted by her was rightly rejected.
12.
In view of the above discussion, the Appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
The judgment and decree dated December 17, 1991 of the first appellate Court are affirmed.
No costs.