GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash the show-cause notice Annexure P3 issued by the Superintendent of Police, Jind, on 2381985 to the petitioner proposing his dismissal from service and withholding the amount of salary except the subsistence allowance already paid.
2.
In the year 1979, the petitioner was working as constable at Police Station Chhappar in District Ambala.
In regard to an allegation of interpolation of the police record, he was placed under suspension and an enquiry was initiated against him.
The petitioner was served with a charge sheet together with summary of allegations and as he denied the allegations, a regular enquiry was ordered against him.
The enquiry officer submitted a report with a finding that the petitioner was guilty of the allegations levelled against him.
This was followed by a show cause notice dated 2821980 issued by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ambala because at the relevant time, the petitioner was posted in District Ambala.
In this notice, there was a proposal to stop three future increments with permanent effect.
Thereafter the petitioner was transferred to Karnal and finally to Jind.
The Superintendent of Police, Karnal as well as the Superintendent of Police, Jind issued noticed dated 2331985 and 2381985 and called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why he be not dismissed from service.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the show ase notice issued to him by the Superintendent of Police, Jind on the ground that the enquiry held against him is vitiated due to violation of principles of natural justice.
He has also pleaded that after issue of show cause notice dated 2821980 no power was vested with the Superintendent of Police, Jind to revise the proposed penalty.
Another ground of challenge to the impugned notice is alleged mala fide of respondent No. 3.
4.
Respondents 1 and 2 have opposed the writ petition by stating that regular enquiry was held against the petitioner in accordance with the Punjab Police Rules and the principles of natural justice.
It has been pleaded by the respondents that after receipt of the reply to the show cause notice sent to the petitioner on 2821980, the petitioner had been transferred to various districts and due to this reason, no final action could be taken.
It has also been stated that the Superintendent of Police, Jind issued show cause notice dated 2381985 because he found that the allegation found proved against the petitioner was extremely serious in nature.
The allegation of mala fide levalled against the respondent No. 3 has also been denied and it has been pleaded that final decision on the show cause notice issued to the petitioner is to be taken after giving due opportunity of hearing to him.
5.
Respondent No. 3 has filed a separate reply and has denied the allegation of mala fide levelled against him.
He has also stated that departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner by Shri RD Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police Naraingarh, who found him guilty.
Respondent No. 3 has also stated that in view of Annexure R1, the previous notice issued to the petitioner could not have been made basis for imposing punishment.
6.
In regard to the allegation of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 has acted with malice, I may mention that the petitioner has made a bald allegation of mala fide against respondent No. 3.
However, he has not placed any material before the Court to show as to how respondent No. 3 was prejudiced against him.
In my opinion, the petitioner has failed to discharge the preliminary burden which lay upon his to prove the allegation of mala fide and, therefore, the impugned notice cannot be quashed on the ground that respondent No. 3 has acted with malice in issuing notice of punishment to the petitioner.
7.
The other ground of challenge to notice Annexure P3 also merits rejection.
No doubt, show cause notice Annexure P1 was issued to the petitioner and it was proposed to impose punishment of stoppage of three future increments with permanent effect but till a final decision was taken on the basis of said notice, it was within the competence of the Superintendent of Police to revise his opinion regarding nature of the punishment to be awarded to the petitioner and pass a final order after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to him.
If the Superintendent of Police, Jind thought that the petitioner should be dismissed form service looking to the gravity of the allegation found proved against him, it cannot be said that the said officer acted without jurisdiction because it is not the case of the petitioner that any final decision has been taken on the basis of notice dated 2821980.
8.
There is another reason why no interference deserves to be made by this Court.
Against the show cause notice Annexure P3, the petitioner has a right to file a representation and raise all the objections regarding conduct of departmental enquiry as well as the show cause notice.
He has a right to plead that the enquiry was not held against him in accordance with rules and the principles of natural justice.
He is also entitled to plead that the allegation found proved against him is not so serious as to warrant the penalty of dismissal from service, Moreover, the petitioner has a right to file an appeal and further right to file revision/review if the punishing authority passes any adverse order.
In his appeal and revision/review, the petitioner can also convince the higher authorities that the action taken against him is legally unsustainable or is otherwise unjustified.
Therefore, even before a decision is taken by the competent authority on the basis of show cause notice issued to the petitioner, this Court's interference is wholly unwarranted.
9.
I may also mention that the petitioner has not challenged the jurisdiction of the Superintendent of Police, Jind to issue a show cause notice to him.
In fact, any such challenge would have been negatived by this Court because Superintendent of Police, Jind is a co-ordinate authority in rank to the Superintendent of Police, Ambala and in issuing notice to the petitioner proposing his dismissal from service, the Superintendent of Police, Jind cannot be said to have acted in violation of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India or the Punjab Police Rules or the principles of natural justice.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dimissed, It is, however, directed that the competent authority should now give a fresh notice to the petitioner calling upon him to submit further representation, if any and to give him an opportunity of hearing in case he makes a prayer for grant of such opportunity.
The competent authority should pass a fresh order after considering the objections raised by the petitioner.