Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the action of the respondent in appointing the petitioner as a Clerk on compassionate grounds and in rejecting his request for appointment as a Deputy Forest Ranger illegal and arbitrary ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On June 11, 1990, the petitioner's father who was working as a Forest Guard in the State of Haryana died.
The petitioner was less than 7 years of age at that time.
In the year 1994, the petitioner passed his BA examination and applied to the Govt. for appointment as a Deputy Forest Ranger on compassionate grounds.
His application was recommended by the Forest Department to the office of the Chief Secretary.
On October 31, 1994, a post of Clerk in the office of the Advocate General, Haryana was offered to the petitioner.
He jointed the post on December 19, 1994.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a representation on October 18, 1995 with a prayer that he be appointed as a Deputy Forest Ranger.
The request having not been accepted, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that a number of other persons have been given appointments to various posts in different services.
He submits that appointments have been made even to the Haryana Civil Services which is classified as a Class-I service.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents in not appointing him to the post of Deputy Forest Ranger for which he is duly qualified is arbitrary and violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He, consequently, prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and appoint him to the post of Deputy Forest Ranger with effect from December 19, 1994 with all consequential benefits.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner's father Mr. Attar Singh was working as a Forest Guard.
On his death, the petitioner was offered the post of a Clerk which he had duly accepted.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to now claim the post of the Deputy Forest Ranger.
The respondents place reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 525.
According to the respondents, the petitioner has no vested right for appointment to the post of a Deputy Forest Ranger.
Accordingly, it is prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed with costs.
4.
We have heard Mr. Jai Vir Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. CP Sapra who has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
5.
Mr. Yadav has contended that a number of persons have been granted appointments to posts of Taxation Inspectors, Inspector, Food and Supplies and even to Class-I posts.
He has drawn our attention to the fact that Devinder Kumar was appointed as a Taxation Inspector in spite of the fact that his father was working as a Watchman and Rajinder Parshad was appointed as a Taxation Inspector on the death of his father who was working as a Peon.
A number of such instances have been given.
Reference has also been made to the appointment of Mrs. Kuttapan to the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) on the death of her husband who was a member of the Indian Administrative Service.
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that the action of the respondents is appointing the petitioner as a mere Clerk suffers from the vice of discrimination.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Sapra.
6.
It is true that the State is under an obligation to ensure that it does not treat equals unequally.
The State cannot act arbitrarily and unfairly.
Persons who are similarly situate have a right to parity of treatment, However, it is equally true that every citizen has a right to be considered for appointment to a post under the State.
Article 16 of the Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity to every one.
Whenever a post in any service under the State falls vacant, it has to be filled up in accordance with the rules and the State is under an obligation to ensure that every eligible candidate is considered.
For his purpose, the post has to be normally advertised.
The applications are considered and the selected person is appointed.
However, the State Govt. has by issue of executive instructions provided that whenever a Govt. servant dies, a member of his family shall be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds.
The basic purpose of these instructions is to ensure that the family of the deceased employee is able to subsist and tide over the economic crisis caused by the death of the bread winner.
The purpose is not to ensure that the family should continue to live as well as it was living or that its status and standard of living has to be preserved.
If instructions were issued to provide that the dependent member shall be given a post equivalent to the one held by the deceased employee, irrespective of the economic situation of the family, the action of the State Govt. shall be open to a challenge on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Compassion cannot mean doling out of favours to the family.
It can only imply the grant of minimum relief which may help the family to pass through the crisis.
7.
The rule in this behalf has been clearly a enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra).
It has been held that the 'favourable treatment' has to be given as a 'relief' against 'destitution'.
The authority "has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Class III and IV are the lowest posts in non- manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds .... " It has also been held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that the appointment cannot be given "as a matter of course".
Furthermore, the fact that the State Govt. had made appointment to a Class II post on compassionate grounds was held to be "illegal, since it is contrary to the object of making exception to the general rule".
It was further held that "neither the qualifications of his dependent nor the post which he (the deceased) held is relevant."
8.
What is the position in the present case ?
9.
The petitioner's father was working as a Forest Guard.
At the time of his death in the year 1980, the petitioner was just a child.
Fourteen years later, when petitioner had attained majority and passed the BA examination, the department has given him appointment as a Clerk.
The action of the State Govt. is absolutely just and fair.
10.
It is true that appointments have been granted to various persons to higher posts.
It is also true that in the cases of Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana and an others (CWP No. 179 of 1990) and Rajiv Kumar Sharam v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 643 (P&H) (CWP No. 8933 of 1993), this court has held that the action of the State Govt. in giving lower posts to the petitioners while others similarly situated had been given appointments to the higher posts suffered from the vice of discrimination.
However, at that time the decision in Umesh Kumar Nagpal's case (supra) was either not available or had not been pointed out to the Court.
The position of law has, however, been clearly enunciated now.
In view thereof, the State Government is only entitled to grant an appointment to save the family of the deceased from 'destitution'.
Nothing more.
This has already been done.
The mere fact that certain other persons were given appointments to higher posts does not ipso facto entitle the petitioner to the claim of a similar relief.
In fact, the action of the State Govt. in those cases may be questionable.
However, this issue does not arise for consideration in this case.
11.
It may also be mentioned that no person has a right to claim appointment on compassionate grounds.
There is no vested right in this behalf.
If the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is accepted, it may even give right to a graduate to claim appointment to a Class-I service like the Haryana Civil Service or even a higher service on the ground that he is qualified for the post.
Such is not the object of granting appointment on compassionate grounds.
A writ a mandamus can only be issued when the petitioner has a right and the State is under a legal obligation to do some thing.
In the present case, it has given appointment to the petitioner.
He had no vested right to claim appointment as a Deputy Forest Ranger and the State was under no legal obligation to give him that post.
12.
Accordingly, we answer the question as posed at the outset in the negative.
We hold that the action of the respondents is not illegal.
It does not suffer from the vice of discrimination.
It is not violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 the Constitution.
The petitioner has no right to claim appointment to the post of Deputy Forest Ranger.
Consequently, no mandamus can be issued to the State Government to do so.
13.
No other point has been urged.
14.
As a result, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.