Doabia, J - The petitioner was proceeded against for certain acts of omission and commission.
Disciplinary authority concluded that he was guilty of having committed theft and pilferage.
A finding was also recorded that he had absented himself during the period of suspension without there being any permission of the Competent Authority.
2.
The order or removal was passed.
Copy of this is Annex.
P2.
The relevant portion reads as under :-  "And whereas on consideration of the record of disciplinary proceedings including inquiry report, the Disciplinary Authority has agreed with the findings of the inquiry officer and has come to the conclusion that the charges of failure to maintain absolute integrity by misappropriating stock and unauthorisedly absenting form his headquarters and failure to follow the laid down procedure while carrying out the transactions as Warehouse Asstt.
leading to theft/pilferage from the godowns of CW, Bhind have been proved against the said Shri VK Khare.
And where as the Disciplinary Authority is satisfied that good and sufficient reasons exist for imposing upon the said Shri VK Khare, the penalty hereinafter specified.
Now, therefore, the disciplinary authority impose the penalty of removal from service of the Corporation upon Shri VK Khare under regulation 59 of CWC (Staff) Regulations, 1986 for his aforesaid lapse.
He, therefore, hereby is removed from the service of the Corporation with immediate effect.
It has been further ordered by the Disciplinary Authority that the period of suspension of Shri VK Khare shall not be treated as spent on duty and he will not be paid anything over and above what has already been paid to him by way of subsistence allowance."
3.
An appeal was preferred against the above order.
The Appellate Authority came to the conclusion that the charge of theft and pilferage has not been established.
It was however found that the petitioner was absent on two occasions from the headquarters without the permission of the competent authority.
It accordingly came to the conclusion that the order of removal has operated harshly against the petitioner.
Accordingly the punishment was modified.
His pay was reduced.
The operative portion of the order passed by the appellate authority reads as under :-  " I have gone through the proceedings of the inquiry, the report of the Inquiry Officer, the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority and also the grounds of appeal.
The grounds on which appeal has been filed are mostly technical.
The order of removal from service has not been passed by DM, it has only been conveyed by him on behalf of the Competent Authority, the charges framed against the appellant are clear and specific.
No prejudice was caused to him by holding a joint inquiry either.
Action against him could be taken under the new Regulations.
However, I find him that the charge of misappropriation of stocks by Shri Khare or its pilferage due to any act attributable to him is not conclusively proved.
There is no evidence to show that he himself pilfered or misappropriated the stocks.
The other charge that he absented himself from the headquarters during the period of suspension without permission of the Competent Authority stands fully proved by his own telegram sent from Gwalior.
The other penalty of removal from service seems to have been imposed on Shri VK Khare by the Disciplinary Authority only because the more serious charge of pilferage of stocks was held by the Inquiry Officer as proved and his findings on this charge was accepted by the Disciplinary Authority.
As stated above, there is no evidence, whatsoever, to connect the appellant directly with pilferage or theft of stocks.
On the second charge, which is proved, the major penalty of removal from service appears to be harsh.
I feel that the ends of justice shall be met if Shri Khare is taken on duty on the initial pay of Rs. 530/- in the pay scale of Rs. 530-1005/- w.e.f.
the date he reports for duty to Regional Manager, Bhopal.
He will, however, not be entitled to any amount other than what he had received as subsistence allowance during the period of his suspension.
The period of absence from duty from the date of his removal to the date of his joining shall be regularised by granting him extraordinary leave.
I order accordingly."
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the dates on which he was absent were those dates when the he was attending the judicial proceedings initiated by him before the Labour Court.
The petitioner had moved the Labour Court, because the respondent authorities had not paid him the allowances payable to him during the period of suspension.
5.
According to the petitioner if he was attending to Court proceeding then this cannot be treated as absence.
He further submits that even if he had applied for leave the respondents were under a legal obligation to grant permission.
He submits that had they not granted permission to attend the Judicial Proceedings they would have rendered themselves liable to contempt proceedings, as not permitting a litigant to attend to judicial proceeding would amount to interference with the administration of justice.
6.
He has placed reliance on Pratap Singh and another v. Gurbakh Singh, AIR 1962 SC 1172.
In the above case it was held :-  "There are many ways of obstructing the Court and any conduct by which the course of justice is perverted, either by a party or a stranger, is a contempt, thus the use of threats, by letter or otherwise to a party while his suit is pending or abusing a party in letters to persons likely to be witnesses in the cause, have been held to be contempt."
7.
Thus there appears to be merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
On two occasions on which the petitioners was absent he was attending the Labour Court.
The authorities could not have declined prayer of the petitioner, to not to attend the Court proceedings.
This aspect was not brought to the notice of the respondent authority.
The appellate authority would accordingly take notice of this fact and redecide the matter within one month.
The period of one month would begin from the date the copy of the order along with writ petition is made available to the respondents.