VK Bali, J (Oral) - There is absolutely no necessity to go into the details of this case.
Suffice it, however, to mention that for the same charges that the petitioner was proceeded departmentally, one Mohinder Singh Cheema was likewise proceeded.
The Inquiry Officer basically returned the finding of guilt against Mohinder Singh Cheema.
For most of the time during which 6635 quintals of wheat was pilfered, Mohinder Singh Cheema and another remained posted at the godown from where shortage was detected.
Petitioner and another had very recently relieved Mohinder Singh Cheema and another from the place of their posting.
It was a joint enquiry against 13 persons including Mohinder Singh Cheema.
After he was dismissed from service, he filed Civil Writ Petition (bearing No. 4451 of 1981) in this Court.
In support of his writ, he raised number of points but his writ petition was allowed basically on the ground that a copy of the report of preliminary enquiry was not given to him.
2.
It is positive case of the petitioner, so repeatedly said in the writ petition, supported by various documents, like, Annexures P-8 and P-9 that a copy of report of preliminary enquiry was not given to him as well.
No doubt, appellate Authority while dealing with the appeal of petitioner has mentioned that petitioner has failed to show any document vide which he might have asked for, either from the department or the enquiry officer, a copy of report of the preliminary enquiry but the said finding, it appears, was recorded without taking into consideration Annexures P-8 and P-9.
Moreover, if the petitioner was unable to show that such a report was not made available to him, it was not at all difficult for the department to prove otherwise.
Still further, it is not understandable as to how the petitioner was given such a copy which was not given to Mohinder Singh Cheema, who was the main person, said to have pilfered the wheat from the godowns.
At this stage Mr. Masih, learned AAG, Punjab, states that in fact copy of report of preliminary enquiry was not given to any one and it could be given only on demand and the petitioner had never made such a demand.
This being now atleast the admitted position that the report of preliminary enquiry was not given to the petitioner, the only question that survives is as to whether the impugned order would be vitiated for non-supply of such report even if the same was not demanded by the petitioner.
3.
Mr. Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner has taken the Court through para 12 of the writ petition wherein it is clearly averred that the enquiry officer was appointed to look into the charges levelled against the petitioner on the basis of preliminary enquiry conducted against him by Shri SS Suri, Joint Director and Shri AS Brar, Deputy Director (Field) for misappropriation etc. of foodgrains and these preliminary reports were the basis for charge-sheeting him and the petitioner time and again requested the authorities for supply of copies of the reports as the same were needed by him to defend himself but the authorities did not supply the same.
In view of this Court, if reliance has been placed upon a document to hold a delinquent official guilty or even if regular proceedings are held on the basis of a document, like in the present case the preliminary enquiry report, a copy of the same has to be given to the delinquent concerned, failing which he shall certainly be prejudiced in defending himself.
In paragraph 19 it has further been averred that when the petitioner was given an opportunity of personal hearing on August 19, 1981 by the Director, Food & Supplies-respondent No. 2, he brought to the notice of the authorities that although list of reliance of documents appended to the charge-sheet indicated that preliminary enquiry report submitted and prepared by Shri SS Suri, Joint Director and Shri AS Brar, Deputy Director was also relied upon the said preliminary enquiry report was not supplied to him.
It is further mentioned that it was a document relied upon and, therefore, ought to have been supplied to him.
It may be mentioned here that the averments made in paragraphs 12 and 19 could not be denied as no written statement has been filed by the State despite the fact that writ petition was admitted way back in the year 1993.
At this stage Mr. Masih, learned AAG, Punjab, requests that the matter may be adjourned for filing the written statement.
The request is rejected for the reasons that the matter remained pending for about three years in this Court and no written statement was filed all this while.
The Rules require that written statement should be filed within 40 days of the admission of writ petition and the request has now been made at a very belated stage.
4.
The State filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 1808 of 1989 in the case of Mohinder Singh Cheema which was dismissed in July 31, 1990.
Mr. Khehar informs the Court that even Special Leave Petitions was filed against the orders of the Division Bench, referred to above, but the same has also been dismissed by the Supreme Court on December 19, 1990.
5.
For the reasons recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 4451 of 1981, supported by some additional reasons, mentioned above, this petition is allowed.
Impugned orders, Annexures P-5 and P-7, are set aside.
In consequence of setting aside of the orders aforesaid, petitioner shall be entitled to all the benefits admissible to him.
The department shall, however, be at liberty to proceed against the petitioner, if it might so choose, after complying with the provisions of law, and, in particular, giving him a copy of the report of preliminary enquiry.
It may be mentioned here that if in such proceedings, that might be carried against him, the petitioner is still held guilty, he shall be entitled to challenge the said orders on the grounds that may be available to him inclusive of ones mentioned in this writ petition on which no decision has been rendered.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.