THB Chalapathi, J - The writ petition is filed challenging the order of the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, dated 13.8.1993 in Reference No. 103 of 1990 holding that the enquiry was not proper, fair and the enquiry report is vitiated.
2.
The 2nd respondent was working with the petitioner-Mill as Cane Inspector in the year 1989.
A charge-sheet was issued to him on 2311982 for not delivering the cane indents to the growers of village Baniayani.
He was given a further charge-sheet on 2121985 for misbehaving with the Deputy Cane Manager.
He was placed under suspension and reinstated after tendering apology.
Again he was placed under suspension on 2731989 on the charges that he had issued bogus cane receipts in the name of one Sunder Lal.
Thereupon enquiry was held against the 2nd respondent Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
The 2nd respondent contended before the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, that the enquiry conducted by Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager, was not proper, legal and, therefore, it is vitiated.
Though the 2nd respondent moved an application for the change of the Enquiry Officer, his request was not acceded to.
Thereafter, the Enquiry Officer proceeded with the enquiry and the 2nd respondent has not participated in the said enquiry from 18121989.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report on 411990 on the basis of which 2nd the respondent was dismissed from service by an order dated 18/2011990.
The 2nd respondent raised an industrial dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act, which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak.
The Tribunal decided the question whether domestic enquiry was valid and proper and on the basis of the material on record, the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court came to the conclusion that the enquiry was not proper, fair and, therefore, is vitiated.
3.
Aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner-Mill filed the present writ petition.
There is no dispute on the point that Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager, was appointed as Inquiry Officer to conduct the enquiry against the 2nd respondent.
The 2nd respondent filed an application before the Managing Director on 26.7.1989 requesting therein that the enquiry be got conducted from some other officer.
Again on 781989, the 2nd respondent wrote a letter to the Managing Director of the Mills reiterating his request dated 26.7.1989 for change of the Enquiry Officer.
He further stated there that the did not expect justice from the Office Manager, who had a personal grudge against him because he worked with him at the relevant time.
The Managing Director did not change the Enquiry Officer on the request of the 2nd respondent  4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that there was no valid ground by the respondent No. 2 to change the Enquiry Officer.
Therefore, the enquiry conducted by Shri RD Sharma, Office Manger, cannot be said to be illegal, unfair or improper.
The record produced before me clearly shows that a note was put up by the office and Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager endorsed his view on 2551989 that the official (2nd respondent) was placed under suspension by an order dated 2731989 in this case on the complaint of the Cane Manager.
Then only the Managing Director wanted the office to have the comments of the Cane Manager.
Thereafter again the officer put up the note stating therein that the reply submitted by Shri Prem Singh was beyond the facts and baseless.
"A regular enquiry in the matter be conducted please."
This was endorsed by Shri RD Sharma on 761989.
On that note, the Managing Director ordered that the Office Manager would be the Enquiry Officer.
Thereafter on 1761989 a note was put by Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager, which is to the following effect :-  "Enquiry into the charge-sheet No. HM/PF 2011-14 dated 1951989 served upon Shri Prem Singh, Sub Inspector Cane, the reply received from him is far from satisfactory.
The explanation (our diary) dated 23.5.1989 submitted by the above named in reply to the above said chargesheet is enclosed for your kind perusal.
The reply tendered by the employee in question demands further enquiry into this case.
As such Enquiry Officer may kindly be named to represent the Management".
On that, the following orders were passed by the Managing Director :-  "For holding of the above enquiry, the Enquiry Officer will be Shri RD Sharma, Office Manager.
The Management representative will be Shri Zile Singh, Dy.
CM" 5.
It is thus, clear that the entire file has been processed through Shri RD Sharma.
In fact on 761989, the Office Manager namely Shri RD Sharma has clearly stated that the reply submitted by 2nd the respondent is far from satisfactory.
Therefore, before the enquiry was conducted, the Enquiry Officer namely Shri RD Sharma has expressed his opinion that the reply of the 2nd respondent is far from satisfactory.
In this case, it cannot be said that there can be no likelihood of any bias on the part of the Enquiry Officer.
It is not as though no Enquiry Officer was available.
When the same person, who has already expressed his opinion on the explanation given by 2nd respondent has been appointed as Enquiry Officer, it cannot be said that the enquiry is fair.
It is absolutely necessary to see that there could not be any likelihood of any bias.
The principle that justice should not only be done, but it also patently appears to have been done, applies not only to the judicial proceedings, but to administrative case also.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the Industrial Tribunal rightly came to the conclusion that the enquiry was not fair.
I, therefore, see no ground warranting interference with the order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak and the writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.