AL Bahri, J - There is a dispute regarding management of Khalsa High School, Maur Mandi, District Bhatinda.
The dispute is between different members of the Managing Committee, in other words parallel Managing Committees being constituted.
A Civil Writ Petition No. 2624 of 1986 was filed in the High Court challenging orders Annexures P-15 and P-16 attached with the Writ Petition passed by the Additional Director, Education and District Education Officer, appointing Sh. Mukhtiar Singh as Headmaster of the School.
These orders were quashed by the Division Bench on September 30, 1986 with a further direction to the District Education Officer to directly pay the salaries to the school teachers as long as the dispute between the members was not settled.
It was observed that anybody desirous of getting any order could approach the Civil Court.
Since Director Public Instructions issued an order on May 31, 1989 authorising Karnail Singh Maan, Manager, Khalsa High School, Maur Mandi to deal with the correspondence of grant-in-aid of the school till decision of the Civil Suit, the present petition was filed under Section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act for taking contempt proceedings against the District Education Officer, Director Public Instructions as well as Karnail Singh.
On going through the reply furnished by the Director Public Instructions it has transpired that the aforesaid order was passed after a direction as given by the Civil Court on a suit filed by Karnail Singh, claiming injunction against the present petitioner and others.
The trial Court had dismissed that application for grant of interim injunction.
However, on appeal the District Judge granted the injunction restraining Harbans Singh the present petitioner from interfering with the management of the school which was being run by Karnail Singh and others.
It was after that decision that order Annexure P/1 was made by the Director Public Instructions.
Against the order passed by the District Judge, a Revision Petition No. 485 of 1988 was filed in the High Court which was dismissed on November 25, 1988.
2.
The contention of counsel for the petitioner that High Court's order was violated in the facts and circumstances of the present case cannot be accepted.
After the District Judge had granted the injunction as aforesaid, it was Karnail Singh and other members of the Managing Committee, who were to manage the school.
Even if it is taken that two views could be adopted in view of the facts stated above, it cannot be said that the respondents acted mala fide or intentionally disobeyed any order passed by the High Court.
The contention that it was only after final decision by the Civil Court that the official respondents could act is not acceptable.
The official-respondents rightly rejected the interim order passed in the Civil Court by the District Judge and in consequence thereof issued order Anneuxre P-1.
3.
Finding no merit in this petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.