SB Wad, J - There are two trade unions representing the workers/employees of the International Airports Authority of India at four places, viz. Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
One Union is called International Airports Authority of India Workers' Union (for short Workers' Union) which is the petitioner in this case, and the other is called International Airports Authority Employees' Union (for short Employees Union), which is respondent No. 2 in the writ petition.
The dispute between the two rival Unions is in regard to recognition as the majority Union.
2.
Respondent No. 1, International Airports Authority of India, held an election by secret ballot on 2531991 to determine the majority character of the Unions.
The Workers' Union did not participate in the election and filed the present petition challenging the said election held on 2531991 in which the Employees' Union was declared as the majority Union.
In the earlier election held on 1231987 the Workers' Union got the majority votes and, therefore, it was recognised as the majority Union.
According to the Rules of respondent No. 1 recognition of Union is secured after every two years.
According to the Employees' Union the workers' Union did not want the elections to be held, which were due since March, 1989.
They, therefore, started agitating against the holding of the elections.
The Management, thereafter declared its intention for holding the elections.
3.
The Workers' Union filed a Suit in the Court of Sub-Judge, Delhi for permanent injunction.
The Suit was dismissed.
Thereafter, the Management announced 2531991 as the date for election.
The Workers' Union filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court (Writ Petition No. 3376/91), which was dismissed by the High Court.
The day on which the Madras High Court dismissed the petition, i.e. 2231991, the Workers' Union met the Management at Delhi to consider postponement of elections and for conducting the election not by the Management of IAAI but by CIRM.
The petitioners have heavily relied upon the Minutes of the said meeting at Delhi on 2231991 to challenge the present elections.
The Minutes are annexed with the petition as Annexure 'O'.
The Employees' Union was not ready for elections being conducted by CIRM and, insisted on elections being held by the Management of respondent No. 1, as was done in the earlier election.
Since both the parties had agreed for secret ballot the Management stuck to its own programme announced earlier and held the elections by secret ballot on 2531991.
On the basis of the result of the elections respondent No. 1 granted recognition to respondent No. 2, the Employees' Union as the Majority Union.
4.
Mr. MC Bhandare, Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner Union submitted the democratic process of election by secret ballot for determining the majority character of a Union has now become well accepted although the law speaks otherwise.
According to him through an election by secret ballot it is possible for the workmen to fearlessly express as to who shall be their spokesman in the collective bargaining with the Management.
According to him when one of the trade unions has objections to certain aspects of the elections, the other Union should readily agree for fresh elections.
That is the spirit of democratic elections, which is essential for industrial peace.
The counsel further submits that the Agreement between the Workers' Union and the Management dated 2231991 is a Settlement within the meaning of Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act and since this Settlement is arrived at with the majority Union it is binding on the other Union (respondent No. 2) also.
5.
Refuting the contentions of the counsel for the petitioners, counsel for the Employees' Union, Mr. Arun Jaitley, Senior Advocate, has submitted that the so-called Agreement between the Workers' Union and the Management, to which the Employees' Union was not a party, is not a Settlement as envisaged by Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes act.
Further, there is no compliance of the mandatory requirements of Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes Rules framed under the Act.
The counsel goes a step further and submits that the dispute between the two Unions in regard to majority character is not an industrial dispute at all.
He further submits that by a unilateral agreement the majority Union cannot force a course of conduct on the other Union, particularly where the dispute between them itself relates to the majority character of the Union.
The counsel further states that the writ petition is barred by the principles of res judicata since the petitioners had unsuccessfully tried to stop the elections through a Civil Suit at Delhi and a writ petition at Madras, both of which were dismissed on merits.
Counsel then submits that considering the conduct of the Workers' Union of thwarting the legitimate method of determining the majority character by election and perpetuating itself in the status of a majority Union illegally, the petitioners have disentitled themselves from getting any discretionary relief through a writ petition in this Court.
The petitioners have resorted to demonstrations and unsuccessful court proceedings before filing the present writ petition.
6.
Mr. M Wadhwani, appearing for respondent No. 1 Management, has submitted that the Minutes of the Meeting dated 2231991 are not and have not been treated as a Settlement by the Management under Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He submitted that it is the Management's right to recognise the Union as the Majority Union and to act as the spokesman for the workmen.
The Management had conducted the elections by secret ballot in 1979, 1982 and 1987.
The Workers' Union was insisting on the elections being held by CIRM and not by the Management while the Employees' Union was opposed to it.
However, both the Unions had agreed that the elections should be held by secret ballot.
Before that the Unions had resorted to threats, strikes, hunger strikes and demonstrations, stopping the functioning of the International Airports.
The Management had to file Civil Suits for securing injunctions against the Unions, restraining them from obstructing ingress and agree to the Management's establishment.
Since the earlier period of recognition was over by March, 1989, the Management was keen on holding the elections for industrial peace and for conferring the benefits on the demands made by the workmen.
For meaningful decision on the demands of the workmen, it was necessary that the recognition of the majority Union was conferred on one of the Unions as early as possible since the elections were already delayed.
So far as the Management is concerned, the counsel submits, they are neutral between the rivalry of the two trade unions but their only concern is industrial peace and efficient running of the International Airports.
7.
Section 2(K) of the Industrial Disputes Act lays down as to what an Industrial Disputes Act lays down as to what an industrial dispute means.
An industrial dispute means, "any dispute or difference between employers and employers or between employers and workmen or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour of any person."
There is no decision by any Indian Court as to whether a dispute between two or more trade unions in regard to majority character is an industrial dispute or not, within the meaning of Section 2(K).
Relying on the decision of House of Lords (1965 Appeal Cases page 307) counsel for the respondents submits that such a dispute regarding majority character is not an industrial dispute because it does not concern with employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour of any person.
The dispute is only between the rival Unions for being the spokesman for collective bargaining with the employer.
He has also referred to AIR 1949 Federal Court 245 and AIR 1981 Delhi 517 where the said decision of the House of Lords is referred to.
8.
Mr. Bhandare, appearing for the petitioner Union, however, submits that collective bargaining has become an integral component of settlement of industrial disputes in India as well.
Through collective bargaining the questions of employment or non-employment or the conditions of labour are espoused and decided.
Section 2(K) should, therefore, be liberally construed so as to include as to who is the real spokesman of the workmen in the collective bargaining with the employers.
It is unnecessary to express fully on this question on the present case because we are of the opinion that the Minutes of the meeting between the Workers' Union and the Management dated 2231991 is not a Settlement within the meaning of Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act, overriding the decision of the Management to hold the elections on 2531991.
The so-called Settlement is no Settlement in the eye of law and, therefore, does not affect the validity of the elections held on 2531991 and the consequent recognition given to the Employees' Union as the majority Union.
9.
The Minutes of the Meeting dated 2231991, Annexure 'O' read as follow :-  "MINUTES OF THE JOINT DISCUSSIONS HELD ON 22391 IN THE ID BETWEEN THE MANAGEMENT OF IAAI AND THEIR WORKMEN REPRESENTED BY IAAIWU REGARDING CONDUCTING OF SECRET BALLOT FOR ELECTING MAJORITY UNION FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECOGNITION.
-----------  PRESENT  On behalf of the Management., On behalf of the Union.
Sh. KPS Srivastava ED(PRS), Sh. Khim Singh, General Secretary.
Sh. HS Bains, GM (PRS), Sh. KK Aggarwal, Branch Secretary, Delhi.
The Management of IAAI conducted the last secret ballot in 1987 after obtaining the consent of both Unions operating in the airports and accorded recognition to IAAIWU (INTUC) which emerged as the majority union on all India basis for the four international airports.
The recognition was accorded for two years from 1331987.
The IAAEU, in their letter dated 13387, addressed to the CLC(C), New Delhi contended that the referendum held on 1231987 may be treated as null and void as the elections were not held free and fair and were not in accordance with the procedure prescribed.
They, therefore, demanded fresh referendum to be conducted by the CLC(C).
The IAAEU also filed a Suit No. 457 of 1987 in the Senior Sub-Judge's Court at Delhi and prayed for declaring the election conducted by the management as without authority, null and void and invalid.
The IAAWU, although they got majority and was recognised, alleged that the elections were not free and fair for the reasons mentioned in para 3 of the Memorandum dated 13387.
In January, 1987, the IAAEU again informed the management that they represent the majority of the workmen and the fresh elections should be conducted.
The management informed that further action will be taken only after the completion of two years, i.e., 1231989.
On 13.3.1989 the IAAEU again submitted to the management for conducting fresh elections and thereafter they are persistently demanding conducting of election/secret ballot.
The elections/secret ballot, however, could not be conducted as IAAIWU consent for conducting the elections was not given and thereafter both the Unions approached the Court and one case is still pending before the Delhi High Court.
In the case pending before the Delhi High Court by the IAAEU, they have prayed for issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction for holding election through secret ballot for redetermination of majority character of the Unions in IAAI for the purpose of recognition and as per the declared policy and memorandum dated 18.12.80 as issued by the Government of India.
At the request of the IAAEU, the management without obtaining the consent of the IAAIWU announced that the secret ballot will be conducted by the management on 2531991.
The IAAIEU protested against the conducting of the elections by the management without obtaining their consent as required under the procedure circulated by the Government of India, Ministry of Labour.
the IAAIWU raised an industrial dispute before the CLC(C) for cancellation of the proposed election and also approached the High Court of Madras in this regard.
After prolonged discussions, the IAAIWU agreed to give consent for holding secret ballot, provided the secret ballot is conducted by the Central Government Industrial Machinery as per the procedure circulated vide Memorandum dated 18.12.80.
The Management stated that they have no objection to hold secret ballot through the CIRM as per the procedure circulated by the Govt. of India.
It is observed that the IAAEU has been demanding that the secret ballot should be conducted in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Govt. in the Writ Petition filed before the Delhi High Court.
Since IAAIW which has not given consent has agreed to given consent, provided the secret ballot is conducted by the Govt., the management will take up the matter with Ministry of Labour, for ordering fresh elections.
The Dy.
CLC(C) informed the parties that the CIRM will conduct the secret ballot immediately on receipt of the orders from Government of India, Ministry of Labour.
The CIRM requires minimum 3-4 weeks' time for conducting secret ballot.
In the circumstances, the management may consider to postpone the proposed elections and request for the Govt. for issuance of necessary orders.
The Management and IAAIWU requested the government to conduct secret ballot on or before 2341991.
On behalf of the Management On behalf of the Union Sd/- Sd/- (KPS Srivastava) (Khim Singh) Sd/- Sd/- (HS Bains) (KK Aggarwal).
Sd/-  (J KANAKIAH)  DY.
CHIEF LABOUR COMMISSIONER"  10.
A bare reading of the Minutes of the Meeting dated 2231991 shows that the Employees' Union was not a party to the joint discussion held on 2231991 and had not agreed for any postponement of the date of election to a future date.
It does not appear that even the Management had finally agreed for postponement of the elections.
It is clear from the sentence, "In the circumstances the Management may consider to postpone the proposed elections and request the Govt. for issuance of necessary orders."
Then comes the sentence, The Management and IAAIWU requested the government to conduct secret ballot on or before 2341991."
This sentence is written in hand and the memorandum is signed by the representatives of the Management, representatives of the Workers' Union and the Dy.
Chief Labour Commissioner.
The purpose of the understanding also shows that the Management would request the government to consider the conduct of elections by CIRM because of the request of the Workers' Union.
Since the Employees Union was not a party to this discussion it cannot be said that they had expressed their consent for the postponement of the elections scheduled to be held on 2531991 or through the agency of CIRM.
It may be noted that the said Minutes categorically stated that the determination of relative strength of the Unions was to be decided on the basis of the instructions of the Government of India, Ministry of Labour dated 18.12.80.
The said instructions (Annexure R-1) inter alia lay down the requirements, viz. :-  "i) Consent of the Management and of all the Union(s) functioning in the establishment for holding secret ballot for the purpose.
ii) Consent of both the management and of the union(s) for secret ballot to be conducted by the CIRM.
iii) Undertaking from the management and also from the unions that they will accept the result of such secret ballot as binding for the purpose, and,  iv) Undertaking from the management that they will accord recognition on the basis of such verdict in secret ballot."
11.
Thus the government instructions dated 18.12.80 categorically lay down that the consent of all Unions must be obtained for holding secret ballot and also the consent of all the Unions was necessary for the conduct of the elections by CIRM.
Admittedly, Employees' Union was not a party to the said discussion on 2231991 and, therefore, cannot be treated to have given its consent for holding the secret ballot by CIRM.
As a matter of fact after the said meeting dated 2231991 would show that the Management did ask the Employees' Union regarding the postponement of the elections and the holding of the elections by CIRM.
The Employees' Union rejected both the suggestions.
Even a cursory reading of the Minutes of the Meeting dated 2231991 would show that the Management also was not ready to decide whether the elections should be conducted by CIRM because the said instructions of the Ministry of Labour required that all Unions must give their consent for the conduct of elections by the CIRM.
12.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the Employees' Union was not bound by the so-called decisions taken in the meeting on 2231991 as it was not a party to the discussions and because the requirements of the instructions of the Ministry of Labour dated 18.12.80 were not complied with.
We may also note at this stage that the said Minutes make it quite clear that the Workers' Union, i.e. the petitioners had agreed for conduct of elections through secret ballot and the Employees' Union had also agreed for the same.
13.
Since the Employees Union had not agreed for postponement of elections or for the conduct of elections by CIRM, the Management had no alternative but to stick to its original schedule and conduct the elections themselves on 2531991.
14.
The said Minutes dated 2231991 cannot be described as a Settlement under the Industrial Disputes Act as it suffers from serious legal infirmities.
It does not comply with the requirements of Section 18 of the Industrial disputes Act and Rules 9 and 58 of the Industrial Disputes Rules.
Admittedly, there were no conciliation proceedings under the Industrial Disputes Act pending when the so-called Agreement evidenced by Minutes dated 2231991 was recorded.
The Agreement, if any, must fall under Section 18(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Section 18(1) categorically states that a Settlement arrived at by such an Agreement binds only the parties to an Agreement.
In contrast a Settlement where the conciliation proceeding is pending under Section 18(3) of the Act binds even the persons who are not parties to the Settlement.
Admittedly, the Employees' Union is not a party to the said proceedings dated 2231991.
It does not, therefore, bind the Employees' Union.
In order to have the binding effect the consent of all parties must be secured (AIR 1967 Kerala 245).
A notice of Settlement to all the parties is mandatory (1978 SCC Vol. 1405), to the extent a Settlement is arrived at without notice to the parties the Settlement is void (AIR 1961 Kerala 265).
Whether a recognize Union can bind down another Union by a Settlement is decided by 1987 LIC 950.
It has been laid down that where there is a dispute between a workman and workman or between the Unions for the majority status a Settlement arrived at by recognised Union is no Settlement within the meaning of Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957, lays down the procedural requirements in regard to Settlement which is arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings or by a separate Agreement.
Such a Settlement shall be in the form 'H' annexed with the Rules.
Admittedly, the memorandum dated 2231991 does not comply with the requirements of Rule 58.
It has been held that requirements of Rule 58 are mandatory and the Settlement shall be void for non-compliance of the same (1988 DLT 185).
15.
Since the memorandum dated 2231991 does not comply with the requirements of Section 18 and Rule 58 it is no Settlement in the eye of law.
Neither the Employees' Union nor the Management is bound by the same.
As a matter of fact the Management has categorically stated that it had never treated the said memorandum as a Settlement.
The memorandum, therefore, cannot in law vary or alter or change the election programme as announced by the Management.
There is no effect whatsoever on the elections held on 2531991 and recognition as the majority Union granted to the Employees' Union.
The elections and the status of majority Union granted to the Employees' Union is, thus, valid, legal and binding on all the workmen and their Unions, viz. Employees' Union and Workmen's Union.
16.
Apart from the fact that conferment of majority status on the Employees Union is legally valid, it is eminently interest of industrial peace in the Organisation and in the interest of workmen themselves.
By bringing to an end the dispute between two rival unions the path is now clear for early settlement of the long standing demands of the workmen.
The elections have brought to an end the atmosphere of confrontation created by resort to extra-legal means, such as hunger strikes and facts unto death, boycotts and dharnas and the obstructionist tactics of suits and writ petitions in the course of law.
17.
After the dismissal of the Suit filed by the Workers' Union and the dismissal of the writ petition by the Madras High Court where the Workers' Union failed to stop the holding of the election, it was unfortunate that the Workers' Union filed the present writ petition instead of taking the result of the elections in good grace.
As a matter of fact the elections had become due in March, 1989 itself and it is because of the intransigent attitude of the Workers' Union that fresh elections were so delayed.
Without any fresh elections the Workers' Union continued to enjoy the de facto status of the majority Union.
There is evidence on record to show that for one reason or another the Workers' Union was bent on boycotting the elections.
Apart from the fact that the present writ petition would be hit by the principles analogous to the principles of res judicata, the conduct of the Workers' Union surely disentitles them for the discretionary relief under the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
18.
The workmen of IAAI are charged with the onerous responsibility of maintenance of the international airports with efficiency comparable to the airports the world over.
They belong to the category of the best paid workmen, which very few industries can boast of.
The trade unions which represent the workmen have, therefore, a special obligation to the nation of maintaining discipline and efficiency at the international airports.
Modern machinery and equipment is provided at such airports and effort should be made by the trade unions to see that the workmen not only have the expertise but devotion of work, so as to handle the sophisticated equipment.
There is no doubt that the trade unions would strive for economic betterment and better conditions of service for the workmen.
But they have a higher duty towards the nation.
Frequent resort to extra legal means such as dharnas, boycotts, hunger strikes and fast into death and abuse of legal process by filing suits and writ petitions at different places such as Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Delhi seriously jeopardises the efficient functioning of the Management.
Industrial peace and public interest are the worst victims in this atmosphere.
19.
We have noticed that during the hearing large number of workmen in their uniform were present in the Court without obtaining leave for their absence from duty.
Such presence was wholly unnecessary when the Unions were represented by able lawyers.
Collective bargaining should not be perverted into collective intimidation and early the unions realise it, it is better for the interest of the workmen and the interest of the nation.
20.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed with costs.
Rule is discharged.
Counsel fee Rs. 2,000/-  Petition dismissed.