TS Doabia, J - The short dispute in the present petition is with regard to the status of the respondent No. 1.
As per him, he falls within the definition of the term "designer".
As per the Municipal Corporation, Gwalior (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation), he is merely a "painter".
2.
As there was a dispute on this issue the respondent sought adjudication before the Labour Court.
The Labour Court recorded a finding in favour of respondent No. 1.
It has been concluded that the respondent is a designer and is entitled to the wages, which are payable to this class and category of persons.
It is this order, which is being challenged in this petition.
3.
If dictionary meanings of the terms 'designer' and 'painter' are gone through it would be found that there is a clear demarcation between the two.
Even though this line of demarcation is thin but that line is clear and perceptible.
4.
The meaning attributed to the terms 'painter' and 'designer' in various dictionaries be first pursued.
In "The Concise Oxford Dictionary", the terms 'designer' and 'painter' have been defined as under :-  " 'Designer' means a person who makes artistic designs or plans for construction., e.g., for clothing, machines, theatre sets; a draughtsman."
" 'Painter' means a person who paints, esp.
an artist or decorator".
In 'Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary', the terms 'designer' and 'painter' have been defined as under :-  "Designer' means a person whose job is designing (e.g. machinery, furniture, fashionable clothes); an industrial designer."
" 'Painter' means a person whose job is painting buildings, walls, etc.
He is a painter and decorator, artist who paints pictures".
In "New Webster's Dictionary and Thesaurus & Medical Dictionary", the terms 'Designer' and 'Painter' have been defined as under :-  " 'Designer' means one who designs or makes plans or patterns; a schemer or plotter". "
'Painter' - laying on colours; the art of representing natural objects in colours; a picture in paint".
From a persual of the above meanings, it is apparent the person who claims to be a 'designer' performs the jobs of a preparing plans.
A 'Painter' is one who performs the job of laying colours.
5.
It appears that this distinction was kept in mind by the Labour Court when it recorded a finding in favour of the respondent No. 1.
The Labour Court has come to the conclusion that respondent No. 1, has been preparing lay out plans in addition to painting, including spray painting.
He has also been preparing monograms and other drawings including master plans indicating the various places in the city of Gwalior.
This he has been doing in addition to painting not only on dotted lines but has the capacity to draw the dotted lines also.
It was this thin line of demarcation which was taken note of.
Taking into consideration, the above duties the Labour Court rightly concluded that respondent No. 1, is a designer and should be paid the wages accordingly.
I am of the view that the Labour Court has committed no error in coming to the above conclusion.
This petition is without any merit and is dismissed.