Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was working as an Accountant with the Municipal Committee, Sirsa, retired from service on March 31, 1992 on attaining the age of superannuation.
His claim for pension having been declined in view of provisions of Haryana Municipal Employees (Pension and General Provident Fund) Rules, 1993, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The posts in the Municipal Committees in Haryana were not pensionable.
On February 21, 1992 the Government took a decision "for enforcing Pension Scheme for the Municipal employees with effect from 141992".
They were asked to supply certain information in a proforma by March 3, 1992.
On March 5, 1993, the Rules called the Haryana Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1993 (hereinafter to be referred to as the Rules) were promulgated.
By Rule 1(2), it was provided that these Rules shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 16th day of April, 1992.
Rule 2 provided for the application of these Rules.
Rule 2(1) which is relevant for the decision of present case is in the following terms :-  "2.
(1) These Rules shall apply to the employees of the municipalities, who, -- (i) were/are appointed on or after the 16th day of April, 1992, on whole-time regular basis; and (ii) were working immediately before the 16th day of April, 1992 and opt for these Rules".
3.
The petitioner states that on the issuance of notification dated March 5, 1993, he opted for pension vide his letter dated April 19, 1993.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
He also submitted certain representations for the grant of pension.
Copies of these representations have been produced as Annexures P-5 and P-6 with the writ petition.
The Government having declined his claim on the ground that he had retired before April 16, 1992, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A copy of order dated May 8, 1993 by which the claim was rejected has been produced as Annexure P-7.
The petitioner challenges this order and the provision of Rule 2(1)(ii) on the ground that these are violative of Article 14 of the Constitution  4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that similar writ petitions including Civil Writ Petition No. 5259 of 1993 were dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated January 17, 1994.
It has been further stated that the petitioner having retired before April 16, 1992, and he having been paid the amount due on account of Provident Fund, Gratuity and Leave Encashment etc., the claim for payment of pension cannot be sustained.
It is also maintained that Rule 2(1) is legal and valid.
5.
A similar plea has been taken by the respondent - Municipal Committee in its written statement.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner had been paid Rs. 1,60,13449 on account of Contributory Provident Fund etc.
The other averments in the petition have also been controverted.
6.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner has made the following submissions :-  (i) The petitioner was in service and working immediately before the 16th day of April, 1992.
He having exercised the option under the Rules, the claim for the grant of pension cannot be declined.
(ii) In case it is held that the petitioner was not working immediately before the appointed day, the provision of Rule 2(1) in fixing April 16, 1992 as the cut off date are ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution 7.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Jaswant Singh who has appeared on behalf of the State Government and Mr. Grewal, learned counsel for respondent No. 3.
8.
A copy of relevant extract from the Rules has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
These were published in the Government Gazette on March 5, 1993 and enforced with effect from April 16, 1992.
Rule 2(1) has been reproduced above.
A perusal of this provision shows that the Rules are applicable to the persons who "were/are appointed on or after the 16th day of April, 1992, on whole-time regular basis" and "were working immediately before the 16th day of April, 1992...."  9.
According to Mr. Verma, since the employee retires on the last day of the month, every one who was in service prior to April 30, 1992 should be deemed to be "working immediately before the 16th day of April, 1992" and held entitled to grant of pension.
10.
This contention is wholly untenable and cannot be accepted.
The provisions of Rule 2 clearly indicate the intention of the framers.
It is apparent that the rules are applicable only to such employees who were either appointed on/or after April 16, 1992 or were working immediately before that day.
The word 'immediately' is not without significance.
It implies 'without interval of time'.
A similar meaning is given to it in the Corpus Juris Secundum.
In a strict sense, it has been said that the word 'immediately' excludes 'all mesne time'.
It is generally used to indicate the 'absence of time between two events' and under peculiar circumstances, implies 'prompt, vigorous action without any delay'.
In its strict sense, it has been defined to mean 'at once, forthwith, instantaneously or instantly or presently'.
11.
If literally construed, the Rule implies that the person should be in service on April 15, 1992, before he can claim the benefit of pension under the Rules.
Keeping in view the fact that the employees retire on the last day of the month, it may be permissible to say that a person who had not retired prior to April 16, 1992 shall be entitled to claim pension.
However, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had retired on March 31, 1992.
He was not in service on April 1, 1992.
Even by a liberal construction of the provision, he cannot be deemed to be working immediately prior to the appointed day.
12.
Mr. Verma laid great emphasis on the fact that the petitioner had exercised his option under the Rules vide letter dated April 19, 1993.
This is undoubtedly so.
However, the unilateral act of exercising option cannot mean that the Rules become applicable to the persons who had retired prior to the appointed day.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is wholly untenable and is consequently rejected.
In view of the above, the first contention raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
13.
This brings me to the consideration of the second contention raised by the learned counsel regarding the validity of the provision contained in Rule 2(1).
Mr. Verma submitted that all the retired persons constitute one class and differential treatment based on the date of retirement is not permissible.
He placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara's case, 1983(2) SCR.
165.
The contention is misconceived.
In Nakara's case, the benefit of State's decision to revise the liberalise pension was denied to the persons who had retired prior to a particular date.
Consequently, classification was created amongst the retired persons even though all of them were entitled to the grant of pension.
This was held to be violative of Article 14.
This does not, however, mean that all retired persons constitute a homogeneous class for all purposes.
There are retired persons who are entitled to the benefit of Provident Fund.
There are others who may be entitled to the grant of pension.
These are two separate classes.
Accordingly, the mere fact that all of them are retired does not mean that they constitute a homogeneous class.
Furthermore, the decision in Nakara's case was explained by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Krishna Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1990 (2) Recent Services Judgments 434.
Thereafter the position was clarified in State of West Bengal v. Ratan Behari Dey and others, 1994(1) SCT 96(SC) : JT 1993 (4) SC 501.
The action of the State Government in specifying a date with effect from which the benefit under the Municipal Corporation of Calcutta Employees (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Regulations, 1982 was admissible was sustained.
It was held that every employee who retired on or after April 1, 1977 was entitled to pension, while those who had retired prior to that day were only entitled to the benefit of Provident Fund.
Still further, in Union of India v. PN Menon and others, 1994(4) SCT 91 (SC) : 1994 (2) R.S.J.
638, it has been held that whenever a revision takes place, a cut off date becomes imperative because the benefit has to be allowed within the financial resources available with the Government.
In view of these binding precedents, the contention as raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has been rejected by a Division Bench of this Court in Gian Chand Walia v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 523 (P&H) : 1994 (4) Recent Services Judgments 672.
Accordingly, even the second contention as raised by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
Since the petitioner has already retired from service, there will be no order as to costs.