GS Singhvi, J - These two petitions have been filed with almost identical prayers, namely, to direct the respondents to allow the petitioners to exercise fresh options under the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988 (for short 'the Rules').
2.
The petitioners in both the petitions are employed as teachers in the Education Department of the Government of Punjab.
Each one of the petitioners has exercised option under the Rules.
This the petitioners did in terms of Rule 5 of the Rules.
Subsequently, they made representation to the departmental authorities for grant of relief in the form of an opportunity to revise the dates of their option.
The petitioners have claimed that similarly situated persons have been allowed opportunity to exercise option but in their cases no such order has been passed by the competent authority.
They have placed reliance on the order dated 16.8.1994 passed in C.W.P.
No. 2587 of 1994 (Haranbir Singh v. State of Punjab and others).
3.
We have perused the writ petition and have given our thoughtful consideration to the submission of the learned counsel.
4.
While deciding C.W.P.
No. 18380 of 1994 this Court had taken note of the fact that there may not be similarly situated persons claiming benefit of any opportunity to revise their option because of hardships caused due to the exercise of option under Rule 5 of the Rules and, therefore, the Court directed the respondents to give an opportunity of revised option to all similarly situated persons.
That direction of ours is applicable to the cases of the petitioners also.
It appears that the petitioners have rushed to this Court without realising that in an earlier case directions have already been given by the Court to the respondents to give relief to all similarly situated persons.
5.
In view of our order dated 21111995 in C.W.P.
No. 18380 of 1994, we dispose of these writ petitions by directing the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to treat these writ petitions as the representations of the petitioners for grant of an opportunity to exercise their revised option for fixation of pay under the 1988 Rules.
The respondents are directed to pass appropriate orders within two months of the receipt of the certified copy of this order together with copy of the writ petition and while doing so the respondents shall keep in view the directions given by the Court in its order dated 21111995.