B Subhashan Reddy, J - This Writ Petition has been filed questioning the appointment of the 4th respondent as Special Secretary to Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
The 4th respondent hitherto was holding governmental job and had retired.
Now he is recalled and re-employed as Special Secretary to Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
This is questioned on five grounds.
2.
Sri K Govind, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the power of appointment is traceable to Article 187(3) of the Constitution of India, which contemplates creation of this post by notification and that this has not been done.
His second contention is that the appointing authority under Rule 4 of AP Legislature Service (Ad hoc) Rules, 1983, is the Governor in consultation with the Speaker of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly and such a consultation is absent in this case.
The third contention is that recalling of an officer, who retired about six years back, is unwarranted as it cannot be said that his services are indispensable.
The fourth ground is that the Office of the Special Secretary to a Legislative Assembly has got so many privileges including that of immunity and the person who holds such an Office should be impartial having no political allegiance, that the 4th respondent is recalled and re-appointed only because of his affiliation and allegiance to Telugu Desam Party which again swept into power and that he cannot be impartial as expected of his office and on that ground his appointment is illegal.
The fifth and last ground is that there is no necessity to appoint the 4th respondent.
Outright I reject the contentions put forth regarding grounds Nos. 3, 4 and 5.
It is not for this Court to verify as to whether the services of the 4th respondent are indispensable.
It is for the authority concerned to take a decision as to whether a particular person who is to be appointed as Special Secretary to the Legislative Assembly, is competent or not.
Such a competency cannot be evaluated by this Court.
As such, the 3rd ground fails.
3.
Insofar as grounds Nos. 4 and 5 are concerned, there is no material to hold that the 4th respondent cannot discharge his functions impartially.
Merely because he was an Officer in the Government then ruled by Telugu Desam Party and that he retired and he is again recalled after the said party has again swept into power, there cannot be any inference drawn that he has got political strings disabling him to be appointed to the post of Special Secretary to the Legislative Assembly.
Further, such kind of posts are posts of confidence and it is for the appointing authority to choose a person of his choice to discharge the said functions.
The appointing authority is the best judge not only with regard to necessity of creating a post, but also of choosing a person, whom he feels confident.
As already stated above, the necessity or otherwise to appoint an Officer is not within the realm of this Court and it is for the Government-appointing authority.
As such these grounds fail.
4.
I now deal with the substantial contentions in support of grounds Nos. 1 and 2.
The Special Secretary's post has got to be created.
The case of the petitioner is that such a post has not been created.
But I find from the notification in G.O.Rt.
1091, General Administration Department, dt. 2.3.1995, which makes it obvious that a notification was issued creating the post of Special Secretary.
As such, I find no force in this argument.
5.
The next important argument is whether there is consultation for such an appointment as contemplated under Art. 187(3) of the Constitution read with Rule 4 of AP Legislature Service (Ad hoc) Rules, 1983.
Mr. S Ramachander Rao, learned Advocate General has now placed before me a letter dated 28.2.1995 addressed by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh which speaks the necessity of appointing a Special Secretary in view of the several reasons stated therein and also the competency of the 4th respondent to hold the said post.
This has been approved by the Governor and also by the Chief Minister on 131995.
As such, for appointing the 4th respondent to the post of Special Secretary to Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly, there is a valid consultation by the Governor and also the Chief Minister and as such, this ground too fails.
6.
For the above reasons, the Writ Petition is devoid of merits is accordingly dismissed at the stage of admission.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.