Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 6553 and 8946 of 1994 have been ordered to be listed together for hearing by the Motion Bench.
The primary grievance of the petitioners in these two cases is that they have been wrongly rejected for admission to the Post Graduate Courses at the Medical College, Rohtak.
Notices have been duly served on The respondents in C.W.P.
No. 6553 of 1994.
In CWP No. 8946 of 1994, notices appear to have been served only on respondents No. 1 and 2.
Consequently, written statement has been filed on their behalf.
Since the case relates to admission to a Post Graduate Course, Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the arguments may be heard and that since some of the private respondents are duly represented in the connected petition, he does not insist upon the issue of notice on the unserved private respondents.
In this situation, the facts as averred in Civil Writ Petition No. 6553 of 1994 may be noticed.
2.
On October 5, 1987, the petitioner was initially recruited as a Medical Officer on ad hoc basis.
On January 1, 1991, he was selected and appointed to Haryana Civil Medical Service, Class II.
He was placed on probation which he completed successfully on December 31, 1992.
On February 21, 1994, the Maharshi Dayanand University issued a notice that an entrance examination for admission to Post Graduate degree and Diploma Courses will be held on April 3, 1994.
The candidates were required to submit their applications by March 11, 1994.
The criterion for admission to the entrance examination was duly notified in Prospectus.
A copy of the relevant extract from the Prospectus has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
It was inter alia provided that "the HCMS doctors, sponsored by the State Govt. as per criteria fixed by the State Govt. for this category, will be admitted to MD/M.S./P.G.
Diploma courses strictly as per their merit in the entrance examination".
The petitioner avers that the criterion had been fixed by the State Government vide its letter dated October 14, 1991 in which it had been inter alia provided as under :-  "(ii) 3 Years System (a) HCMS doctors who have successfully completed the probationary period and also have total service of 4 years in the State including 2 years of rural service in the State will be eligible for the grant of No Objection Certificate for doing PG Course against reserved seats in Medical College, Rohtak.
(b) The period spent on ad hoc service in the State and in the rural areas in the State will be taken into account for the purpose of counting the period of four years service in the State and to years rural service respectively."
A perusal of this letter further shows that different conditions had been prescribed for candidates who wanted to join the two years-course and others who were candidates for admission to three years-course.
Since the controversy in the present case relates to the three years-course, only facts as relevant for that course are being noticed.
In respect of three years-course, it was inter alia provided that the "HCMS doctors who have successfully completed the probationary period and also have total service of 4 years in the State including 2 years of rural service in the State will be eligible for the grant of No Objection Certificate for doing PG Course against reserved seats in Medical College, Rohtak."
The period spent on ad hoc service was to be taken into consideration.
According to the petitioners, this criterion was arbitrarily altered on March 11, 1994 when the State Government issued instructions by which it was inter alia provided that "HCMS Doctors who are appointed on regular basis and there is nothing adverse regarding their efficiency or integrity and have total service of 2 years in the State including one year of rural service in the State will be eligible for the grant of `No Objection Certificate' for doing PG Course against reservd seats in Medical College, Rohtak".
As hither to fore, the period of ad hoc service was to be taken into consideration.
Vide order dated March 13, 1994, the last date for submission of applications was extended to March 21, 1994.
Consequently, persons who had been appointed to the Haryana Civil Medical Service on regular basis and had completed 2 years of service including one year of rural service, also became eligible to apply for admission to the the entrance test and competed for admission to the Post Graduate Courses.
The entrance test was actually held on the appointed date viz. April 3, 1994.
A total of 9 candidates secured the prescribed level of 20% marks marks.
Since a total of 33 seats had been reserved and only 9 persons had qualified the entrance limitation the State Government relate the requirement of 20% marks to 12% marks and called all persons who had secured a minimum of 12% marks for interview.
Finally, 33 candidates including respondents Nos. 5 to 8 were selected and admitted to different courses.
The petitioner had secured 1166% marks.
He was, consequently, not called for interview.
The petitioners in the connected petition secured even lesser marks.
Consequently, even they were not called for interview.
Aggrieved by the selection, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petitions.
3.
Their primary grievance is that the State Government having published the Prospectus was not entitled to modify the criterion and that persons who were not even members of the Haryana Civil Medical Service, Class II, could not be made eligible to be considered for admission to the Post Graduate Courses.
The petitioners have raised various grounds which shall be presently noticed.
4.
The respondents contest the claim made by the petitioners.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the state of Haryana and the Selection Committee, it has been pointed out that the government had reserved 33 seats for the HCMS Doctors in the various subjects for the year 1994.
Out of these, 21 seats were in the MD/MS Courses and 12 for Post Graduate Diploma Courses.
It has been further pointed out that the State Government had initiated the process to review the policy for admission to Post Graduate Courses on November 30, 1993.
It was finalised on March 11, 1994.
The policy decision issued on October 14, 1991 was modified to ensure that "more and more HCMS Doctors may apply for PG Courses..." With this object in view, the condition regarding completion of the probation period successfully, was waived.
In order to implement this policy, the last date for submission of applications was extended from March 11, 1994 to March 21, 1994.
An advertisement in this behalf was published in the Daily Tribune on March 13, 1994.
In this advertisement, it was mentioned that the minimum eligibility criteria had been revised and persons with total service of 2 years including one year rural service were eligible to compete.
It has been further pointed out that a candidate was required to secure 20% marks in the written examination.
However, after the compilation of result, it was found that only 9 persons had secured the requisite percentage of marks.
As a result, 24 seats would have remained unfilled.
It had, thus, become necessary to relax the eligibility criteria.
The Government decided to grant relaxation upto 12% marks.
All persons who had secured 12% marks were called for interview on May 11, 1994.
The petitioner in CWP No. 6553 of 1994 had secured only 1166% marks.
Consequently, he was not called for interview.
As for the petitioners in the connected petition, it has been pointed out that they had secured - 00.75 and 0375 marks.
Since the score of the petitioners in both the cases was below the prescribed standard, they were not considered eligible to be called for interview.
Various grounds raised by the petitioners have been controverted.
Written statements have also been filed on behalf of various other respondents.
These are broadly on the same lines as that filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
Consequently, a detailed reference thereto is not necessary.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. JS Manipur who opened the case on behalf of the petitioners, has contended that the amended criteria as issued by the State Government vide its letter dated March 11, 1994, cannot be applied to the admission in question as it was issued on the last date for submission of applications.
Counsel has further submitted that the action of the Government in granting relaxation upto 12% in the marks required to be secured by the candidate in the entrance examination was illegal.
Learned counsel has further submitted that the action of the State Government in allowing a person who was still on probation for admission to a Post Graduate Course was wholly arbitrary and illegal.
Mr. PS Patwalia, appearing for the petitioners in the connected case, has adopted the arguments raised by Mr. Maanipur and has further submitted that the method of negative marking adopted by the respondent-University as a result of which the score of the petitioners was even below zero, cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the following questions arise for consideration :-  (i) Is the action of the State Government in revising the criteria for admission to the Post Graduate Courses vide its letter dated March 11, 1994 illegal ?
(ii) Is a person who has been regularly appointed to HCMS Class II, debarred from admission to a Post Graduate Course merely because he has not completed the period of probation ?
(iii) Has the State Government erred in granting relaxation from 20% to 12% marks in the entrance examination ?
and (iv) Is the method of marking adopted by the respondents illegal ?
7.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions and the questions posed above, it may be noticed that the petitioners were candidates for admission to a Government Medical College.
The expenses for their education are borne by the State Government.
Seats have been reserved for the members of the Service so as to ensure proper medical service in the State, which in turn also improves the career prospects of the candidates.
Since the State Government is bearing the expenses, it is legitimate for it to choose the source/s from which admissions have to be made.
Still further, members of the Medical Service who are admitted to the Post Graduate Courses against the reserved seats are treated as if they are in service.
They are paid full salary and allowances during the period of their studies at the Medical College.
In this situation, it is within the jurisdiction of the State Government to not only lay down the criteria for admission but to enable as many as possible candidates to compete and to select the best from amongst them.
Choice of proper candidates would help the State Government to fulfil the object of providing good medical services within the State.
It is with this end in view that the officers are required to execute bonds and give undertaking to serve the State Government for the prescribed period.
In case of default, they are liable to pay a substantial amount of money.
With this background in view, let us proceed to consider the four questions posed above.
8.Re: QNo.
(i)  It appears that the State Government had originally laid down the criterion for permitting HCMS Doctors to get admission in Post Graduate Courses vide its letter dated April 20, 1988.
This criteria was modified in October 1991 whereby it was provided that the candidate should have successfully completed the period of probation and rendered service of four years "including 2 years of rural service."
Vide letter dated March 11, 1994, this criteria was partially modified.
It was inter alia provided that the candidate should be "appointed on regular basis" and there should be nothing adverse regarding his efficiency or integrity.
He should have rendered a total service of two years including one year of rural service.
The period of ad hoc service could be taken into consideration under the original as well as the modified conditions.
Consequently, the only changes brought about by the State Government by the impugned criteria were - (i) the period of total service was reduced from 4 years to 2 years and, (ii) the criterion regarding the successful completion of the period of probation was done away with.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, their eligibility was not in any way adversely affected.
Only the field of choice was widened.
A larger number of candidates were made eligible to compete.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submit that the modified criteria is illegal as the respondents were bound to make the admissions on the basis of the criteria which existed on the last date for submission of applications.
9.
It is the admitted position that initially, the applications had to be submitted by March 11, 1994.
Since the impugned letter regarding the change of criteria had been issued on the same day, it cannot be said that the criteria was changed after the last date for admission.
It was actually changed on the same date.
However, in order to provide a real opportunity to the candidates who were now eligible to compete, the University decided to extend the last date for submission of applications for admission to the entrance test.
An advertisement was actually issued and published in The Tribune of March 13, 1994.
The last date for submission of applications was extended upto March 21, 1994.
It was also notified that candidates who have been regularly appointed to the Medical Service and have completed 2 years of service including one year rural service are eligible to apply.
Consequently, more candidates were given a chance to compete.
They actually competed.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, their eligibility had remained unaltered.
Their conditions of qualifying the examination were also not changed.
Their rights in respect of their eligibility and qualifications were not affected.
Consequently, they can have no legitimate grievance.
10.
It was pointed on behalf of the petitioners that the provisions made in a Prospectus have the force of law.
They cannot be altered by an executive order.
Reliance in support of this submission was placed on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab etc, 1993(4) SCT 328 (FB)(P&H) : 1993(2) PLR 212.
In this case, the conditions stipulated in the Prospectus were altered after the entrance examination had been actually held.
In this situation, their Lordship were pleased to observe as under :-  "It may at this stage further be stated that the Notification dated July 13, 1992 goes contrary to the policy which was laid down for admission in the Notification dated May 20, 1992 on the basis of which the Prospectus had been issued to the students and the students appeared for test on the basis of the policy laid down in the prospectus.
The prospectus cannot subsequently be changed by the State Government to the detriment of the students to benefit certain other students.
In Randeep Kaur v. The State of Punjab and others, a Division Bench of this Court had an occasion to consider the value of the Prospectus issued for admission to an entrance examination.
It was held that the eligibility for admission to a course has to be seen according to the Prospectus issued before the entrance examination and that the admission has to be made on the basis of instructions given in the prospectus as the instructions issued have the force of law.
We agree with the view taken by the Division Bench.
Since the Prospectus issued for admission to the 1992-93 course in the medical college has the force of law and the students appeared in the examination on the basis of the instructions laid down in the said Prospectus, it was not open to the State Government to issue contrary instructions and as such also the Notification dated July 13, 1992 issued by the State Government is invalid in law.".
11.
Change in criteria of eligibility after the entrance examination has already been held, has no parallel with the situation in the present case.
Still further, even their Lordships of the Full Bench had noticed and approved the view taken by a Division Bench of this Court in Randeep Kaur's case wherein it was held that "the eligibility for admission to a course has to be seen according to the prospectus issued before the entrance examination and that the admission has to be made on the basis of instructions given in the prospectus as the instructions issued have the force of law."
The action of the respondents in the present case is not contrary to the rule enunciated by the Full Bench.
The admission has been made according to the conditions prescribed before the entrance examination was actually held.
Consequently, the petitioners can derive no advantage from the decision of the Full Bench.
12.
The action of the State Government was prompted by the consideration of enabling a larger number of members of the Medical Service to compete for admission to the Post Graduate Courses.
It was obviously intended to provide opportunity to more and more persons so that the best candidates could be selected.
Such a course of action was wholly legal and I find no ground to take the view that the State Government did not have the jurisdiction to do so.
13.
Accordingly, it is held that the action of the State Government in modifying the criteria in the facts and circumstances of this case, was not illegal and the instructions dated March 11, 1994 do not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Re: QNo: (ii)  14.
It was next contended that a person who has not even satisfactorily completed the period of probation cannot be eligible for admission to a Post Graduate Course.
There is no basis for such a contention.
No rule or administrative instruction has been produced to show that a person who has been regularly appointed to the HCMS Class II after selection through the Public Service Commission should be considered as ineligible merely because he has not completed the period of probation.
Still further, the State Government has taken adequate precaution even in this behalf.
It has been specifically provided that there should be "nothing adverse regarding the efficiency or integrity" of the candidate.
Successful completion of the period of probation was no doubt a condition prescribed in the instructions issued in the year 1991.
However, the obvious purpose was to ensure that the person should be efficient and honest.
That condition has even now been specified in the impugned instructions.
Consequently, enough safeguard has been taken by the State Government.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the Government had acted arbitrarily or unfairly.
Even otherwise, as already observed, merely because a person is on probation, does not mean that he should be debarred from joining a Post Graduate Course.
It is not unknown that persons who are merely officiating as Head Constables or in various other ranks of the Police, are sent for various courses at the Police Training College.
The idea is to improve their efficiency and enable them to perform their duties in a proper way.
Same purpose is sought to be achieved by the State Government by allowing Doctors who have been regularly appointed to compete for admission to a Post Graduate Course.
In view of the fact that such a course of action is not debarred by any rule, the question has to be answered in the negative.
It is, accordingly, held that a person who has been regularly appointed to the Haryana Civil Medical Service cannot be debarred from admission to a Post Graduate Course against a reserved seat only because he has not yet completed the period of probation satisfactorily and in spite of the fact that his efficiency and integrity are upto the requisite standards.
15.
Re: Q N (iii) :  It was then contended that the action of the Government in reducing the prescribed standard of 20% marks to 12% was illegal.
16.
It is the admitted position that 33 seats had been reserved for persons working in HCMS Class II.
Only 9 candidates secured 20% marks.
If the State Government had not granted the relaxation, the remaining 24 seats would have remained unfilled.
In order to obviate such a situation, the State Government was compelled to grant the relaxation.
It did so.
As a result, candidates upto Sr. No. 41 who had secured 12% marks were called for interview.
There is no rule which debarred the Government from granting the relaxation.
In fact, since the Government had prescribed the requisite standard, it could as well revise it and bring it to a lower level.
It was a question of policy to be decided by the competent authority.
While exercising power under Article 226 of the Constitution, the Court can interfere only if the action is found to be illegal or wholly arbitrary.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it does not appear to be so.
17.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that if the State Government could call the candidates who had secured 12% marks for interview, why could it not even call the petitioners.
18.
The answer is simple.
The petitioners had failed to secure the requisite percentage of marks as prescribed by the Government after the grant of relaxation.
Of course, the matter would have been different in case they had secured 12% marks and had yet not been called for interview.
However, since they have failed to attain the requisite standard, they can have no cause for complaint.
Re : QNo.
(iv) : -  It was contended by Mr. Patwalia that the method of marking adopted by the State Government was wholly arbitrary and thus illegal.
According to the learned counsel, candidates were subjected to an objective type test.
While they were given credit for the correct answers, the marks were deducted for wrong answers.
As a result, their ultimate score was considerably reduced.
In fact, the petitioners in Civil Writ Ptition No. 8946 of 1994 were awarded marks below zero.
19.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the purpose of holding the test was to judge the knowledge of candidates.
While they were given credit for the correct answers, they suffered a loss of marks in the event of their giving wrong answers.
While answering questions of objective- type, sometimes, a candidate can give answers by sheer guess work.
It can turn out to be correct or may be wrong.
In order to ensure that a candidate answers a question only when he is certain, the competent authority has provided that if the answer is correct, he will be given credit.
In case, the answer is wrong, he will suffer a loss.
This is calculated to avoid guess work.
A candidate should answer a question only when he is certain.
Accordingly, there seems to be no infirmity in the method adopted by the competent authority.
20.
Certain ancillary submissions were also made.
It was contended that the result of the examination was not duly published.
It was also contended that the State Government had erred in interviewing the first 9 candidates on May 9, 1994 while the remaining candidates were interviewed subsequently.
21.
These contentions are wholly lacking in merit.
So far as the publication of the result is concerned, the petitioner's result had been duly conveyed to him.
The marks secured by him have been duly mentioned in the written statement.
As for the interview, it may be noticed that according to the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-University, it had initially conveyed the result of only 9 candidates to the Government.
This was so because only 9 persons had secured the requisite percentage of marks viz. 20%.
Subsequently, at the asking of the Government, result of all the candidates was conveyed.
In this situation, the Government initially interviewed only 9 candidates.
Thereafter, it decided to grant relaxation so as to ensure that the remaining 24 seats could also be filled up.
After the grant of relaxation, all persons who had secured 12% or more marks were called for interview.
In these circumstances, I find that there was no infirmity in the action of the State Government.
22.
Mr. Maanipur also submitted that the concurrence of the Finance Department was received by the State Government on 1131994 and the impugned instructions were issued on the same day.
So what ?
The concurrence of the Finance Department was needed as the persons who were admitted to the Course were to be paid their salary in spite of the fact that they were studying in the College.
If the Government had received the concurrence on 1131994 and had issued the instructions on the same day, it is not understood as to what illegality was committed by it.
23.
It deserves mention that the petitioners had taken their chance without raising their little finger and appeared in the entrance examination.
They did not challenge the criterion before the entrance examination was held.
After they had failed to secure even 12% marks, they have raised all kinds of contentions before this Court.
In my view, they were sitting on the fence.
They took their chance.
They appeared in the entrance examination.
It is only when they failed to secure even 12% marks in the written test that they have made all kinds of complaints.
They cannot be permitted to do so.
24.
Still further, even if their contention that the original criteria could not be changed, were to be accepted, the petitioners would not get any advantage at all.
Under the original criteria as well, they had to secure 20% marks to be eligible for admission to the course.
They had failed to attain the prescribed standard.
Even after the relaxation of standard, they did not qualify.
Consequently, they have no reason to feel aggrieved.
No other point has been urged.
The petitions are wholly frivolous and totally lacking in merit.
These are, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases , there will be no order as to costs.