GH Guttal, J - The question for consideration is whether the process of selection of typists, comprising of written test, trade and viva voce is arbitrary if separate marks for these tests are not assigned and if the marks for the viva voce constitute 50% of the total number of marks.
2.
The petitioner who holds the degree of M.Sc.
in Mathematics, applied for the post of Typist in the Life Insurance Corporation of India, in its Trivandrum Division.
The notification inviting applications for the post is dated 1831991.
She was successful in the written test held on 481991.
She was then called for a trade test on 2881991.
She was invited to appear at the interview held on 23.9.1991 which she did.
She was not selected.
The petitioner impugns the validity of the selection process at which 50% of the total marks were allotted for interview.
3.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are respectively the Senior Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Trivandrum, and the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
The respondents 3, 4 and 5 are some of the selected candidates.
4.
The method of selection is this :  The candidates successful in the written test are invited to appear for the trade test, which is a test in typing.
The candidates successful in the trade test are called for the interview.
5.
No list of the successful candidates showing their ranks was ever published.
On enquiry the petitioner learnt that the Senior Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Trivandrum, had appointed a total of 55 candidates.
6.
The petitioner's writ petition OP No. 16825 of 1992 to compel publication of the rank list was disposed of by directing her to represent her case to the respondents 1 and 2.
In view of the admitted facts set out hereinbelow it is unnecessary to refer to the proceedings of the OP No. 16825 of 1992.
Eventually, the petitioner filed a representation on 571993 in pursuance of the direction in the judgment in OP No. 16825 of 1992.
By their letter dated 1481992 (Ext.
P10), the respondents 1 and 2 rejected the representation.
7.
During the arguments, learned counsel for the respondents graciously produced the file containing the "rank list."
8.
The following facts are undisputed :  (i) The existence of the select list/rank list was asserted by the respondents for the first time on 1481993 (Ext.
P10).
In spite of the opportunity presented by the petitioner in OP No. 16825/1992, the respondents never claimed that there was a rank list or that they made appointments according to the rank list.
(ii) The respondents asserted in their counter-affidavit in OP No. 16825 of 1992 and continue to assert now that the selection of candidates was based on the marks assigned at the interview.
(iii) The written test carried 50 marks.
The performance in the trade test was not evaluated in terms of marks.
No marks were assigned for the trade test.
Consequently, the marks in the trade test did not independently enter the selection of candidates.
(iv) The interview carried 50 marks.
Even if it is assumed that the written test and trade test together carried 50 marks, the marks for the interview constitute 50% of the total number of marks.
(v) The interview committee assigned marks out of the maximum marks of 100 (50 for written test and 50 for the interview).
The split up of the marks secured by the candidates in the written test and interview were not separately recorded.
9.
As set out earlier this is a case in which typists were selected on the basis of a written test followed by a trade test and ultimately a viva voce test.
If separate marks are not assigned for written test and trade test there is no way of knowing how a candidate performed before he is called for an interview.
While the written test carried 50 marks - the evaluation in the trade test has not been disclosed.
If the marks in the written test and the trade test are not separately prescribed and assigned, the selectors have the opportunity of picking and choosing candidates irrespective of their performance in the written test and the trade test.
Therefore, the absence of separate evaluation of the performance in the written test and in the trade test introduced an element of arbitrariness permitting the authorities to pick and choose irrespective of their performance.
Without assigning separate marks for the written test and the trade test candidates were then interviewed where their performance carried a maximum of 50 marks.
The record produced by the respondents shows that a total of 100 marks which included 50 for the written test were assigned without assigning separate marks for the written test and the trade test.
What I have now is the performance of various candidates out of the total of 100 marks out of which 50 were meant for the interview.
When the authorities assigned a lump sum of marks out of a total of 100 there is no way of knowing how the candidates fared in the written test and trade test.
For instance, take the case of a candidate who secured 20/25 marks in the written test and 10/25 marks in the trade test totalling 30 marks out of 50.
Take the case of another candidate who secured 20/25 marks in the written test and 20/25 in the trade.
When both of them went for the interview the candidate with only 10/25 marks in the trade test could be assigned 25/50 marks in the interview making his total 55 out of 100.
The other candidate with 20/25 marks in the written test and 20/25 marks in the trade test would be assigned 10/50 marks only in the interview making his total marks 50 out of 100.
This comparison illustrates how a person with a better performance in written and trade tests could be rejected by assigning him less marks in the interview and a candidate with an inferior performance in the written test and in the trade test could be selected by assigning him more marks in the interview.
There is thus clear arbitrariness in the procedure.
10.
The second aspect which makes the whole selection process arbitrary, unreasonable and illegal is the prescription of 50% of the total marks for the viva voce.
This is not a selection based on academic performance.
Nor is this a selection for professional assignment, or for a job requiring special ability which could be evaluated only at the interview.
Therefore the rule laid down in Ashok alias Somanna Gowda v. State of Karnataka, 1992(2) SCT 35(SC) : AIR 1992 SC 80 and Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 647(SC) : (1991) 1 SCC 662 applies.
The selection being a composite process comprising of written examination and interview the allocation of 50% of the total marks for the interview is unreasonable, excessive and the process of selection is arbitrary.
11.
Some other judgments of the Supreme Court relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents need to be mentioned.
Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar, 1994(1) SCT 483(SC) : AIR 1994 SC 141 was a case where it was held that the selection process which prescribed 50% of marks for the interview was not arbitrary.
That was not a case where selection was based on written test and viva voce.
The selection was based on academic performance where the authorities were not called upon to evaluate the candidate on the basis of a written test.
DV Bakshi v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 2374 was a case of selection of customs house agents for grant of regular licences.
Prescription of 30% marks for the interview was upheld.
The reason was that the post demanded assessment at the interview of specialised ability relating to "temperament, managerial ability, communication ability, interpersonal skills, ability to interact with colleagues and officials, general awareness in regard to his functional responsibilities and professional norms as well as norms of behaviour."
The special needs of the particular office for which selection, was made demanded greater percentage of marks for the interview.
The case of the petitioner is different.
Indian Airlines Corporation v Capt.
KC Shukla, 1993(1) SCT 234(SC) : (1993)1 SCC 17 was a case in which the selection of Deputy Operations Manager was based on interview and annual confidential reports for each of which 50% marks were prescribed.
The process of selection was job oriented and the marks assigned at the interview were for professional ability and management capacity.
The selection of typists in the Life Insurance Corporation does not demand a job oriented process or judgment on the professional ability of candidates.
Mahmood Alam Tariq v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1988 SC 1451 was a case in which 30% of the total marks were assigned for viva voce.
The selection was for the posts in Rajasthan Police Service and Rajasthan Forest Service.
In view of the fact that the Administrative, Police and Forest Services demand ability to deal with public with tact and imagination and higher traits of personality the prescription of 30% marks was held to be reasonable.
12.
I will now summarise my conclusions :  The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the cases set out in paragraph 11 above apply if the selection is for the post requiring specialised ability or the selection is job oriented or involves the ability to deal with the public and demands high er traits of personality.
Where selection for the posts of typists, is by a composite process of written test followed by interview, and where specialised ability demanded by the posts like test customs house agents, managerial post or administrative posts, requiring interaction with the public is not called for, the rule laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab (supra) and Ashok alias Somanna Gowda v. State of Karnataka, (supra) applies.
Where there is a composite process of selection comprising written examination and interview the allocation of more than 15% of the total marks for viva voce is unreasonable and excessive.
There are good reasons for extending this rule to cases where in addition to the written test there is also a trade test.
Trade test - in this case typing - tests the candidates with reference to the work they are expected to perform as typists.
If the performance in the typing test does not enter the selectors' minds the exercise of selecting typists becomes irrational and arbitrary.
This is what exactly happened in this case.
The candidates who were better typists could be eliminated in the viva voce consisting of 50% of the total marks and those who are poor in typing job chosen by viva voce.
The process of selection comprising of written test, trade test and viva voce is arbitrary and discriminatory if (a) the performance in these tests is not separately evaluated, or (b) the marks for the viva voce exceed 15% of the total number of marks.
13.
For reasons stated in the foregoing paragraphs I hold that the process of selection of typists impugned in this petition is arbitrary and discriminatory and therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
14.
The petitioner is the only candidate who approached this Court with the grievance against the process of selection.
While similar grievance could be made by others who have not been appointed, their cases cannot be considered as they never approached this Court.
In Ashok alias Somanna Gowda v. State of Karnataka (supra) the Supreme Court confined the benefit of its order to the petitioners who approached it.
It appears reasonable to me that the relief in this petition and the direction that I propose to issue should be confined only to the case of the petitioner.
Thus judgment should not be understood by the respondents to be a general relief in favour of all candidates.
15.
The letter No. P & IR.
dated 14th August, 1993 (Ext.
P10) issued by the Senior Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Trivandrum is quashed.
I direct the respondents 1 and 2 to appoint the petitioner as Typist, if necessary, by creating a post.
This order shall be complied with on or before 31st August, 1994.
Orders accordingly.