GB Patnaik and DM Patnaik, JJ.
- The petitioner was an agent of the Life Insurance Corporation and had been appointed as such on 3171989.
On account of certain lapses on his part while he was functioning as such agent, the Senior Divisional Manager called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why his agency should not be terminated in accordance with the provisions contained in Regulation 16 of the Agents Regulations, 1972.
The petitioner filed his show cause on 161089 admitting the allegations against him and stated that there had been serious lapses on his part for which no rule could provide protection and also undertook not to repeat such mistake in future but prayed that a sympathetic view of the matter be taken in view of the present employment problem and in view of the fact that the petitioner had no other way of living.
Since the allegations were admitted by the petitioner and in view of the gravity of allegations the Senior Divisional Manager ultimately terminated the agency in question finding that the act of the petitioner had been grossly prejudicial to the interest of the Corporation as well as to the interest of its policy holders.
The petitioner then approached this court assailing the aforesaid order of termination of agency in JC No. 4029 of 1991, but it was pointed out to this Court that against the order of termination of agency an appeal lies.
The Court, therefore, did not entertain the writ application and disposed of the same with the observation that the petitioner might file an appeal.
Pursuant to the aforesaid observation the petitioner filed an appeal and the appellate authority having dismissed the same by his order dated 1081992, annexed as Annexure 5.
The petitioner has approached this court again.
2.
The main plank of the petitioner's argument is that the appellate authority has not applied his mind to the relevant materials and the contentions raised in the appeal memo and has mechanically dismissed the appeal.
But on going through the order of the appellate authority under Annexure 5, we are unable to persuade ourselves to agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The appellate authority on the other hand had carefully considered the records of the case with all materials as well as the contentions raised by the petitioner in his appeal memo but in view of the admitted facts which the petitioner conceded in his show cause and in view of the gravity of the charges levelled against the petitioner the appellate authority refused to interfere with the order of the Senior Divisional Manager terminating the agency of the petitioner in question.
3.
On examining the aforesaid appellate order under Annexure 5, we see no legal infirmity with the same so as to be interfered with by this Court in a writ of certiorari.
The due procedure has been followed and opportunity of showing cause having been given to the petitioner and the petitioner having admitted the allegations made against him and merely praying for a sympathetic view being taken, the authority has disposed of the matter.
The charges were such, no fault can be found with the decision taken by the authority concerned.
If an Agent of the Corporation behaves in the manner in which the petitioner has behaved, it is difficult to repose confidence and allow such Agent to continue.
If that view of the matter, we are not inclined to interfere with the decision of the appellate authority under Annexure 5.
4.
Mr. Rath appearing for the petitioner, however, urges that since more than six years have elapsed in the meantime, the authority may consider the question of appointing the petitioner as an Agent afresh.
Our dismissal of the writ petition does not debar the petitioner from making any fresh application nor would we stand on the way of the authorities to reconsider the matter and if they are otherwise satisfied, it is open for them to appoint the petitioner afresh.
Subject to the aforesaid observation the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.