SR Singh, J - Heard Sri ABL Gaur, learned counsel for the petitioner.
None appeared on behalf of the respondents.
2.
The writ petition is directed against the order dated 27121986 (Annexure-14) to the writ petition passed by the Chancellor, Meerut University, Meerut under Section 68 of the UP State Universities Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The controversy involved in the present case relates to inter se seniority between the petitioner and the 4th respondent Sri VP Gupta and the question which requires consideration by the Court is whether the service rendered by the 4th respondent in substantive capacity in Ahir College affiliated to MD University, Rohtak (Haryana) from 22101964 to 29.1.1979 is to be counted towards determination of his seniority in IP Degree College, Bulandshahr where he was appointed on 10101979 as Lecturer in the department of Commerce, on which post he was confirmed with effect from 1101982.
The relevant Statute governing the determination of seniority of Principal and other teachers of Affiliated Colleges is contained in Statute 1810(e) of the First Statute of Meerut University, which inter alia provides that "Service in a substantive capacity in another University or another degree or post-graduate college whether affiliated to or associated with the University or another University established by law shall be added to his length of service".
Relying upon the aforesaid provisions, the Chancellor held the 4th respondent senior to the petitioner.
3.
Sri ABL Gaur, learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the order impugned in the writ petition is vitiated due to reason of breach of principles of natural justice in that it was passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
Sri Gaur also placed reliance upon a decision of this Court in Ganga Saran v. Chancellor, Meerut University, 1978 All LJ 92, in support of his contention that quasi- judicial order passed without hearing the other party is illegal.
The proposition of law advanced by Sri Gaur admits of no exception for it is settled that no order having severe consequence should be passed in breach of principles of natural justice.
But the petitioner has come in writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution which he is not entitled to invoke as matter of course.
It is not disputed that the 4th respondent rendered service in substantive capacity in Ahir Degree College, Rewari, Haryana affiliated to MD University, Rohtak from 22101964 to 29.1.1979 which service, in our opinion, has to be counted while determining his seniority in the present college in view of the express language employed in Statute 1810(e) of the First Statute referred to above.
If the order is otherwise legal, just and proper this Court may decline to invoke its extraordinary and discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution for it is well settled that the court is not bound to issue a futile writ.
Mere remand of the matter for decision afresh after affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner would serve no purpose in view of the admitted facts stated above.
4.
Sri ABL Gaur then urged that the expression `University' occurring in Statute 1810(e) has the meaning assigned to it by clause (20) read with clause (8) of Section 2 of the Act and accordingly he urged that since the `University' as defined in the Act means the `existing University' or `new University' established under Section 4 of the Act, MD University, Rohtak would not fall within the purview of the term `University' as defined in the Act and therefore, urged the learned counsel, the service rendered in the college affiliated to the said University could not be counted towards seniority.
We are afraid, this submission cannot be countenanced in view of the fact that Statute 1810(e) of the First Statute of Meerut University has clearly used the words `University' and `another University established by law'.
The Legislature has deliberately not used the words "another University established under the Act" nor has it used the words "University as defined in the Act".
The word `law' used in the Statute 1810(e) has, in our opinion, a much wider meaning as comprehended by Art. 13 of the Constitution.
It cannot be confined to the particular enactment, viz, the UP State University Act, 1973.
It being not disputed that MD University of Rohtak is a University established by law i.e. the law made by the legislature other than the legislature of State of UP, the Chancellor in our opinion, has correctly interpreted/applied Statute 1810(e) of the first statute of Meerut University to the facts of the case.
5.
Sri Gaur then tried to buttress his submission on the basis of a decision of single Judge in case of NS Verma v. Chancellor,Kanpur University, 1986 UP LBEC 62 where the service rendered by a teacher in South Yaman at the University of Aden College of Education was not counted for the purpose of determining his seniority in accordance with the 1st Statute of Kanpur University.
In our opinion the decision cited by Sri Gaur is not applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as there the relevant statute 1113 specifically provided that period of service in another University, associated/affiliated college in the same cadre and grade or a higher cadre and grade could be counted towards seniority, "if the college or University is situated in Uttar Pradesh and the college is affiliated to or associated with one of the Universities in the State.
No such restriction in there is the Statute 1810(e).
As such the decision relied upon by Sri Gaur is of no avail to the petitioner.
6.
No other point was urged.
7.
In view of the above discussion the writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.