GS Singhvi, J - Adverse remarks made in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period between 1.4.1990 to 761990, rejection of the representation made by the petitioner and withholding of his Efficiency Bar have been questioned by the petitioner by way of this petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner has prayed for quashing of Annexure P-1, Annexure P-5 and Annexure P-6.
2.
Case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed in Haryana Police as Assistant Sub Inspector on 2881974 after having been selected by the Haryana Subordinate Service Selection Board.
He was confirmed as Assistant Sub Inspector with effect from 28.8.1977, after successful completion of period of probation.
He was promoted as Sub Inspector with effect from 16.1.1979 and was confirmed on that post on 1101981.
The petitioner says that he became entitled to be placed in list F but his case was not considered in the year 1994 for placement of his name in list F on account of pendency of his representation against the adverse remarks made in his Annual Confidential Report for the year 1981-82.
His representation was ultimately rejected on 23.5.1989.
Subsequently, he was brought on list F with effect from 19121986.
In the year 1990, the petitioner was posted as Inspector CIA at Rohtak.
Respondent No. 5 Zile Singh Siroha was the Superintendent of Police Rohtak.
According to the petitioner respondent No. 5 got annoyed with him because he had declined to do some illegal acts on the verbal orders of respondent No. 5.
This annoyance of respondent No. 5 led to the petitioner's transfer from the post of CIA Inspector to the District Inspector but that order was subsequently cancelled.
It is alleged that respondent No. 5 threatened the petitioner and told him that he will spoil the petitioner's career.
According to the petitioner respondent No. 5 translated his threat into reality when he made adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period from 1.4.1990 to 1761990 even though the petitioner had not worked under Respondent No. 5 for a period of three months.
3.
Against the adverse remarks the petitioner made a representation dated 1061991.
His representation has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated 16.4.1992.
At the same time Deputy Inspector General of Police passed order dated 24.4.1992 and ordered withholding of his Efficiency Bar.
4.
In questioning the adverse remarks made by respondent No. 5, rejection of his representation and order dated 24.4.1992 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police for withholding of Efficiency Bar, the petitioner has pleaded that respondent No. 5 has violated the Government instructions regarding confidential reports and had made adverse remarks due to personal ill-will and prejudice.
He has pleaded that the remarks are baseless.
The petitioner has questioned rejection of his representation on the ground of non-application of mind and non-consideration of the relevant factors by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
He has also challenged withholding of his Efficiency Bar on the ground that if adverse remarks are held to be vitiated for different reasons the action of respondent No. 3 to withhold his Efficiency Bar should also be nullified.
5.
In reply the respondents have admitted facts relating to recruitment and promotion of the petitioner.
They have also admitted that the petitioner was posted as Inspector CIA It has been stated that the petitioner was transferred from CIA Rohtak to District Inspector vide order dated 7.4.1990 issued by respondent No. 2 and the same authority passed order dated 1941990 reposting the petitioner to CIA Rohtak.
Regarding the adverse remarks the respondents have pleaded that the same were made by the then Superintendent of Police who was Supervisory Officer of the petitioner who had occasion to make assessment of the performance of the petitioner.
His representation was duly considered by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak and in view of the adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner, respondent No. 3 issued order dated 24.4.1992 withholding the Efficiency Bar.
6.
First argument of Shri Balhara is that respondent No. 5 had no jurisdiction to make entries in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner because he was not the Supervisory Officer of the petitioner for a period of three months.
Shri Balhara invited the court's attention to the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab on 31101963 (Annexure P-4) as also the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana on 2521971 and 31.10.1993 which have been placed on record as part of Annexure P2.
He argued that in view of these instructions issued by the Government of Punjab and Haryana, respondent No. 5 had no authority to make any entry in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period from 1.4.1990 to 1761990.
Shri Balhara further argued that the action of respondent No. 5 in recording such adverse remarks against the petitioner despite the fact that he himself was conscious of the lack of authority, shows his deep personal prejudice with the petitioner.
Shri Balhara argued that the wanton breach of the Government instructions by respondent No. 5 should by itself be a ground for quashing the adverse remarks.
On the merits of the adverse remarks Shri Balhara argued that the two First Information Reports No. 68 of 1990 and F.I.R. No. 75 of 1990 of which reference has been made in para (i) of the remarks were made subject-matter of enquiry before the commission headed by KN Sakia (retired Judge, Supreme Court of India) and he had not made any adverse comments on the working of the petitioner.
Regarding the second case, Shri Balhara pointed out that only the petitioner had taken action for arrest of the accused in F.I.R. No. 386 of 1989 registered at Police Station Bahadurgarh and therefore no doubt could be raised regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
He further argued that his work as CIA Inspector was always above board and therefore respondent No. 5 had no material to describe his work as below average.
Another argument of Shri Balhara is that Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak to whom representation was submitted by the petitioner did not apply his mind to his representation and he has arbitrarily rejected the said representation.
He further argued that the detailed representation of the petitioner has been rejected summarily without assigning any reason and there is nothing in the file to show that the Deputy Inspector General of Police had considered any of the points raised by the petitioner in his representation.
Regarding withholding of Efficiency Bar, Shri Balhara argued that only ground for withholding of Efficiency Bar is adverse Annual Confidential Report of 1990 and if that Annual Confidential Report is held to be vitiated, the petitioner is entitled to a direction allowing him to cross Efficiency Bar.
Learned Assistant Advocate General could not point out any provision in the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab and Haryana enabling a Reporting Officer to record remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of an employee even though such employee may have worked for less than 90 days.
She, however, argued that respondent No. 5 had the occasion to consider the performance of the petitioner and he had every right to make his comments regarding the performance of the petitioner.
Ms. Bahri argued that even though Sakia Commission has not adversely commented upon the petitioner's working, the petitioner cannot claim that respondent No. 5 has wrongly made adverse remarks.
She, however, conceded that nothing adverse has been found against the petitioner in respect of FIR Nos. 68 of 1990, 75 of 1990 and 386 of 1989.
7.
I have thoughtfully considered the matter and in my opinion the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
8.
Perusal of the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab on 31101963 clearly shows that some 27 years prior to the making of adverse remarks by respondent No. 5, the Government of Punjab (at that time Haryana was a part of Punjab) had issued directions that no Reporting Officer should record his remarks in A.C.R.
of an employee under him unless he has seen his work and conduct at least for three months.
After the formation of the State of Haryana, these instructions have been repeated by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana vide his letter dated 25.2.1971 and 31.10.1993.
In the letter dated 25.2.1971 the Chief Secretary has laid emphasis on the requirement of minimum period of working and observed :  "(i) The confidential report shall also be written when either the reporting authority or the subordinate concerned leaves charge of his post, provided that the reporting authority has not recorded the report previously during the year and further that the reporting authority has seen the work of the subordinate concerned for a period of three months or more."
In his letter dated 31.10.1993, the Chief Secretary has reiterated that remarks should not be made by reporting officers if the official has served under him for less than three months.
This is evident from the following extract of the letter dated 31.10.1993 :  "If the officer has served under the Reporting Officer for less than three months, the opinion of the officer under whom he had previously served for at least three months should be obtained.
Instances have come to the notice of Government wherein these instructions are not being observed rigidly and the Reporting Officers continue to write confidential reports on Government employees under them, whose work they have seen for a period of less than three months.
This entails a lot of inconvenience and wastage of time and labour at various levels.
I am, therefore, to emphasise that the provisions of paragraph 7, referred to above should, in future, be observed (sic) authorities while regarding the confidential reports on Government employees."
9.
From the above quoted extracts of the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, it is clear that the Reporting Officer does not have the jurisdiction to make remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of an officer unless he has seen his work for a minimum period of three months.
This shows that the Government has in its wisdom thought it proper to prescribe a minimum period of service under Reporting Officer as the condition precedent to the making of remarks in the confidential reports by the Reporting Officer.
These instructions have been issued with twin objects.
Firstly, this is to prevent the Reporting Officers from unnecessarily enhancing the record of an official.
Secondly, it is intended to prevent the degradation of the record of the official who may not have served even for three months under the Reporting Officer.
In the background of this I do not find any substance in the contention of the learned Assistant Advocate-General that even though the petitioner had served for less than three months under respondent No. 3, the latter had the authority to make adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner.
This view of mine is fully supported by a decision of the Division Bench dated 1531994 in C.W.P.
No. 14801 of 1993 Satbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(2) SCT 494(P&H).
10.
The aforesaid conclusion should have been sufficient to quash adverse remarks made by respondent No. 5 but having regard to the nature of the remarks made by respondent No. 5, I find it necessary to decide as to whether there is any basis for the adverse remarks made by respondent No. 5.
Respondent No. 5 had described the petitioner to be unreliable and not dependable official who shirks his responsibility.
These remarks have been made in the context of FIRs.
Nos. 68 of 1990 and 75 of 1990.
Admittedly, these FIRs.
related to the same subject-matter which was enquired into by Shri KN Sakia, Retired Judge, Supreme Court and report submitted by the Commission does not point its finger towards the petitioner.
The Commission has thoroughly probed into entire matter and if there is no adverse comment on the work or conduct of the petitioner in relation to Meham election, it is reasonable to conclude that the remarks made by respondent No. 5 at item No. (i) are baseless.
11.
Regarding F.I.R. No. 386 of 1989 the remarks made by respondent No. 5 are without any basis.
Not a word has been cited either in the A.C.R.
or in the comments by respondent No. 5 as to how he came to the conclusion that the petitioner's honesty was doubtful.
Even in the reply filed by the respondents it has not been shown as to how the petitioner's integrity was doubted in connection with F.I.R. No. 386 of 1984.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General fairly conceded that there is no material in support of the remarks at item No. (ii).
Similarly, regarding remarks at item Nos. (iii) and (iv) there is absolutely no oral material which could justify adverse remarks.
12.
In regard to argument of Shri Balhara that no speaking order has been passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police while dismissing the representation made by the petitioner, it is necessary to observe that the petitioner has not referred to any rule or administrative instructions requiring the reasons or communication thereof for the decision of the representation against the adverse remarks.
In the absence of such requirement in the rule or the instructions mere absence of reasons in the order rejecting the representation filed by the petitioner, cannot be a ground to quash the order Annexure P5.
This principle of law has been laid down by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. EG Namudri, 1991(2) SCT 142(SC) : A.I.R. 1990 (sic.)
SC.
13.
In Nanudri's case (supra) the Supreme Court held that when a challenge is made to the adverse remarks or the decision taken by the competent authority on the representation submitted by the aggrieved official and there is a charge of arbitrariness the respondents should produce the record and the court can itself look into the file as to whether there existed any basis for the adverse remarks.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General has produced before me file in which the representation of the petitioner had been dealt with.
A careful perusal of that file shows that after receiving the comments from respondent No. 5, the Deputy Inspector-General of Police simply recorded one line "considered and rejected."
This action in any manner cannot be termed as satisfactory method of deciding the representation particularly when the representationist had raised several points to show that the remarks are legally and factually incorrect.
Therefore, it has to be held that rejection of the representation of the petitioner vide Annexure P5 is arbitrary.
14.
In view of the aforesaid conclusion, it will have to be held that withholding of the Efficiency Bar of the petitioner on the basis of the adverse remarks is also unjustified.
If the adverse remarks are held to be without jurisdiction and arbitrary, the petitioner's case for crossing Efficiency Bar will have to be reconsidered by the competent authority.
15.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P-1, P-5 and P-6 are quashed.
The respondents are directed to reconsider the case of the petitioner for crossing of Efficiency Bar and take an appropriate decision within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.