VK Bali, J (Oral)- Ram Niwas and 31 others have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash the seniority list dated 9th of September, 1987 issued by the Chief Secretary and the orders dated 31st of March, 1988 contained in letter dated 16th of May, 1988 (Annexures P/9, P/9-1 and P/11).
They further seek a direction to be issued to respondent No1 not to act upon the impugned orders/seniority list and instead treat the petitioners senior to respondent Nos.2 to 60 amongst the Clerks and recast the seniority list on that basis.
2.
The facts, as culled out from the averments in the petition, reveal that the petitioners in pursuance of the advertisement published by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, applied for their appointments against certain posts of Clerks which were lying vacant in Haryana Civil Secretariat.
They were selected and the Subordinate Services Selection Board vide its letter dated 27th of August, 1982, forwarded a list of the selected candidates including the petitioners to the Chief Secretary for the purposes of issuing them appointment letters.
On receipt of the recommendations of the Board, the Chief Secretary vide letter dated 14th September, 1982 appointed them against the posts of Clerks in Haryana Civil Secretariat.
The question regarding determination of seniority of the candidates appointed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and Public Service Commission remained under consideration of the Government and was ultimately resolved by way of issuing Government instructions addressed to all the Heads of the Departments in the State dated 29th March, 1957, 15th of March, 1962 and 24th of November, 1962.
It is pleaded that it was laid down in these instructions that the temporary appointments made without the recommendations of the Board are just a make shift arrangement and cannot be counted towards seniority which instead would be determined from the date of issuance of Board's recommendations and not from the date of receipt of the recommendations.
3.
Respondent Nos.2 to 60 has been appointed in the Haryana Civil Secretariat as Clerk on purely ad hoc basis before the appointment of the petitioners.
They were in the employment of respondent-State even prior to the recommendations by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Inasmuch as respondents Nos.2 to 60, it is pleaded were appointed on ad hoc basis by virtue of instructions Annexures P2 to P.4, they had been ranked junior to the petitioners.
However, in the year 1983, the State Government vide notification dated 3rd January, 1983 decided to exclude from the purview of the Board such Class III posts of Clerks which had been held for a minimum period of two years as on 15th September, 1988 by the Clerks appointed an ad hoc basis for the purposes of regularising their services and decision that services of those ad hoc Clerks, who had completed two years services as on 15th September, 1982 be regularised against the posts/vacancies of Clerk provided they fulfilled the other conditions contained in the notification.
In pursuance of the notification dated 3rd of January, 1983, Chief Secretary vide orders dated 13th of January, 1983, ordered regularisation of services of respondent Nos.2 to 60 with effect from 15th September, 1982.
4.
When it came to the notice of the petitioners that respondent Nos. 2 to 60 in consequence of the regularisation of their services are making efforts and the department is also likely to treat them seniors to the petitioners, they submitted a detailed representation dated 31st March 1987 requesting the Chief Secretary, inter alia, to determine their seniority vis-a-vis respondent Nos.2 to 60, in pursuance of the Government instructions Annexures P2 to P.4 and assign seniority to them above respondents 2 to 60 without taking any decision on the representation and without informing them about any orders, the Chief Secretary vide letter dated 9th September, 1987 circulated a seniority list of the establishment of the Haryana Civil Secretariat.
Respondent Nos.2 to 60 were ranked seniors to the petitioners.
After the circulation of the aforesaid seniority list, the petitioners filed yet another representation dated 27th November, 1987 to the Chief Secretary requesting therein that the seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondent Nos.2 to 60 deserved to be recast in view of the instructions contained in Annexures P-2 to P-4, keeping in view the date of recommendations, namely, 27th August, 1982.
Without affording an opportunity to the petitioners, the Chief Secretary vide order dated 31st March, 1988, rejected the same.
It is in the wake of the circumstances referred to above that the present writ petition has been filed in this Court.
5.
The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners vehemently contended that Annexures P-2 to P-4 provide counting of seniority from the date of recommendations made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and inasmuch as the petitioners names were so recommended on 27th of August, 1982, it should be from this date that their seniority should be reckoned with.
It is further pleaded and argued by the learned Counsel that respondents Nos.2 to 60 were regularised in service vide order dated 14th January, 1983 from retrospective date on 24th August, 1982 and inasmuch as the names of the petitioners were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board on 15th September, 1982, thus, petitioners could not be shown junior to respondent Nos.2 to 60.
6.
The cause of the petitioners has been opposed in two sets of identical written statements, one filed on behalf of respondent No1 and the other by respondents 2 to 60.
The defence as projected is that the instructions Annexures P-2 to P-4 do not apply at all to a person who is straightaway employed through the agency of Subordinate Services Selection Board and, in fact, such instructions are applicable to a case of person who had been appointed initially on ad hoc basis.
In so far as the person who secures appointment direct through public service commission, it is further stated that the matter has to be dealt with, in accordance with the statutory rules known as the Punjab Civil Secretariat (States Service Class-II) Rules, 1952, Rule 9 thereof clearly stipulates that the seniority inter se of members of the service holding the same class of posts shall be determined by the date of their substantive appointment to the post.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, this Court is of the considered view that there is no merit in the points raised in the petition which have been noticed above.
Annexure P-2, the instructions dated 29th March, 1957 start with the subject of counting of purely temporary service for purposes of seniority and the same runs thus :-  ``I am directed to say that according to the instructions contained in Finance Department letter No.8398-FR-56/6165 dated 14th September, 1965, a Government servant appointed locally in purely temporary capacity when absorbed in a regular post on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, is allowed the benefit of previous temporary service towards increment and leave.
A question had arisen whether such Government servants should also be given the benefit of this temporary service for purposes of seniority.
It has been decided that a temporary appointment made without the recommendation of the Board, is just a make shift arrangement and cannot therefore, count for seniority which should in such cases, be determined with reference to the date on which the recommendations of the Board are received."
Annexure P-3, the instructions dated 15th March, 1962 are again with regard to the determination of seniority of the candidates recruited by the Board but who were earlier holding temporary/ad hoc appointments.
It is true, in the case of such temporary or ad hoc employees the seniority was to count from the date of the issue of the recommendations for their regular absorption by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Annexure P-4, the instructions dated 24th November, 1962 are also to the same effect.
these instructions, thus, cannot come to the rescue of the petitioners.
8.
Faced with this situation, learned Counsel for the petitioners Mr. RP Bali contends that there was no justification whatsoever for regularising ad hoc or temporary employees from retrospective date and that this decision of the respondents is discriminatory, thus, offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In D Rama Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1988 Supreme Court 857, the Supreme Court while dealing with the same situation held that when the regularisation is from a retrospective date but it is after the ad hoc appointment, the same cannot be said to be vitiated due to arbitrariness.
The facts of DRama Rao's case (supra) reveal that in exercise of powers under Rule 23(a) of the General Rules, the services of the two respondents had been regularised retrospectively with effect from 19th May, 1961 and the order of regularisation had been passed by the Chief Engineer on 3rd May, 1967.
While dealing with this matter, this is how the Supreme Court proceeded in the matter :-  ``In the instant case the date from which regularisation has been directed to take effect is not anterior to their appointment as Assistant Engineers.
That being the position, regularisation is not vitiated on account of arbitrariness.
At this stage Mr. RP Bali, learned Counsel for the petitioners states that out of the petitioners there are also persons who were initially given ad hoc appointments and were later regularised by the Subordinate Service Selection Board.
No such pleadings have been made in this petition.
However, if there may be any such petitioner, this judgment will have no adverse effect on him.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.