GS Singhvi, J - The short controversy involved in this writ petition is as to whether the services of the petitioner could have been terminated by Annexure P-1 without an enquiry and without an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
2.
In brief, the case of the petitioner is that she was appointed as Anganwari worker by the Director, Social Welfare, Haryana, on 5101982 after having been recommended by the Selection Committee for appointment as Anganwari worker.
After the petitioner served for about seven years, the impugned order Annexure P.1 has been issued on 691989 terminating her services on the ground that 8th Class certificate produced by the petitioner was bonus.
3.
The petitioner's assertion is that minimum qualification for the post of Anganwari workers was primary pass and she had been selected on the basis of primary pass certificate.
She has also stated that no regular departmental enquiry was held by the competent authority inasmuch as no charge-sheet was served upon her and no opportunity of defence was given to her before terminating her service.
4.
The respondents have opposed the writ petition on the ground that an enquiry was made into the allegations of production of forged certificate by the petitioner.
The enquiry was held by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Dadri and before him the petitioner admitted that she had produced bogus certificate.
While admitting that minimum qualification for the post of Anganwari Worker was primary pass, the respondents have pleaded that according to the Government instructions/decisions only those candidates who possessed minimum qualification of middle pass in the case of reserved category and those who possessed the matric certificate and belonged to general category were to be preferred.
During the interview the petitioner had submitted the middle pass certificate and thereafter she was given appointment.
When a complaint was received against the petitioner, a detailed enquiry was made by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) and on the basis of the report of the Sub- Divisional Officer (Civil), the competent authority passed the impugned order.
5.
A look at the pleadings of the parties show that the petitioner's service has been terminated after almost seven years of her appointment.
It is not in dispute that minimum qualification for recruitment as Anganwari worker was primary pass and that qualification was possessed by the petitioner at the time of appointment in the year 1982.
It is also an admitted position that no charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner and no regular departmental enquiry was held by the respondents before passing of the impugned order Annexure P.1.
The learned Asstt.
Advocate General argued that in the enquiry made by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Dadri, the petitioner had admitted that she had produced bogus certificate showing her as middle pass and in the face of this admission of the petitioner, no purpose could have been served by holding a regular departmental enquiry.
She also argued that service conditions of the Anganwari workers are not regulated by the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India or any Act of the Legislature, and in the absence of such rules it was not necessary for the respondents to hold a regular departmental enquiry.
6.
In my considered opinion neither of the submissions of the learned Asstt.
Advocate General deserves to be accepted.
The learned Asstt.
Advocate General may be correct in making statement that statutory rules have not been framed for regulating the conditions of service of Anganwari workers but the absence of statutory rules does not absolve the respondents or any other public authority from complying with the rules of natural justice before any action adversely affecting the rights of a citizen is taken.
In cases of public servants or employees of public employer necessity of compliance with the rules of natural justice is implicit in the exercise of power by the public employer to punish its employees.
This issue stands concluded by the Supreme Court's judgment in UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vijay Narayan, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 840.
That was also a case in which no rules were framed for regulating the conditions of service of the employees of the Warehousing Corporation.
While rejecting the arguments that in the absence of rules, it was not necessary for the employer to comply with the rules of natural justice, the Supreme Court observed :  ".......The Court would, therefore, presume the existence of a duty on the part of the dismissing authority to observe the rules of natural justice, and to act in accordance with the spirit of Regulation 16, which was then on the anvil and came into force shortly after the impugned dismissal.
The rules of natural justice in the circumstances of the case, required that the respondent should be given a reasonable opportunity to deny his guilt, to defend himself and to establish his innocence which means and includes an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses relied upon by the appellant- Corporation and an opportunity to lead evidence in defence of the charge as also a show-cause notice for the proposed punishment......." The aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court broadly indicate the procedure which is required to be followed by a public employer before it can terminate the service of an employee as a measure of punishment.
I may further observe that even if procedure of issuing charge-sheet and holding of regular enquiry may not be necessary in all the cases the minimum which the employer has to do is to give notice of those allegations to the employee on the basis of which it proposes to take action and to give an opportunity to the employee to meet with those allegations.
Unless this minimum requirement of natural justice is fulfilled, the employer's action in terminating the service of the employee on the basis of the allegations of misconduct will have to be treated as illegal.
7.
What has happened in the present case is that no enquiry has been made by the departmental authorities.
Instead they have relied on the report of the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
That report, no doubt, indicates that the petitioner made a statement before the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) about her having submitting bogus certificate, but there is nothing on the record to show that the petitioner was made aware of the proposed action on the ground that she had secured employment on the basis of bogus certificate.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner was made aware of the charge against her and she had admitted that charge.
It cannot also be ignored that minimum qualification for recruitment of Anganwari worker was merely primary pass and there is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner did possess the primary pass certificate.
The petitioner could have pleaded in response to the show cause notice that she had not derived any benefit by producing the middle certificate.
It would have also been open to her to plead that termination of her services after a period of seven years would cause her immense hardship.
All these matters could legitimately be examined by the competent authority before passing an order of punishment.
It is, therefore, evident that non- compliance of the rules of natural justice has occasioned failure of justice qua the petitioner.
8.
In the result this writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P1 is declared illegal and is, hereby, quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service.
For back wages the petitioner shall be free to avail remedy under section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
If any application is filed by the petitioner under Section 33(C)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for back wages it shall be open to the respondents to plead and prove that the petitioner was gainfully employed during the intervening period and, she is, therefore, not entitled to whole or part of the back wages.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.