RP Sethi, J - The respondent-writ petitioner, who was otherwise to retire on 3151989 on superannuation, was directed to be compulsorily retire vide Annexure P-1 dated 18111988.
It was stated that as the writ petitioner had attained the age of 55 years, it was not proper to retain him in service in the public interest.
The aforesaid order of compulsorily retiring the petitioner was challenged by him in the Court on various grounds as incorporated in the writ petition filed.
The writ petitioner had attributed mala fides and claimed himself to be the Chairman of the Municipal Employees Union, Ludhiana.
It was submitted that the order impugned in writ petition was passed with the object of forcing him to withdraw the petitions already filed by him.
2.
It was further contented that the order impugned in the writ petition was against the provisions of law and government instructions issued in that behalf.
The appellant-State had tried to justify the action with the submission that this Court had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the pleas raised, as it was within the competence of the State to retire any person at any time.
It was contended that since the order impugned in the writ petition did not cast any stigma on the conduct and reputation of the writ petitioner, no relief could be granted to him.
3.
After perusing the entire record, examining the case law on the subject and affording the parties opportunities to be heard the learned Single Judge vide his judgment impugned in this appeal came to the conclusion, as under :-  ``Taking into consideration the relevant rule, the instructions referred to above and the ratio of the decisions referred to above, it is clear that no doubt it is the pleasure of the Government to retain a Government employee after attaining the age of 55 years but that pleasure is subject to the rules or the instructions noticed above.
The record of the Government employee as a whole is to be considered at the same time if adverse entries were recorded therein and communicated in the last ten years of service could be taken into consideration.
The old and state entries in the service record are not to be taken into consideration when latest record shows good or better remarks.
The respondents have referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the written statement to certain punishments imposed upon the petitioner for the period 1959 to 1966.
In 1959, the petitioner was suspended but was reinstated after six months.
In 1962, increment of the petitioner was postponed for one month.
In 1965, a charge-sheet was framed and in March, 1966, a warning was given.
Also in March, 1966, another increment was postponed.
The order compulsorily retiring the petitioner was passed on November 18, 1988 (Annexure P-1).
All the punishments referred to above are stale and are not relevant for the purpose of considering as to whether the petitioner should be retained on completing 55 years of age."
4.
The learned Single Judge also came to the conclusion that whole of the record of the petitioner had not been seen before passing the order of compulsorily retiring him and that the writ petitioner was not proved to be a dead-wood and thus could not be retired from service on attaining the age of 55 years.
It was noticed that the conduct of the petitioner had been adjudged `Very Good' by his superior Officers and that the action of compulsorily retiring him was not referrable to any misconduct or inefficiency adjudicable in the writ jurisdiction.
We do not agree with the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the court had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the pleas raised or that the State had the absolute right to retire any person at any time according to their choice.
The powers of judicial review are inherent in our constitutional system which cannot be conceded to in favour of the executive.
It is, however agreed that the Court has no power to substitute its judgment for the opinion of the executive authorities provided the same is arrived at on the basis of the record and is not actuated by extraneous considerations.
If the conclusions arrived at are not in conformity with the service rules, bye-laws, government orders or instructions issued in connection therewith or the action is actuated by extraneous consideration, the Court has ample powers to grant the necessary relief.
In the case before the learned Single Judge, the writ petitioner had placed on record a number of documents showing that his work and conduct had been appreciated by his Officers.
From Annexure P-4 it appears that the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana vide order dated 4121984 had opined that the work and conduct of the writ petitioner was good and was fit for promotion.
Vide Annexure P-5 the Assistant Commissioner had recommended the case of the writ petitioner and appreciated his services.
Vide Annexure P-6 dated 1481987 the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana had certified that ``Shri Chint Ram worked as Assistant Building Superintendent from December 1986 to June, 1987.
During this period he made best possible efforts to effect recovery in the Building Breach and disposed of composition cases expeditiously.
I appreciate his work and wish him all the best in his service career'' and vide Annexure P-7 it was certified that ``as Appreciation Letter appreciating the services for good work was issued to Shri Chint Ram, License Supdt.
of Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana vide my DO letter No554- 55/AC dated 681984."
5.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge being based upon the relevant provisions of law and proper appreciation of the record pertaining to the petitioner, does not require any interference.
It may not be out of place to mention here that after the passing of the order, the writ petitioner actually retired after six months.
The appeal is dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Consequent upon dismissal of the appeal and setting aside the order of his compulsory retirement, the writ petitioner shall be paid all his dues, if not already paid, within a period of 3 months.