TS Doabia, J - Right to shelter is being claimed as a matter of right.
It is being claimed as a fundamental right.
Field, J in Munn v. Illioois, (1877)94 US 113 said that :  "Life means something more than mere animal existence and the inhibition against the deprivation of life extends to all those limits and facilities by which life is enjoyed."
2.
The right of pavement dwellers and their plight was noticed by the Supreme Court of India in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180 : 1986 R.R.R.
290.
The Court noticed the situation in the opening para of the judgment.
It was said :  "These Writ Petitions portray the plight of lakhs of persons who live on pavements and in slums in the city of Bombay.
They constitute nearly half the population of the city.
The first group of petitions relates to pavement dwellers while the second group relates to both pavement and Basti or slum dwellers.
Those who have made pavements their homes exist in the midst of filth and equator which has to be seen to be believed.
Rabid dogs in search of stinking meat and cats in search of hungry rats keep them company.
They cook and sleep where they ease, for no conveniences are available to them.
Their daughters come of age, bath under the nosy gaze of passers-by, unmindful of the feminine sense of bashfulness.
The cooking and washing over, women pick lice from each others's hair.
The boys beg.
Menfolk, without occupation, snatch chains with the connivance of the defenders of law and order; when caught, if at all, they say : "Who doesn't commit crimes in this city ?"
3.
The procedure of removing hutments was held to be violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, thus placing their rights at the same pedestal as other rights contained in Part III of the Constitution.
This concept was, however, dilated as is apparent from the later discussion of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, AIR 1989 SC 38 and Sodan Singh v. New Delhi Municipal Committee, (1990)8 Legal Reports and Statutes 82 : 1989(2) R.R.R.
387.
Further in Jagdish Prasad v. M.C.D.
through Commissioner, AIR 1993 SC 1254, it was held that employees cannot demand housing accommodation as a matter of right.
The fact that there was no resolution in favour of the employees from which it could be spelled that Corporation had agreed to make any allotment was taken note of.
It is in the background of above legal situation the factual position in the present case be noticed.
4.
The petitioners are employees of the Municipal Corporation Gwalior (hereinafter referred as the 'Corporation').
They are all working in the Fire Brigade Section of the Municipal Corporation, Gwalior (hereinafter referred to as the 'Corporation').
According to them, there was a dispute between the petitioners and the Corporation and a settlement was arrived at on 12th November, 1980.
As per this, the Corporation agreed to provide land within a period of one week for building residential quarters.
The relevant demand at Sr. No. 2 and the decision taken thereon is as under :  The English rendering of this reads as under : Demand Resolution The Municipal Corporation had invited applications from its employees for house building which have been already submitted by the employees but no land is made available for this purpose.
Hence either plots be made available or cheaper rates to the employees of the Fire Brigade for construction of quarters or quarters be got constructed and given under ownership rights of the employees.
Selection of site for construction of quarters for the employees of Fire Brigade be made within a week and a report be submitted accordingly.
5.
The above decision was taken when the Corporation was under supervision of the Administrator who was looking after the affairs of the Corporation.
When an elected body came into existence, the settlement Annexure P/3 was given a complete go-bye.
No step was taken to arrange the land.
No effort was made for arranging land for the municipal employees in the Fire Brigade Section.
Provision whereof was contemplated in annexure P/3.
The petitioners were, however, put in possession of built quarters.
They are liable to be evicted as soon as their service tenure comes to an end.
As noticed above, the petitioners have based their right on the basis of the settlement annexure P/3.
They have also sought to substantiate their claim by relying on a brochure issued by the Corporation.
According to them as per this brochure indicates that transfer of ownership was contemplated.
According to the petitioners, this was in furtherance of the resolution and the settlement annexure P/3.
6.
The stand of the Corporation is that as per settlement effort was to be made for making some land available to the petitioners.
There was no settlement with regard to providing built housing accommodation in which transfer of ownership to the petitioners was ever contemplated.
It is stated that the Administrator of the Corporation did enter into a settlement but the elected body was not bound to abide by the decision taken by the Administrator.
It has been further stated that the houses which are in the occupation of the petitioners cannot be transferred to them as these are meant for staff of the Fire Brigade section.
The Corporation's need to allot these quarters for the benefit of the staff manning the Fire Brigade is a permanent need.
According to the Corporation these quarters have been built near the place where the Fire Brigade section is located.
The requisite averments in this regard are contained in para 14 of the return filed by the Corporation.
Reliance has been placed on annexure R/3 which is a record of the steps taken by the Corporation while dealing with this aspect of the matter.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has made the following submissions.
(i) that, the petitioners have a fundamental right to have a shelter on their head; (ii) that, the resolution passed and the decision taken by the Administrator would bind the Corporation; (iii) that, the Corporation is estopped from taking a contrary stand.
For this reliance has been placed on the plea of estoppel.
(iv) According to the petitioners a sum of Rs. 270/- is being deducted from the salaries of the petitioners every month and it is being adjusted as house loan.
According to the petitioners, if this amount is adjusted towards sale price then the payment made by them is much more than the price of the houses in possession of the petitioners; and (v) that, according to section 424(4) of the Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, the elected body is bound by the decision which may be taken by the State Government or its nominee, namely, the Administrator.
8.
The learned counsel for the Corporation contended that the resolution and the settlement annexure P/3 cannot be given effect to.
For this he has placed reliance on section 80 of the MP Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act').
According to him, the Corporation has no power or authority to transfer immovable property.
9.
The learned counsel for the Corporation has also placed reliance on section 67 of the Act which enumerates the duties of the Corporation.
There are certain obligatory functions.
The requirement to provide housing accommodation to the employees is not an obligatory duty.
The argument of the Corporation is that they have not agreed to perform these optional duties.
As such the Corporation is not bound by the stipulation made in annexure P/3.
10.
The learned counsel for the Corporation has argued that Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not the proper forum for the petitioners.
If there is any breach of contract, the petitioners are at liberty to take such remedies as may be available to them under the ordinary law but.
Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot be resorted to it.
According to the learned counsel for the Corporation, the settlement annexure P/3 has not been arrived at in accordance with the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It is contended that this has no binding nature.
11.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has contended by placing reliance on annexure R/1 that this is policy decision of the Government dealing with the allotment of the houses.
Stress has been laid on the fact that the policy decision taken does make mention that the property can be given on ownership basis.
According to him, if the approval of the State Government has not been obtained then the petitioners cannot be made to suffer.
The fact that there is a provision in the budget for constructing houses should be taken note of.
12.
Provisions of Sections 80 and 424 of the Act are relevant.
Section 80 has been relied upon by the Corporation and section 424 has been relied upon by the petitioners.
These provisions read as under :  "80.
Provisions governing the disposal of Municipal property or property vesting in or under to management of Corporation.
(1) No streets, nazul lands, public places, drains or irrigation channels shall be sold, leased or otherwise alienated, save in accordance with such bye-laws as may be made in this behalf.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) - (a) the Commissioner may, in his discretion, grant a lease of any immovable property belonging to the Corporation, including any right of fishing or of gathering and taking fruit, flowers and the like, of which the premium or rent or both, as the case may be, does not exceed five hundred rupees for any period not exceeding twelve months at a time : Provided that every such lease granted by the Commissioner, other that the lease of the class in respect of which Standing Committee has by resolution exempted the Commissioner from compliance with the requirements of this proviso, shall be reported by him to the Standing Committee within 15 days after the same has been granted.
(b) with the sanction of the Standing Committee, the Commissioner may by sale or otherwise grant a lease of immovable property including any such right as aforesaid, for any period not exceeding three years at a time of which the premium or rent or both, as the case may be, for any one year does not exceed three thousand rupees; (c) with the sanction of the Corporation the Commissioner may lease, sell or other wise convey any immovable property belonging to the Corporation.
(3) The Commissioner may - (a) in his discretion dispose of by sale, letting out on hire or otherwise, any movable property belonging to the Corporation not exceeding five hundred rupees in value; subject to the conditions and limitations imposed by this Act or by any other enactment for the time being in force."
"424.
Reconstitution of Corporation.
(1) The Government may, if it thinks fit, at any time, during the period of supersession declare by notification, while it its intention to constitute a Corporation in place of the Corporation superseded under Section 422 or dissolved under Section 422-A (2) The Administrator of the City shall forthwith proceed to prepare a register of electors and to hold an election of Councillors in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Councillors so elected and selected shall enter upon office as the Corporation on such day as the Government made appointment in this behalf, and subject to the provisions of this Act, shall continue in office for a period of four years from the date on which they enter upon office.
(4) All debts and obligations incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things to be done by, or for the Corporation or the Administrator of the City before the reconstitution of the Corporation shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or to be done by, or for, the Corporation at reconstituted under this section.
(5) Every appointment, notification, notice, tax, order, scheme, licence, permission, rule, bye-law, or form made issued, or imposed by the Corporation under this section and not inconsistent with this Act, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued or imposed under the provisions of this Act, and shall unless subsequently altered, modified, cancelled, suspended, surrendered or withdrawn, as the case may be, under this Act, remain in force for the period, if any for which it was so made, issued or imposed.
(6) All rates, taxes and sums of money due to the Corporation or to the Administrator of the City when the Corporation is reconstituted under this section, shall be deemed to be due to the Corporation.
(7) All suits or other legal proceedings, civil or criminal, instituted by or against the Corporation of the Administrator of the City before the reconstitution of the Corporation under this section may be continued by or against the Corporation so reconstituted.
13.
I have considered the arguments raised by learned counsel for both the parties.
14.
The claim of the petitioners that right to shelter is a fundamental right cannot be accepted.
The judicial pronouncements noted above do not support the petitioners.
All that can be spelt out from the decisions given by the Supreme Court in, AIR 1993 SC 1254 is that in case some resolution is passed by the Corporation then some ground may be available for the person in whose favour resolution has been passed to Bank upon.
If there is no resolution then the employee have no legal right which can be enforced by a writ of Court.
In the present case, there is no resolution passed by the Corporation from which it can be inferred that a provision was made for allotting the houses.
Settlement annexure P/3 makes a mention regarding making provisions for land.
This again is not in Positive Terms.
This is not the claim of the petitioners.
They want built houses.
The houses cannot be transferred to them by way of ownership.
The argument of the learned counsel for the Corporation that provisions of Section 80 require prior approval of the State Government before any immovable property can be transferred is valid.
There is no approval from the State Government.
The petitioners as such are on slippery ground and they are not entitled to any relief.
15.
Apart from the above, it may be seen that at the time when the settlement annexure P/3 was arrived at the Corporation was under supersession.
An Administrator was looking after the affairs of the Corporation.
When a Corporation is under the administration of an Administrator, then the property which vested in the Corporation is to vest in persons or a committee named for the purpose in the Act.
The persons or the committee is subject to the control of the Government.
Thus, reading sections 80 and 424 together a conclusion is irresistible that the Corporation's property cannot be transferred by the Administrator.
In similar circumstances the Supreme Court in Hitkarini Sabha v. The Corporation of the City of Jabalpur, AIR 1972 SC 2017 held that the lease granted by an Administrator of superseded a Municipal Committee would be void.
This was because the property came to vest in the State Government and the Administrator had no authority to transfer it in any manner.
Thus, the settlement annexure P/3 would not confer any right on the petitioners.
The argument in this regard is without any merit.
16.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has further submitted that a sum of Rs. 270/- is being deducted from the salary of the petitioners.
According to the Corporation, this is deducted towards house rent.
In this view of the factual position, this argument is also of no help to the petitioners.
17.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has also raised a plea of estoppel also.
According to him the elected body was bound to follow and abide by everything that is contained in the settlement annexure P/3.
First of all, it may be seen that the settlement annexure P/3 was only to the effect that efforts would be made to arrange some land whereon houses could be built.
There is no decision which contemplated making provision for built houses - Again by settlement annexure P/3 what was sought to be transferred was immovable property.
The decision being in contravention of section 80 of the Act could be ignored and would not be binding on the elected body.
The fact that the accommodation has been built for Fire Brigade Staff cannot be ignored.
These accommodations have been made near the Fire Brigade station.
As soon as some incumbent retires another one is allotted this house.
The requirement of the continuous presence of the fire fighting staff near the fire station is imperative.
As such, the houses built for the fire righting staff cannot be transferred.
18.
The petitioners right in this case emerges either from the settlement under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or is based on a contract pure and simple.
As such, these rights are per se contractual rights.
These arc not enforceable in a writ petition.
The decision given in Bareilly Development Authority and another v. Ajay Pal Singh and others, AIR 1989 SC 1076 goes against the arguments raised by the petitioners counsel.
Thus looking from any point of view, there is no merit in this petition.
It is, however, made clear that in case the petitioners are to be dispossessed then they would not be dispossessed except in due course of law.
19.
This petition is without any merit and the same is dismissed as such.
Petition dismissed.