SP Kurdukar and Swatantar Kumar, JJ.
- By this appeal the appellant seeks to challenge the legality and correctness of the judgment and order dated February 17, 1992 passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 12680 of 1991.
2.
Controversy in this writ petition relates to admission in Polytechnic Technical Institutions in the State of Punjab of the children of the serving staff of the Technical Education Department.
There is no dispute that the appellant passed his senior secondary Examination Part-II in March, 1991 and secured 276 marks out of 450 marks (60 per cent).
Father of the petitioner, Shri RK Dhawan at the relevant time happened to be working as Head of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar.
This is an aided institution by the Government of Punjab and is affiliated to the State Board of Technical Education, Punjab.
Petitioner was desirous of securing admission to the Engineering Course.
3.
The Government of Punjab vide its letter dated 28th of August 1987 `Annexure P-5' reserved 2 per cent of seats for admission in Polytechnics - Technical Institutions in the State for the children of serving staff of the Technical Education Department.
The prospectus issued by the Government Engineering College, Bathinda for the session 1991-92 also indicated reservation of 2 per cent of seats pursuant to the Govt. Letter dated 2881987 `Annexure P-5'.
It is also made clear in para 3 of the prospectus that the reservation for other categories will remain unchanged during the year 1991-92.
The appellant failed to secure the admission in terms of Govt. letter `Annexure P-5' and consequently, he filed civil writ petition No. 12680 of 1991 in this Court.
At the motion stage on 691991, the Court passed the following order :-  ``Admitted.
To be heard along with CWP No. 14670 of 1989.
The petitioner be given provisional admission at his own risk and responsibility in Electronics and Instrumentation Department.
It has been made clear to the counsel for the petitioner that the provisional admission would not entitle him to continue the studies if ultimately the petition fails.
The admission be given forthwith.''
4.
Pursuant to this interim order, the appellant continued his studies in the Engineering College, Bhatinda, Civil Writ Petition No. 14670 of 1989 was heard by the learned Single Judge.
The court did not approve the reservation made in Govt. Letter ``Annexure P-5'' since the writ petitioner in the said writ petition had completed more than two semesters the learned Single Judge allowed the petitioner to complete the course.
5.
As far as the appellant is concerned, under the impugned order, the learned Single Judge found that the appellant had completed only one semester and set aside the admission of the appellant to the Engineering Course.
It is this order dated 17th of February, 1992 which is subject-matter of challenge in this appeal.
6.
At the time of admission of the appeal on 17th of June 1992, this Court passed the following order:-  ``Admitted.
The petitioner is permitted to Continue his studies till further orders.''
The appeal has reached for final hearing in January 1995.
During the intervening period, the appellant has passed six semesters and has appeared for the 7th Semester examination.
The result of the 7th semester is yet to be declared, and examination of the final semester will be held sometime in May, 1995.
We are told that the appellant has passed all the six semesters and has appeared for 7th semesters of which the result is withheld.
Having regard to the fact that the appellant has completed and passed six semesters under the interim orders of this Court it would be harsh to reverse the entire procedure and set aside the admission of the appellant in the Engineering Course.
We may also indicate that reservation made by the State of Punjab vide letter `Annexure P-5' may not stand the test of equality under Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is in these circumstances although the appellant could not have got the admission on merits but got the benefit of and admission to the Engineering Course under the Government letter `Annexure P-5' and by now has completed six semesters.
Bearing in mind, all those circumstances we allow the appellant to continue the course and direct the respondents to declare the result of the appellant of the 7th semester and permit him to appear in the 8th semester in accordance with the law.
Although we are in agreement with the reasoning of the Single Judge as regards Govt. letter annexure P-5 but having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we permit the appellant to continue the course.
Appeal is partly allowed subject to the above directions.
In the circumstances there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal partly allowed.