ML Kaul, J - The appellant Khair Din, who appeals to this Court by this Letters Patent Appeal, against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 521993, was working as a Follower in the Police Training College, Udhampur, since his enrolement on 2291977 vide Order Book No. 401.
On 30.4.1988 he proceeded on leave for one month and as he was taken ill he could not resume his duties on the scheduled date on 30.5.1988 after the expiry of one month's leave.
He informed the authorities telegraphically about his confinement to bed vide telegrams dated 29.6.1988 and 11.8.1988, which fact finds mention in the order of respondent No. 3 dated 6121991.
As the appellant could not resume his duties on the expiry of the sanctioned leave, therefore, his services were summararily terminated by the respondent No. 2 vide his order No. 1024 of 1988 dt. 22121988.
2.
The appellant preferred a writ petition in this Court for quashment of the aforesaid order dt. 22121988 and challenged its validity on various grounds, including the competence of respondent No. 2 to pass the discharge order and also on the basis of principles of natural justice that the appellant was not provided sufficient opportunity to defend his case and the respondents had failed to issue any show-cause notice before passing of such discharge order.
3.
The said writ petition of the appellant, being SWP No. 558 of 1991, was allowed to be withdrawn by him with a liberty to make an appropriate representation to the respondent No. 2, i.e.
Principal Police Training College, Udhampur, for vacation of the said order of discharge passed against him.
Accordingly, the appellant filed a representation before the respondent No. 2 stating the facts which prevented the appellant to join his duty after the expiry of his earned leave.
The said representation of the appellant was again summararily disposed of by the respondent No. 2 and he did not pay any heed to the circumstances raised and proved by the appellant, which prevented him to join the duty after his sanctioned leave was over.
The said authority, according to the appellant, did not take note of the four commendation certificates to have been issued by the authorities for his excellent services rendered by him in the Department during his service career of 11 years.
The authorities failed to take any lenient view and instead in an undue haste summararily discharged the appellant from service and subsequently dismissed his representation as well.
4.
Thereafter, the appellant preferred Writ Petition No. 55 of 1992 in this Court, which has been dismissed by the learned Single Judge vide order dated 521993, impugned in this LPA, holding that no legal or fundamental right of the appellant was violated.
5.
In this L.P.A. it has been urged by the appellant that the learned Single Judge has failed to return a finding on the fact as to whether the Vice Principal can terminate the services of the appellant, who has been recruited by the Principal, who is an Officer superior in rank and thus the order of termination passed by the Vice Principal, is against law.
It is also stated that the telegrams sent from Srinagar by the appellant for extension of his leave, were received by the respondents 2 and 3 and it clearly indicates that the appellant had not left without leaving his fresh address at home.
No show-cause or grounds of allegations or charge-sheet was served upon the appellants, therefore, no enquiry as envisaged under the Jammu and Kashmir Police Rules and Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules of 1956, has been conducted by the authorities resulting into miscarriage of justice and the order of discharge passed by the respondents against the appellant, is without any force of law and also contrary to the provisions of the Police rules and the Constitution.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and also bestowed our thoughtful consideration over the record on the file.
7.
It is quite material to make mention of certain provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Police Manual 1960 Vol. II which deals and envisaged as to how punishments can departmentally be imposed upon a police officer.
In this regard relevant part of Rule 334 is mentioned as below :  "334.
(1) No police officer shall be departmentally punished otherwise than as prescribed in these rules.
(2) Authorised departmental punishments.
- The following punishments may be inflicted departmentally on police officers of and below the rank of Inspectors - xx xx xx xx (b) Removal not a bar to re-employment in Government service in another department.
xx xx xx xx xx (3) For the purpose of these rules the term "Major Punishment" shall be held to mean any authorised punishment of dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement, withholding of increments, fine, reduction, recovery from pay and forfeiture of increment.
The term "Minor Punishment" shall mean all other authorised punishments."
Rule 359 of the aforesaid Police Rules reads as under :-  "359.
Procedure in departmental enquiries.
- (1) The following procedure shall be followed in departmental enquiries :-  (a) The enquiry shall, whenever, possible be conducted by a gazetted officer empowered to inflict a major punishment upon the accused officer.
Any other gazetted officer or an Inspector specially empowered by the Minister I/C Police Departments to hold departmental enquiries (vice Order No. 636-C dated 2761945) may be deputed to hold an inquiry or may institute an enquiry on his own initiative against an accused police officer who is directly subordinate to him, except that in the case of a complaint against a constable the inquiry may be conducted by an Inspector.
The final order, however, may be passed only by an officer empowered to inflict a major punishment upon the accused police officer.
(2) The officer conducting the inquiry shall summon the accused police officer before him and shall record and read out to him a statement summarising the alleged misconduct in such a way as to give full notice of the circumstances in regard to which evidence is to be recorded.
(3) If the accused police officer at this stage admits the misconduct alleged against him the officer conducting the enquiry may proceed forthwith to record a final order if it is within his power to do so or a finding to be forwarded to an officer empowered to decide the case.
... ... ... ... (4) If the accused police officer does not admit that misconduct the officer conducting the enquiry shall proceed to record such evidence oral and documentary in proof of the accusation as is available an necessary to support the charge.
Whenever possible witnesses shall be examined direct and in the presence of the accused who shall be given opportunity to cross examine them.
The officer conducting the enquiry is empowered, however, to bring on to the record the statement of any witness whose presence cannot in the opinion of such Officer be produced without undue delay and expense or inconvenience if he considers such statement necessary and provided that it has been recorded and attested by a police officer not below the rank of Inspector or by a Magistrate and is signed by the person making it.
The accused stall be bound to answer questions which the enquiring officer may see fit to put to him, with a view to elucidating the facts referred to in statements or documents brought on the record as herein provided.
(5) When the evidence in support of the allegations has been recorded, the enquiring officer shall : (a) if he considers that such allegations are not substantiated either discharge the accused himself if he is empowered to punish him or recommend his discharge to the Superintendent or other officer who may be so empowered, or (b) proceed to frame a formal charge or charges in writing, explain them to the accused officer and call upon him to answer them.
(6) The accused officer shall be required to state the defence witnesses whom he wishes to call and may be given time in no case exceeding 48 hours to prepare a list of such witnesses together with a summary of the facts as to which they will testify.
The enquiring officer shall be empowered to refuse to hear any witnesses whose evidence he considers will be irrelevant or unnecessary in regard to the specified charge framed in which case he shall record the reason for his refusal.
He shall record the statements of those defence witnesses whom he decides to admit in the presence of the accused, who shall be allowed to address questions to them the answers to which shall be recorded, provided that the enquiring officer may cause to be recorded by any other officer not below the rank of Inspector the statement of any such witness whose presence cannot be secured without undue delay or inconvenience and may bring such statement on to the record.
The accused may file documentary evidence and may for this purpose be allowed access to such files and papers except such as form part of the record of the confidential office of the Superintendent of Police as the enquiring officer deems fit.
The supply of copies of documents to the accused shall be subject to the ordinary rules regarding copying fees.
(7) At the conclusion of the defence evidence or if the enquiring officer so directs at any earlier stage, following the framing of a charge the accused shall be required to state his own answer to the charge.
He may be permitted to file a written statement and may be given time not exceeding one week for its preparation but shall be bound to make an oral statement in answer to all questions which the enquiring officer may see fit to put to him arising out of the charge, the recorded evidence or his own written statement.
(8) The enquiring officer shall then proceed to pass orders of acquittal or punishment if empowered to do so, or to forward the case with his finding and recommendations to an officer having the necessary powers."
From the bare reading of the above quoted rules, it emanates that no police officer can be removed from service for a Major Punishment, in which the punishment of removal imposed upon the appellant falls, unless a departmental enquiry is held.
As per Rule 359 (supra), which contains a stipulation that in case of a police officer who is not a gazetted officer an enquiry has to be conducted by a Gazetted Officer empowered to inflict a Major Punishment upon the accused officer.
Even any other Gazetted Officer or the Inspector specially empowered by the Minister I/C Police Department to hold departmental enquiry vide order No. 636C dated 2761945, may be deputed to hold an enquiry or may institute an enquiry on his own initiative against an accused police officer, who is directly subordinate to him, except that in the case of a complaint against a constable the inquiry may be conducted by an Inspector.
However, the final order may be passed only by an officer empowered to inflict a Major Punishment upon the accused police officer.
It is imperative upon the Inquiry Officer, who conducts inquiry against such a police officer, that he shall record and read out to him a statement summarising the alleged misconduct in such a manner as to give full notice of the circumstances in regard to which evidence is to be recorded.
In case such an accused police officer at the very outset admits the misconduct alleged against him, the Inquiry Officer may proceed forthwith to record a final order if it is within his power to do so or a finding could be forwarded by him to an Officer empowered to decide the case.
In case the delinquent police officer does not admit his misconduct, the Inquiry Officer in that eventuality shall have to record such evidence, oral and documentary, in proof of the accusation as is available and necessary to support the charge.
Whenever it is possible the witnesses are to be examined direct in presence of the accused police officer, who shall be given an opportunity to cross-examine them.
After recording the evidence, the Inquiry Officer shall, if he considers that such allegations are substantiated, either discharge the accused himself, if he is empowered to dismiss him, or recommend his case for punishment to higher officer, having the necessary powers, or the Inquiry Officer may proceed to frame a formal charge or charges in writing, explaining them to the accused police officer and call upon him to answer them.
The accused officer shall be required to state the defence witnesses whom he wishes to call and may be given time not exceeding 48 hours, to prepare a list of such witnesses with a summary of the facts as to which they will testify.
The enquiring officer shall be empowered to refuse to hear any witnesses whose evidence he considers will be irrelevant or unnecessary in regard to the specified charge framed in which case he shall record the reason for his refusal.
He shall record the statement of those defence witnesses whom he decides to admit in the presence of the accused, who shall be allowed to address questions to them the answers to which shall be recorded.
The accused police officer may also file documentary evidence and may be allowed access to such files and papers, as the enquiring officer deems fit.
On the conclusion of the defence evidence or earlier to that stage during the enquiry after framing the charge, the accused police officer shall be required to state his own answer to the charge so framed against him.
He shall be permitted to file a written statement and may be given time, not exceeding one week, to prepare such a statement, but the accused shall be bound to make an oral statement in answer to all the questions which the enquiring officer may see fit to put to him arising out of the charge, the recorded evidence or his own written statement.
Thereafter, the enquiry officer shall proceed to pass orders of acquittal or punishment if empowered to do so or forward the case with his finding and recommendations to an officer having necessary powers.
8.
From the above discussion, it transpires that a definite procedure for a subordinate police officer is provided under the aforesaid Police Rules, that no such officer can be removed from service, unless a full dressed enquiry is conducted against him in pursuance of Rule 359 of the aforesaid Police Rules, which provides the method and the manner in which such an enquiry is to be conducted against a non-gazetted police officer for awarding a Major Punishment, provided under Rule 334 of the said police rules.
9.
In the case on hand it is apparent that the appellant has been removed from service under Order No. 1024 of 1988 dated 22121988 and the grounds taken for his removal were that the appellant after proceeding for thirty days leave absented from service and the authorities tried to secure his presence with regard to which matter was referred to S.H.O.
Police Station Udhampur and the copy was addressed oh his home address as well.
He was subsequently served with a notice vide No. OASI/14342 dated 2791988, failing which it was desired that ex parte decision would be taken against the appellant.
After that a Final Notice under No. 15607-9 dated 15101988 was served upon the appellant directing him to resume his duty in the office of the Vice Principal Police Training College, Udhampur, failing which he would loose his job.
As the appellant did not join even upto a period of two months thereafter, it was presumed that he was not interested to serve the Department and was accordingly removed from service.
10.
The learned Single Judge in the impugned judgment has observed that the respondents had made all efforts to intimate the appellant about the proposed enquiry, but as he had left his home without leaving any address, it was not possible to serve any notice upon him.
11.
In this regard it is material to make mention of the fact that the appellant had sent two telegrams to the respondents, which fact is borne out from the order dated 6121991 passed by respondent No. 3, wherein the Director Police Training College, Udhampur, who has dismissed the representation of the appellant, has admitted that two telegrams were received from the appellant with a request for extension of his leave, but those were rejected by the respondents.
12.
No material was produced by the respondents, either before the learned Single Judge or before us, showing that as to what were the reasons on the basis of which the two telegrams for extension of leave received from the appellant, were rejected by the respondents.
There is no proof available with us that no leave was due to the appellant, for which fact the extension in his leave was rejected.
13.
It appears that no enquiry as envisaged by the aforesaid Police Rules, has been conducted by the authorities concerned and without a formal enquiry having been conducted against the appellant, he has been removed from service.
The representation of the appellant was also rejected although the respondents could re-open the matter and could also allow the appellant to participate in the enquiry, which could be conducted against him at that stage as well.
14.
The mode of enquiry envisaged under the aforementioned Police Rules, is not in any manner different to the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, which provides the procedure which is to be following which lowed by a Competent Authority as a mandate of law, while imposing a punishment on any government servant for any misconduct, alleged against him.
15.
This Bench in case State v. S Qamar Ali, 1996(1) S.C.T.
115 (LPA 356/93) decided on 541994, has held :-  "It is an established principle of law that a government servant enjoys the protection of his services, as contained in Article 311 of the Constitution of India, corresponding to Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
The Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, provides the procedure which is to be followed by a competent authority, as a mandate of law, while imposing a punishment on any government servant for any misconduct.
The absence of a government servant without leave or after the end of leave, which involves loss of appointment cannot be deviated from the definition of misconduct in the broader terminology of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, and thus the procedure as laid down in the Appeal Rules of 1956 was to be followed by the competent authority, before taking action against the respondent within the purview of Article of the aforesaid Regulations, by virtue of which a government servant looses his appointment if found absent without leave or after the end of the leave."
While taking this view we are fortified in AIR 1966 SC 492, wherein it has been held :  "No doubt the Government may visit the punishment of discharge or removal from service on a person who has absented himself by overstaying his leave, but it cannot order a person to be discharged from service without at least telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed.
If this is done the incumbent will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed and no question of reinstatement will arise.
It may be convenient to describe him as seeking reinstatement but this is not tantamount to saying that because the person will only be reinstated by an appropriate authority, that the removal is automatic and outside the protection of Article 311.
A removal is removal and if it is punishment for overstaying one's leave an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such an order is proposed, no matter how the Regulation describes it."
The same view has been adopted by the Apex Court in AIR 1971 SC 1409, wherein one Deokinandan Prasad, petitioner therein, was disentitled his pension for a period of five years, for he had remained absent continuously from service for five years, with regard to which order no opportunity was provided to him by the concerned, authorities.
The Supreme Court held that :  "as no opportunity was given to the petitioner to show cause against the order proposed, hence there is a clear violation of Article 311.
Therefore, the said order on this score alone was quashed."
Again the Apex Court in AIR 1976 SC 37 has held :  "Where the services of a permanent Government servant were terminated under FR 18 of Assam Fundamental and Subsidiary Rules on account of his continuous absence from duty for more than five years and no opportunity was given to him to show cause why the Rule was inapplicable, it was imperatively necessary to give the servant an opportunity to show cause against the proposed action, particularly when he was persistently contending that his failure to join duty or absence was involuntarily and due to circumstances beyond his control."
16.
In view of the above case law and the Police Rules, discussed hereinabove, it emerges that the respondents have not paid any heed to the telegrams of the appellant which he had sent for extension of his leave from Srinagar and no reasons have been provided as to why his leave was not extended, which apparently was due to him.
Neither any formal statements of facts was prepared, nor any enquiry as envisaged under the police rules, mentioned supra, was conducted against the appellant and without any enquiry into the matter, the appellant was removed from service by the respondents.
17.
There are commendable certificates issued in favour of the appellant with regard to his commendable work and he had proceeded on a sanctioned leave and stayed back after his leave was over, but while his leave was subsisting he gave two telegrams to the respondents for extension of his leave, which for no reasons provided by the respondents in the impugned orders have been taken into consideration, although it was imperative upon the authorities concerned to consider such telegrams and dismiss him after formal enquiry could be conducted against the appellant, showing that these telegrams were not bona fide.
The respondents also did not publish the statement of allegations or the charge-sheet in a local paper and did not provide a chance to the appellant to reply the allegations, as to how he remained absent without leave.
18.
We have already held in the case titled State v. S Qamar Ali (supra) that the grounds on which the respondents propose to take action against the appellant was not reduced in the form of a definite charge or charges, which were to be communicated to the appellant together with a statement of allegations on which each charge was based or any other circumstance, which was proposed to take into consideration for passing the removal order.
If it was found by the respondents that the appellant was absent from duty, they could have formulated a charge or the charges against the appellant along with the statement of allegations, and if those could not be served upon him for want of his address, they could publish it in a local paper.
Thereafter, if the appellant was not available, the respondents could then pass an order of removal against him, as envisaged in the Police Rules.
19.
As the respondents have failed to do so, therefore, the order of removal passed against the appellant is contrary to the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India corresponding to Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, read with the provisions of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, as well to the Police Rules, quoted above.
20.
The Letters Patent Appeal is, accordingly, accepted and the impugned order dt. 521993 passed by the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Consequently, the order of removal passed against the appellant on 22121988 by the respondent No. 2 is quashed.
The respondent are at liberty to conduct a fresh enquiry against the appellant, if they so choose, and subject to the result of such an enquiry the appellant shall be reinstated and his period of absence shall be dealt with as per the result of the enquiry to be conducted by the respondent against him.
Appeal allowed.