RP Sethi, J (Oral) - The petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 6286 of 1986 for the grant of following reliefs :  (1) For declaring their service as Class-II Service.
(2) For the grant of pay-scales equivalent to the pay scales of Medical Officers and Dental Surgeons with effect from January 1, 1978, when the pay-scales were revised on the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission.
(3) As recommended by the Second Pay Commission as well as on acceptance of the said report of the Commission by the Government, twenty per cent posts of the Veterinary Officers be placed in the Selection Grade with effect from January 1, 1978.
2.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by the learned Single Judge of this Court on 2.6.1989.
A direction was issued to the respondents to allow Selection Grade on 20 per cent posts with effect from 111978.
In brief, the relief regarding grant of pay-scales equivalent to the pay-scale of Medical Officers and Dental Surgeons was not allowed as the respondents had contested the same on the ground that they had not passed any order equating the pay- scale of Veterinary Surgeons with that a Medical Officers.
3.
The learned Single Judge while disposing of the writ petition had specifically observed that if the Government had ever decided to equate the pay scales of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons with those of PCMS Class-II doctors, after the matter was represented to the Government, in that event, same pay scales were to be allowed for both the posts aforesaid.
Despite the observations made, the State did not allow the same pay scales to the respondents/writ petitioners, with the result that they filed a Review Petition before the learned Single Judge, which was accepted by order dated 1191990.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellants has vehemently argued that while passing order in the Review Petition as well as in the Writ Petition, the learned Single Judge has not taken note of the fact that there did not exist any Government order, justifying issuance of directions equating pay scales for both the posts aforesaid, as contained in the judgment of this writ petition.
The argument of learned counsel cannot be accepted in view of the fact that conflicting replies were filed by the appellant-State.
It was not specifically denied that there did exist any order, by which pay scales had been equated, but the relief prayed for by the petitioners was negatived on the plea of privilege with respect to the document relied upon by the writ petitioners.
Later on when the relevant file was produced, the learned Single Judge noticed the note of the Finance Department dated November 7, 1978, which was considered by the Finance Secretary, who prepared his report on November 23, 1978, where in a specific mention was made regarding office note of November 27, 1978, which related to the grant of grade of 400-1100 to the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons.
The learned Single Judge also noted para 2 of the aforesaid note, which inter-alia provided :-  ``The Agricultural Minister has stated that in this respect Chief Minister had already assured to the deputationists of the concerned employees that they would be given the same grade which at present was being given to the PCMS Class-II doctors i.e. 400-1100 as the Government was bound by its assurance.
Therefore, the veterinary Assistant Surgeons be given grade of 400-30/40-1100.
Approved."
5.
In view of the fact that the Government order had been brought to the notice of the Court, there was no doubt left in the mind of the Court that the pay scales of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons had been equated to the pay scales of PCMS Class-II doctors, which had been done on the representation of the Veterinary Assistant Surgeons.
The discrimination resorted to by the appellant/State could not be justified and the writ petitioners were held entitled to the relief prayed for by them in the Review Petition.
The learned Single Judge in his order made in the Review Petition also noted that the intention of the Secretaries of the Department of Finance and Animal Husbandary to keep the order of the Finance Minister aforesaid in concealment from the Court is not at all commendable.
The way in which the present writ petition as well as the Review Application have been prosecuted on behalf of the State of Punjab, has put the petitioners not only to great inconvenience but to great expenses as well.
The appellants/State having decided to equate the pay-scales of Veterinary Assistant Surgeons and PCMS Class-II doctors could not have taken a different stand, nor can be permitted to make discrimination, which they could not justify when challenged in the Court of law.
Order of learned Single Judge being based upon facts and proper appreciation of provisions of law applicable in the case, does not require any interference.
There is no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.