KS Kumaran, J - The petitioner who is an Assistant Executive Engineer in the Haryana State Electricity Board (respondent herein) was issued a charge sheet (Annexure 11) to which the petitioner gave his explanation under Annexure P2.
Then the respondent issued a show cause notice (Annexure P3) as to why a minor punishment as detailed in regulation 5 of the HSEB Employees (P&A) Regulations, 1980, should not be inflicted, for which the petitioner sent a reply (Annexure P4).
Ultimately, the respondent issued order Annexure P5 stating that on account of wilful absence from duty and misbehaving with the Executive Engineer, the punishment of stoppage of two annual increments with future effect was imposed upon him.
The appeal filed by the petitioner under Annexure P6 was rejected under Annexure P7, simply stating as follows :-  ``Your appeal has been considered by the competent authority and stands rejected.''
2.
Another charge-sheet (Annexure P10) was issued to the petitioner for which he submitted his reply (Annexure P11).
The respondent issued an order (Annexure P12) imposing the punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect.
The appeal (Annexure P13) filed by the petitioner was rejected; vide order Annexure P14.
The petition for review filed by the petitioner under Annexure P15 was also rejected under Annexure P16, stating that nothing warranted the review.
3.
The petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the impugned orders (Annexures P5, P7, P12, P14 and P16).
4.
The petitioner has also alleged that he has completed 12 years of service and is entitled to be placed on selection grade and that the same has not been granted to him on the ground that his absence has not been regularised.
He, therefore, prays that a writ of mandamus may be issued for considering his case to be placed on the selection grade in the pay scale of Rs. 4100-5300 with effect from 161990.
Written statement has been filed and we have heard the counsel for both sides.
The learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that this Court in CWP 3710 of 1994 (Digamber Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board) decided on August 3, 1994, following the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1990(6) SLR 73 held that the punishment of stoppage of annual grade increments with commulative effect under 1980 Regulations was a major penalty and the same having been imposed on the petitioners therein without following the procedure prescribed in the Regulations for imposing major penalty, the impugned orders of punishment were liable to the quashed.
The learned counsel for the petitioners, therefore, contended that the order passed by the respondent imposing such a punishment without holding an enquiry is invalid.
5.
Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent contended that prior to the amendment of the Service Rules concerned, withholding/stoppage of increments of pay with cummulative effect was only a minor punishment, and only after 23.12.1993 when the amendment took effect, such a punishment has been classified as major punishment and, therefore, the respondent had imposed that punishment merely after calling for the explanation and after obtaining his reply therefor.
Learned counsel for the respondent, therefore, contended that it was not necessary to conduct an enquiry against the petitioner before imposing such a punishment.
Such a contention cannot be accepted in the face of the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to and relied on by this Court in CWP 3710 of 1994 (supra).
Therefore, the imposition of the first punishment, namely, withholding of two increments with commulative effect, imposed upon the petitioner under Annexure P5, as confirmed, in appeal, by Annexure P7, has to be quashed for this reason alone.
This apart, these orders are liable to be quashed inasmuch as the respondent has not passed a speaking order, either under Annexure P5 or under Annexure P7.
The orders are cryptic and no reasons have been given for coming to the conclusion as to the guilt of the petitioner in spite of the detailed reply given by him.
In CWP 3710 of 1994 (supra), this Court has also held that such orders passed without giving reasons as to the ground on which the punishing authority had arrived at a conclusion are unsustainable.
Therefore, on the ground that no reasons have been given also, this order has to be quashed as unsustainable.
6.
So far as the second charge is concerned, that also suffers from the said infirmity.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner had given a detailed reply vide Annexure P11, there is nothing in the order Annexure P12 which shows that they were even considered.
The order is cryptic and does not give any reasons.
Then, the appeal filed by the petitioner was rejected by means of an one-line order that his appeal was considered and rejected.
Similar was the fate of the review application.
Therefore, when the respondent had given no reasons for not accepting the explanation given by the petitioner and had merely imposed the punishment without giving any reason, the order imposing such punishment has to be quashed.
Consequently, the cryptic orders passed in the appeal as well as in the review have to go.
Unless and otherwise, the respondent gives the reasons for coming to a particular conclusion, the petitioner will not be able to prefer a proper appeal.
The petitioner must be in a position to know on what grounds his explanation has not been accepted so that he may prefer a meaningful appeal.
Apart from that, the orders passed by the respondent are subject to judicial review and this Court while reviewing such orders passed by the authorities, like the respondent, will not be able to appreciate them unless the respondent gives the reasons for coming to a conclusion against the petitioner.
So, I find that the order under Annexure P12; the rejection order of appeal under Annexure P14, and rejection order of the application for review under Annexure P16 are liable to be quashed.
7.
But at the same time, we are also of the view that the respondent should be given liberty to proceed with the first charge sheet (Annexure P1) from the stage of explanation given by the petitioner under Annexure P2.
It will be open to the respondent to hold a proper enquiry with regard to this charge sheet according to rules and then pass appropriate orders.
Similarly, with regard to the second charge sheet (Annexure P10) it is open to the respondent to continue from the stage of the petitioner's reply (Annexure P11) and to pass appropriate orders giving the reasons therefor, after giving the petitioner a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Subject to these observations, the writ petition will have to be allowed with regard to the prayer for quashing the orders.
In view of the fact that we have given liberty to the respondent to continue the proceedings, the petitioner will not now be entitled to the relief directing the respondent to consider his claim for granting selection grade as prayed for by him.
To that extent, this writ petition shall fail and is dismissed accordingly.
The result is that this writ petition is allowed in part on to the extent indicated above but, in the circumstances, without any order as to costs.
Writ Petition allowed.