AP Chowdhari and JL Gupta, JJ.
- The petitioners have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly they urge that they are not being considered for appointment to the posts for which they have appointed, by the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
Secondly, they claim that the respondent-University is bound to make reservation for members of Scheduled Castes.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Petitioner No. 1 possesses the qualification of MSc.
(Agri.
Economics) with an OGPA of 325/400.
Petitioner No. 2 possesses the qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture) with an OGPA of 316/4.00.
According to the petitioners, they have secured 6625% and 64% marks in the respective MSc.
examinations.
3.
On October 30, 1993, the Punjab Agricultural University advertised various posts including the posts of Assistant Professor (Farm Management); Assistant Professor (Agronomy) and District Extension Specialist (Agronomy).
The relevant qualification was MSc.
in the Speciality concerned "with minimum over all grade point average of 320/400 or 55% marks."
However, no reservation for members of Scheduled Castes etc. was made.
4.
In response to the advertisement, the petitioners submitted their applications.
Petitioner No. 1 applied for the post of Assistant Professor (Farm Management) while petitioner No. 2 was a candidate for the posts of Assistant Professor (Agronomy) and District Extension Specialist (Agronomy).
Apprehending that their claims may not be considered, the petitioners have approached this Court through present writ petition.
They aver that they are eligible for the posts and that the University is bound to make reservation for members of Scheduled Castes in accordance with the policy framed by the State Government.
They also aver that the action of the University is not making reservation is arbitrary and illegal.
They even that in view of the fact that the Haryana Agricultural University as also the Kurukshetra University have made reservations in case of teaching posts, there is no justifiable reason for the respondent-University to take a different view.
They further aver that the respondent having made reservations in respect of non-teaching posts, is bound to follow the same pattern even in case of appointments to teaching posts.
It has also been averred that the posts of Assistant Professor and District Extension Specialist are non-teaching posts.
5.
In response to the notice of motion is issued by the Court, a written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that petitioner No. 2 is not eligible for the posts of Assistant Professor (Agronomy) and District Extension Specialist (Agronomy) with regard to the policy of reservation, it has been averred that the University is a body corporate and the Board of Management, which is the final authority to make regulations for reservations to any category of posts, has decided to make reservation only in respect of non-teaching posts.
Accordingly, the respondents claim that the petitioners have no right to compel the University to make reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Castes etc.  6.
The petitioners have filed a rejoinder to the written statement.
It has been averred that persons with an OGPA of less than 320 having been appointed in the past, the action in treating petitioner No. 2 as ineligible, is discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has been further averred that the Punjab and Haryana Agricultural Universities have been constituted under the provisions of the Haryana and Punjab Agriculture University Act, 1970 and since the Haryana Agriculture University has made reservation even in respect of teaching posts, the respondents are bound to make reservation in the same manner.
7.
In view of the pleadings of the parties, it is clear that petitioner No. 1 who has an overall grade point average of 325 in the MSc.
examination, is eligible for the post.
Consequently, the two questions that arise for consideration are.
:  (i) Is petitioner No. 2 who has an over all grade point average of 316/4.00 eligible for the posts of Assistant Professor (Agronomy) and District Extension Specialist (Agronomy) ?
(ii) Is the respondent-University bound to make reservation for members of Scheduled Castes etc. ?
8.
Mr. GS Savra, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that according to the Qualifications prescribed by the University, a candidate should have secured an overall grade point average of 320/400 or 55% marks.
He submits that petitioner No. 2 had secured an over all grade point average of 316/400 which is equivalent to 64% marks.
Mr. Deepak Agnihotri, learned counsel appearing for the University has contended that the petitioner is not eligible.
9.
According to the advertisement, a candidate should have secured an over all grade point average of 320/400 or 55% marks in the MSc.
examination so as to be eligible for appointment to the posts in question.
Admittedly, petitioner No. 2 has secured an overall grade point average of 316.
However, it has been clearly averred in the petition that on conversion his score is 64%.
It has also been averred that candidates with an over all grade point average of less than 316 have been appointed as Assistant Professors in the past.
Instances have been quoted in paragraph 6 of the writ petition as well as para 4 of the rejoinder.
While an explanation with regard to the instances quoted in the writ petition has been given, no reply has been filed to the rejoinder.
In this situation, we have to assume that the averments made in the rejoinder are admitted by the respondents.
It has been pointed out that Mr. Randhir Singh, who had an over all grade point average of 303 was appointed as an Assistant Professor (Vegetable) in the year 1986-87.
It has also been stated that Mrs. Bhupender Kaur and Mr. Manjit Singh who had a secured an OGPA of 302 were appointed to the post of Assistant Professor in the year 1986.
In this situation, it does not appear to be reasonable for the respondents to take the view that the petitioner is not eligible to be considered.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
In the rejoinder filed by the petitioner, it has been categorically averred that according to the formula given by the University in its Prospectus, an over all grade point average of 316 is equal to 64%.
This averment has been made in the writ petition also.
It has not been specifically controverted.
Even otherwise, we are of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner that he has secured 64% marks, is not wrong.
A candidate is required to have an over all grade point average of 320 out of 4.
If 4 is the maximum score under the system of OGPA, it must follow that 100 is the maximum score under the system of percentage.
If the score of the petitioner is, thus, converted, he shall be presumed to have secured 79% marks.
The petitioner avers that according to the formula laid down by the University, he has secured 64% marks.
This appears to be correct.
The petitioner, has, thus, secured more than 55% marks in the MSc.
examination.
11.
In this situation, we are of the considered view that petitioner No. 2 is also eligible for being considered for appointment to the posts of Assistant Professor (Agronomy) and District Extension Specialist (Agronomy).
12.
This brings us to the consideration of the second question viz. Is the University bound to make reservation for appointment to the teaching posts ?
13.
Article 16(1) of the Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity for employment and appointment under the State.
Clause(2) prohibits discrimination on the prescribed grounds.
However, Clauses 3 to 5 lay down exceptions to the rule of equal opportunity.
One of these exceptions is contained in Clause (4) which enables the State to make a provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of "any backward class of citizens" which is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
The term "backward" has not been defined.
In fact different provisions in the Constitution use different expressions.
To illustrate Article 46 contemplates that the State shall promote the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes...." Article 335 provides that "the claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of Administration in the making of appointments to Services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State" Article 340 empowers the President to appoint a Commission to appoint a Commission to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes..." However, by now, it is clear that members of Scheduled Castes are entitled to the benefit of the special provision that may be made by the State under Article 16(4).
It is also equally clear that Clause (4) contains only an enabling provision.
The State is not bound to make reservation.
If in a given case, the State Government or the appropriate authority decides not to make reservation, the court cannot compel it to do so.
Further more, the reservation made by one State Government or authority does not bind another State or authority.
We are, thus, of the opinion that this Court cannot issue a mandate to the University which is admittedly a 'State' as defined under Article 12 to make reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Castes for appointment to teaching posts.
14.
Under the Scheme of the Constitution, the reservations can be made "consistently with the maintenance of efficiency."
If the appropriate authority considers that reservation would not be conducive to maintenance of standards of excellence in education, it cannot be accused of violative the provisions of the Constitution.
On the contrary, its action would be in strict conformity with the Constitutional Scheme.
This is precisely the view that appears to have been taken by the University.
15.
The Punjab Agricultural University can take pride in the fact that it has contributed to the green revolution that has been brought about in this country.
If in this process, it has chosen to deny the benefit of reservation to the backward classes of citizens, it cannot be accused of having acted illegally or in violation of the Constitutional provisions.
Accordingly, we answer the second question in the negative and hold that the University is not bound to make reservation for members of Scheduled Castes in so far as teaching posts are concerned.
16.
Mr. Sawa contends that reservation has been made by the University in the matter of appointments to non-teaching posts.
He also appoints out that reservations have been made by the Haryana Agricultural University as well as the Kurukshetra University in the matter of appointments to teaching posts.
This may be so.
Each University is an autonomous body.
It is free to take its own decision in the matter of making reservations.
The decision of one University does not bind another.
Further more, the mere fact that the Punjab Agricultural University has made reservation in respect of non-teaching posts, does not mean that reservation has to be made even in respect of teaching, posts.
The two categories of posts are totally different.
There is a valid classification between teaching and non-teaching posts.
Reservation in one category of posts cannot lead to automatic reservation in the other.
17.
The petitioner have also averred that the posts of Assistant Professor are non-teaching posts.
The averment is wholly baseless.
Nothing has been produced on record to show that the incumbents of these posts need not perform duties of teaching or research.
We cannot accept the statement of the petitioner.
18.
Accordingly, we hold that both the petitioners are eligible and entitled to be considered for the posts for which they have submitted their applications.
However, the University was not bound to make reservation for these posts.
The writ petition is allowed to this extent only.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.