VK Jhanji, J - This will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 1225 of 1994 as well as CM No. 9372 of 1994.
2.
In this case, the petitioner was recruited as a Constable in Haryana Police.
Keeping in view the provisions of Rule 138(2) of Punjab Police Rules, the petitioner was ordered to be promoted as Head Constable on 1101982 on ad hoc basis.
Subsequently, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted.
The order of revision was challenged by the petitioner by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 7176 of 1992 in this Court which was admitted by a Division Bench of this Court and the reversion was stayed.
The writ petition is still pending in this Court for decision.
The present writ petition has now been filed by the petitioner for issuance of a direction to the respondents to consider his case for confirmation under Rule 1318 of the Rules ibid and further to declare him to be entitled to be deputed to Intermediate School Course at Police Training College, Madhuban from the date his juniors were so deputed.
3.
Reply on behalf of the respondents has not been filed to this writ petition.
However, in the connected writ petitions (C.W.P.
Nos. 11560, 11586 and 5504 of 1993), respondents have taken the stand that the petitioners therein who were similarly placed as the petitioner in this case, were promoted as Head Constables under Rule 138(2) of the ibid Rules but the said promotion was on ad hoc basis and in the order promoting them as such, it was made clear that they have no right to claim seniority.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
Rule 138(2) of Police Rules has recently been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana, JT 1994(2) SC 157 : 1994(2) SCT.
556.
It has been held by the Supreme Court that promotion of Constables to the post of Head Constables under Rule 138(2) is on regular basis though in the promotion order it may have been specifically mentioned to be on temporary or ad hoc basis.
The relevant paragraph of the judgment of the Supreme Court is as under :  "Under Rule 13.1 there shall be selection tempered by seniority.
Efficiency and honesty should be the main factors.
Passing of training course is necessary.
When the candidate did not pass such test, discretion has been given in Ride 138 to the Deputy Inspector General of Police to relax the mandatory requirement of passing of the training course that the within the quote and promote a candidate as Head Constable.
The rule expressly gives power to the Deputy Inspector General of Police in exceptional cases to promote the persons.
The appellant was considered in the sports quota and was found to be suitable in accordance with Rule 138(2).
It would be obvious that the promotion could be on regular basis but not on ad hoc basis.
No rule or instructions having statutory force was brought to our notice to support the contention of the State.
In fact, in the counter affidavit it was specifically admitted that there is no rule for appointing on ad hoc basis.
It is true that due to administrative exigencies ad hoc or temporary promotion is permissible.
But it must be traceable to statutory source of power or instructions having force of law.
No such rule has been brought to our notice.
The only conclusion would be that the promotion of the applicant under Rule 138(2) on regular basis, though specifically said to be on temporary or ad hoc basis."
5.
There is also merit in the contention of counsel that the petitioner would be deemed to have been confirmed on completion of probation period of two years.
The relevant rule in the case of the petitioner is Rule 1318 which is reproduced hereunder :-  "1318.
All police officers promoted in rank shall be on probation for two years; provided that the appointing authority may, by a special order in each case, permit periods of officiating service to count towards wards the period of probation.
On the conclusion of the probationary period a report shall be rendered to the authority empowered to confirm the promotion who shall either confirm the officer or revert him.
In no case shall the period of probation be extended beyond two years and the conforming authority must arrive at a definite decision within a reasonable time soon after the expiry of that period whether the officer should be confirmed or reverted.
While on probation officers may be reverted without departmental proceedings.
Such reversion shall not be considered reduction for the purpose of Rule 164."
Concededly, the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable on 1101982 and has completed more than two years probation period and there is nothing on record to show that his conduct during the probation was not satisfactory.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner would be deemed to have been confirmed on the post in question on completion of two years' probation.
6.
Consequently, this writ petition stands allowed but with no order as to costs.
Respondents are directed to depute the petitioner for Intermediate School of Course at Police Training College, Madhuban forthwith.
The seniority of the petitioner shall be reckoned from the date his immediate juniors were sent to the Course.
Civil Misc. No. 9372 of 1994 also stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.