VK Jhanji, J - Present civil revision arises out of the order of first Appellate Court passed on an application of the plaintiff (respondent No. 1 herein) to declare the result of 1st Professional Supplementary Examination during the pendency of the appeal filed by the petitioner against the interim order of the trial Court vide which plaintiff was allowed to appear in the 1st Year MBBS Examination.
2.
In brief, the facts are that the plaintiff, on having successfully passed P.M.T.
in the year 1991, got admission in August, 1991 in All India Institute of Medical Sciences, (for short the AIIMS), New Delhi.
Examination of first professional was to be held in July, 1992 but the plaintiff did not appear.
In December, 1992, the Medical Council of India (for short the MCI) considering the case of the plaintiff on compassionate grounds, allowed him to migrate from AIIMS, New Delhi to Medical College, Rohtak.
The migration was allowed on the condition :  "The Executive Committee decided to allow the migration of Mr. Gagan Chhabra, from All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi to Medical College Rohtak on compassionate grounds, in view of the unfortunate family circumstances mentioned by the candidate.
However, as he has not passed the 1st Prof. MBBS, Examination, the Committee decided that he will have to start as a fresh candidate in the transferee Medical College and complete 18 months of study before appearing in the 1st Prof.
Examination."
3.
In terms of the decision of the M.C.I., Medical College, Rohtak allowed the migration and asked the plaintiff to submit an affidavit duly attested by an Oath Commissioner.
Plaintiff submitted his affidavit dated 1121993 before the Director, Medical College, Rohtak in which he affirmed that as per decision of Medical Council of India, I shall have to start as a fresh candidate in Medical College, Rohtak and complete 18 months of study before appearing in the 1st Prof. MBBS examination as desired by Medical Council of India vide their letter No. MCI-31(7) 92/7654 dated 2741993.
4.
1st Prof MBBS Examination of the Medical College, Rohtak was to be held in December, 1993 i.e. only when the plaintiff had completed almost a year of his study.
As the plaintiff was not given roll number by the Medical College on the ground that the condition precedent to his migration was that he could be allowed to appear in the 1st Prof. only after having attended classes for 18 months, the plaintiff filed civil suit for mandatory injunction against Medical College, Rohtak, Secretary, MCI, New Delhi, State of Haryana and also against MD University, Rohtak, seeking a direction against them to issue roll number to the plaintiff so as to enable him to appear in the 1st Prof.
Examination.
On an application, trial Court vide order dated 17.12.1993 directed the Medical College, Rohtak to allow the plaintiff to appear in 1st Prof. MBBS examination.
MD University, Rohtak felt aggrieved of the order and filed appeal before the Additional District Judge which is pending decision.
Result of the plaintiff of 1st Professional was declared provisionally.
He got re-appear in one paper of Anatomy.
In February, 1994, plaintiff appeared in Supplementary Examination and since the result of the Supplementary Examination was not declared, he filed an application before the Additional District Judge for a direction to the University to declare the result of re-appear paper.
Learned Additional District Judge vide impugned order, ordered the declaration of the result and further permitted the plaintiff to continue his studies in Second Professional of MBBS Examination subject to the final outcome of appeal.
MD University, Rohtak has impugned this order in this civil revision.
5.
At the time of motion hearing, operation of the impugned order was stayed.
Subsequently, the plaintiff filed Civil Misc. No. 9060-CII of 1994 under Section 151, C.P.C. for permitting the plaintiff to attend the classes of MBBs 2nd Prof. till the final decision of civil revision preferred by the University.
6.
Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner on the merits of the civil revision, I am of the view that the revision deserves to succeed.
Plaintiff was allowed migration on the compassionate grounds specifically on the condition that he would be allowed to appear in the 1st Professional Examination only after attending classes for 18 months.
Plaintiff accepting that condition filed an affidavit to that effect.
I am prima facie of the view that the plaintiff cannot now turn back and say, give me migration but the condition with regard to attending classes for 18 months is not acceptable.
In equity, a person drawing benefit from a transaction is not permitted to escape from the disadvantage, if any, flowing from it.
7.
Counsel for the plaintiff and his father, who was present in Court, submitted that decision of this civil revision be deferred because the University has recommended the case of the plaintiff to the M.C.I., New Delhi for counting the period of classes the plaintiff attended with AIIMS, New Delhi.
It was also submitted that the plaintiff had developed suicidal tendency due to sudden death of his elder brother and for this reason migration was sought and was allowed by the MCI, New Delhi, considering the merit of the plaintiff.
The father of the plaintiff may be right in submitting that the plaintiff is a brilliant student but that by itself is not sufficient to wipe off the condition to which the plaintiff himself had agreed to abide by.
8.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the order under revision cannot be sustained and the same is set aside.
However, a direction is given to the first Appellate Court where the appeal is pending, to decide the appeal within two months from today, without being influenced by any observation made hereinabove in this petition.
Plaintiff shall also be at liberty to approach the MCI, New Delhi for early decision on his representation and in case the MCI, New Delhi decides his representation in his favour, I am sure the University and the Medical College, Rohtak shall give appropriate relief to the plaintiff.
Plaintiff shall also be entitled to make an appropriate representation to the University to allow him to sit in the second professional MBBS Course pending consideration of his representation by MCI, New Delhi.
In the circumstances of this case, I am sure that the University shall take a sympathetic view of the matter.
For the reasons recorded above, this civil revision is allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
Revision allowed.