Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By this writ application the petitioner has challenged an order dated 29th September, 2003 of the Learned Registrar, Original Side, High Court, whereby and whereunder the benefit under the career advancement scheme given earlier by order dated 27th August, 2003 has been withdrawn.
Short fact of the case is as follows :  The petitioner was appointed after the regular selection process in Group D category in the Original Side of the Hon'ble Court on 1lth July, 1990.
Subsequently, in the year 1993 by an office circular applications were invited from and amongst the High Court Group-D employees for selection in the post of Bank Sarkar in the Original Side of the High Court.
The petitioner was appointed to the post of Bank Sarkar on 17th August, 1993 in the scale of pay of Rs. 875/- to Rs. 1260/- on the basis of his performance in the said selection test and examination.
In the said cadre there has been no avenue of promotion from the post of Bank Sarkar as such he was entitled to get advancement to the second higher scale after completion of ten years of service with reference to the Feeder post in terms of the career advancement scheme.
Accordingly, the petitioner was given such benefit by the order of the Ld.
Registrar, Original Side, dated 27th August, 2003.
Subsequently the same was revoked by the impugned order.
2.
It is the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Paritosh Kumar Mullick that going by the words and spirit of the Memorandum being No. 6075-F dated 21st June, 1990, the said benefit was given rightly and the same ought not to have been withdrawn since the petitioner was not promoted to the post of Bank Sarkar, rather it was fresh appointment.
Admittedly, there has been no scope for further promotion from the said post of Bank Sarkar.
Accordingly, the decision of revocation of the Registrar, Original Side basing on the opinion of the Government is erroneous and unjust.
3.
Mr. Dipayan Choudhury, learned Counsel for the Registrar, Original Side submits that the post of Bank Sarkar was treated to be a promotional post and, in fact, the petitioner was given promotion upon selection and as such the petitioner had to be treated to have been promoted and he was entitled to get benefit of career advancement scheme not before completion of twenty years of service with reference to the Feeder post viz. Group-D post.
Admittedly, the petitioner had not completed twenty years of service with reference to Group-D post.
4.
Of course he is candid enough to say that there has been no rule relating to filling up of the post of Bank Sarkar by way of promotion.
He further submits that traditionally this post is filled up by way of direct recruitment upon competitive examination by advertisement.
In case of petitioner such method of recruitment was not followed entirely, but selection process was confined to amongst the Group-D employees of course on the basis of holding examination the post was filled up.
According to him, practically it has been treated to be a promotional post and the petitioner has been promoted.
5.
Learned Counsel for the State, Mr. Shyamal Kumar Ganguly, supports and adopts the argument of Mr. Choudhury and contends that from the facts and circumstances of this case it is clear that the petitioner was really promoted and it was not a fresh recruitment.
So he was not entitled to get the benefit before he completes twenty years of service with reference to Feeder post viz. Group-D post.
6.
I have heard respective contentions of the Learned Counsels for the parties.
Before I decide the issue as to whether the order of revocation of the learned Registrar, Original Side is correct or not, the relevant provision under which a career advancement scheme is allowed, is to be quoted :  "(ii) A Government employee who has completed service of ten years or longer without any promotion will move from the revised scale in relation to him to the first higher scale and further serving that scale for two years will get advancement to the second higher scale, provided that the total period of his service in the first two scales is not less than twenty years.
(ii) A Government employee who has got normal promotion to a post in the first higher scale within ten years of service will have to complete total service of twenty years before he gets advancement to the second higher scale with reference to the feeder post."
All the learned Counsels agreed that if holding of the post of Bank Sarkar by the petitioner is treated to be a promotional one then he is not entitled to the benefit of career advancement under the aforesaid scheme unless he completes twenty years of service with reference to the Feeder post viz. Group-D posts.
7.
The High Court Registry could not provide with any document to show that post of Bank Sarkar is to be filled up by way of promotion.
Rather in the supplementary affidavit document has been annexed showing that the post of Bank Sarkar is required to be filled up by way of direct recruitment by selection through test.
In this case the petitioner was admittedly selected upon examination pursuant to the call given by the High Court Administration on his application made for taking test.
Mr. Chowdhury says that since the selection process was not taken by way of advertisement and it was confined to the Group-D staff it should be treated to be a case of promotion by way of selection.
I am unable to accept this argument.
The mode of selection was not different in this case, only the field of choice was limited.
It was for the High Court Department to follow the prescribed rules and the mode of selection.
The petitioner was not at fault.
It is true that advertisement was not issued public notification was given so the character of the selection and also direct recruitment for filling up the post of Bank Sarkar is not changed at all by this process.
8.
As such, I find substance in the submission of Mr. Mullick that it was a post of direct recruitment, and not promotion as erroneously held by the Government as well as High Court Administration.
I, therefore, hold that the petitioner was holding the post of Bank Sarkar as a direct recruitee, not as a promotee.
As it is absolutely plain and simple from the relevant rules that the post of Bank Sarkar is not a promotional one whatever may be the mode and method of selection, the holder of post has to be declared a direct recruit.
9.
Under such circumstances, I am of the view that the decision taken earlier by the Registrar, Original Side was correct and subsequent decision is erroneous and unjust.
As such, the subsequent decision revoking the earlier decision of granting benefit is set aside.
The benefit given earlier to the petitioner shall be restored forthwith.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.