Jawahar Lal Gupta, J(Oral) - The petitioner herein is a member of the Scheduled Caste.
He was recruited as a Manager (Grade-I) in the Haryana Warehousing Corporation.
He claims that the seniority of a member of the Scheduled Castes is to be fixed at the roster point reserved for a member of that class and that the instructions dated April 27, 1972, issued by the Government to the effect that the seniority has not to be determined on the basis of the position in the roster are contrary to the ratio of the Full Bench's judgment of this Court in Jaswant Singh and others v. Secretary to Govt. Punjab, 1989 (Vol. 4) S.L.R.
257.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was selected and appointed as Manager Grade-I in December 1979.
He actually joined the post on January 5, 1980.
Soon after joining service, the petitioner claims that he submitted a representation for the grant of promotion to the rank of District Manager as also for the refixation of his seniority.
This claim of the petitioner was rejected vide order dated February 13, 1984.
However, soon after on July 17, 1985, the petitioner was given the additional charge of the post of District Manager.
He was originally divested of this additional charge on June 20, 1986.
Again on June 29, 1986, the respondents issued an order by which the petitioner was given the additional charge of the post of District Manager.
On August 13, 1986, the petitioner submitted a representation, a copy of which has been produced a representation, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.9.
He claimed that there are 10 posts in the cadre of District Manager in the Corporation and that he deserved to be promoted to one of those posts.
This representation was disposed of vide order dated October 14, 1986.
The petitioner was informed that "at present there is no post of Distt.
Manager lying vacant nor there is any proposal under consideration for making any promotion as District Manager.....Whenever there is occasion to order any promotion on the post of District Manager, your name will be considered if it falls within the eligibility limit.
"Undoubtedly, the petitioner submitted another representation on August 19, 1991.
A copy of this representation has been produced on record as Annexure P 11.
In this representation, the petitioner claimed that his seniority in the cadre of Manager Grade-I should be fixed at Sr. No. 4 as he had been appointed against the said reserved point in December, 1979.
Since this representation was not expeditiously decided, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 1467 of 1992.
This petition was heard and disposed of by the Motion Bench at the stage of preliminary hearing vide its order dated January 30, 1992, with the following observations :-  "Present : Mr. P S Patwalia, Advocate.
This writ petition is being disposed of without giving any notice to the respondent.
The main prayer of the petitioner is that his representation, Annexure P 11, is pending disposal since 1981991 and the respondent-Corporation is taking steps to revert the petitioner from the post of District Manager.
We direct that respondent shall dispose of the representation, Annexure P 11, expeditiously.
Till then, the petitioner will be allowed to work on the post of District Manager.
The writ petition stands disposed of with the above direction."
In pursuance to the directions of the Court, petitioner's representation was disposed of vide order dated February 5, 1992.
It was observed as under :-  "The matter has been examined in the light of Govt. instructions issued in this behalf from time to time.
In this connection your attention is invited to Govt. instructions issued vide No. 2379-2-GSI-I-72/10994 dated 2741972 wherein it has been clarified that vacancies assigned to Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes under the block system are so assigned for the purpose of reservation only and are not intended for fixing inter-se-seniority.
Keeping in view the above position, it is regretted your representation for giving you seniority as per roster point, irrespective of length of service is hereby rejected."
3.
The petitioner's claim for the grant of seniority was thus rejected in view of the instructions dated April 27, 1972.
Almost simultaneously, the Corporation issued a seniority list vide its letter dated January 30, 1992, in which the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 16.
Even though the objections thereto were invited, the petitioner had chosen to impugn the seniority list as also the order rejecting his representation though the present petition.
Primarily, the challenge is directed against the order dated February 5, 1992 by which the petitioner's claim for seniority has been rejected.
A challenge has also been made to the instructions dated April 27, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P 14.
It has been averred that the action of the respondent-Corporation is not fixing the seniority of the petitioner in accordance with his position in the roster is contrary to the ratio of the Full Bench Judgment in Jaswant Singh's case (supra).
On the same ground, even the validity of the instructions dated April 27, 1972 has been questioned.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, a preliminary objection has been raised.
It has been inter alia averred that the seniority of persons recruited by direct appointment is fixed on the basis of the order of merit.
As a result, the petitioner was placed at No. 2 in the group of persons recruited in the year 1979.
Persons, who have been recruited as Managers Grade-I prior to him have been shown at Sr. Nos. 1 to 14 in the seniority list.
Those recruited in the year 1979 or thereafter have been shown at Sr. Nos. 15 to 27.
The petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 16 in that list.
According to the petitioner's claim, he is entitled to be placed at Sr. No. 4.
The respondents aver that persons at Sr. No. 4 to 15 are necessary parties and in their absence, the petitioner's claim for seniority cannot be entertained.
On merits, it has been averred that the instructions issued by the State of Haryana, as adopted by the Corporation, inter alia provide for reservation in the matter of recruitment in various Class-III posts and that no reservation is permissible in the matter of seniority.
It has been further pointed out that so far as promotion to the post of District Manager is concerned, even though no statutory rules have been finalised, yet the quota has been laid down under the draft rules.
The quota was initially fixed at 50 : 50 in the year 1961.
In 1978, it was decided to fill up the posts of District Managers exclusively by promotion.
Subsequently, in the year 1986, the Corporation had decided to fill up the posts in the ratio of 75 : 25 by promotion and direct recruitment.
On this premises, it is claimed that the post of District Manager has now to be filled up by promotion.
Factually, it has been averred that there are a total of 8 posts in the cadre of District Managers.
Four persons, who were recruited by direct appointment, are already working.
There are three promotees and as such one more post has to be filled up by promotion and not by direct recruitment.
5.
In the petition, an ancillary claim that the petitioner is entitled to the pay of the post of District Manager from the date of his initial appointment till now has also been made.
It has been made on the premises that the petitioner has been actually discharging the duties of the post and as such he is entitled to the pay scale attached to that post.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
At the time of hearing, even a reference has been made to Rule 13 of the Draft Rules to contend that the petitioner is entitled only to the grant of an "acting allowance equal to 10% of the minimum of the pay scale of the higher post in addition to his pay."
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, points out that the respondents are not entitled to rely on the provisions of Rule 13 as no reference thereto has been made in the written statement.
Besides this, he states that in view of the fact that the respondents are disputing even the factual position, it is necessary for the petitioner to furnish a more detailed information and to show that he has been, in fact, discharging the duties of the post of District Manager.
He submits that in view of the fact that the interest of the petitioner is likely to be prejudiced, if any opinion is expressed without his being given any opportunity to challenge the vires of Rule 13, it is appropriate that this matter should be left open so that the petitioner can either file a fresh petition or resort to such other remedy as may be available to him under the law.
Learned counsel for the respondents have no objection to this course being adopted.
Accordingly, the dispute regarding the petitioner's claim for the payment of salary attached to the post of District Manager for the duration of the time for which he has acted on this post is left open.
The petitioner would be entitled to make this claim on the grounds raised in this petition or such other grounds as may be available to him under the law in any subsequent proceedings by way of a petition to this Court or before any other appropriate authority.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties, Mr. P S Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that in view of the ratio of the judgment of the Full Bench in Jaswant Singh's case (supra), the instructions dated April 27, 1972 are unconstitutional and the seniority of the petitioner has to be fixed at Sr. No. 4 in the cadre of Manager Grade-I He further submits that the post of District Manager has now to be filled up by direct recruitment only and it has to be reserved for the member of a Scheduled Caste.
On the other hand, Mr. Bhoop Singh, learned counsel for the Corporation, besides pressing the preliminary objection noticed above, contends that the instructions issued by the Government in the year 1972 are in the strict conformity with the provisions of Article 16 and that in view thereof, the petitioner is not entitled to seniority as claimed by him in this petition.
He further submits that the Full Bench Judgment was based on the instructions, as prevalent in the State of Punjab, and that their Lordships have not laid down a rule that the seniority has to be fixed in accordance with the vacancy position in the roster.
He further submits that the seniority of the petitioner has been fixed in strict conformity with the provisions of the rules under which the position of the merit list is the determining factor.
Learned counsel also points out that in accordance with the quota rule as laid down by the Corporation from time to time, the post of District Manager has now to be filled up only by promotion and that it cannot be filled up from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes only.
7.
Article 16 contains only an enabling provision.
It authorises the State to make reservation in favour of such class(s) of citizens as are socially or educationally backward and are not duly represented in the services of the State.
No citizen has a right to claim reservation.
It is the power of the Government to make a provision for reservation, if it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so.
If in the exercise of this power, the State Government chooses to provide for reservation upto a particular limit and further takes a conscious decision that the reservation shall not entitle the person concerned to claim seniority, it cannot be said to be an act in violation of the provisions of Article 16 or any other provision of law.
Vide instructions dated April 27, 1972, the State Government had inter alia observed as under :-  "It has to be pointed out that this was irregular and inter se seniority of all candidates taken (i.e. whether appointed against reserved vacancies or against open vacancies) must be fixed according to the combined list and not otherwise."
It is thus obvious that the Government categorically took the view that the position of vacancies in the roster was not for the determination of the inter se seniority.
It is further provided that the seniority had to be determined in the order of merit as prepared by the appropriate Selection Board.
These instructions, in my view, do not infringes any provision of the Constitution.
In fact, they are in strict conformity with law.
I am unable to sustain the challenge made on behalf of the petitioner.
8.
Learned counsel submits that the instructions are contrary to the ratio of the judgment in Jaswant Singh's case.
Specific reference has been made to certain observations, which will be presently noticed.
9.
In Jaswant Singh's case, their Lordships of the Full Bench were interpreting Government circular dated July 19, 1969 as amended on September 8, 1969.
This circular inter alia provided as under :-  "According to the instructions, appointments of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes persons are made on the basis of appropriate prescribed 100-point rosters and they should be assigned seniority as per the points reserved for them in the relevant 100-point roster irrespective of their positions in general merit-list (in the case of direct recruitment) or in general seniority list, (in the case of promotions) in Class I, II, III and IV services.
In other words, roster points are seniority posts in respect of the members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
This should be strictly followed by the recruiting agencies/appointing authorities at the time of preparing merit lists and appointments made by direct recruitment or by promotions."
It is thus obvious that the instructions issued by the State of Punjab postulated that "roster points are seniority posts in respect of the members of Scheduled Castes and Backward classes....." and that "this should be strictly followed by the recruiting agencies/appointing authorities at the time of preparing merit lists and appointments made by direct recruitment or by promotions."
It was in view of this specific provision in the instructions that the Full Bench came to the conclusion as recorded in para 14 of the judgment that "in the cases of appointment at a reserved point in a roster the seniority of Scheduled Caste/Backward Class candidate shall be the roster point."
Further it is equally clear that the reference to the judgment of the Division Bench in CWP No. 5346 of 1987 (Gurmel Bhatwa v. The State of Punjab and others) as also to the judgment of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Hira Lal v. The District Judge, Ghaziabad, 1983(2) SLR 79 was made in the context of the circular, referred to above.
Such is not the position in the present case.
The State of Punjab took a conscious decision that the seniority shall be determined according to the position on the roster.
Accordingly, the Full Bench had held that the seniority of Jaswant Singh etc. has to be determined on that basis.
Such is not the position in the present case.
In fact, the decision of the State of Haryana is clearly to the contrary.
A conscious decision is reflected in the instructions dated April 27, 1972.
These instructions can in no way be said to be contrary to the ratio of the Full Bench judgment in Jaswant Singh's case.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner's claim for seniority at Sr. No. 4 on the basis that he was appointed against the said reserved point on the roster is not in consonance with the instructions of the Government and the claim made by him was rightly rejected by the Corporation through the impugned order.
10.
It is equally important to notice that seniority is an important condition of service.
There is a catena of decisions that seniority of a Government servant cannot be altered without following the principles of natural justice.
Even though the petitioner claims seniority at Sr. No. 4, which would result in affecting the rights of persons from Sr. No. 4 to 15, none of them was impleaded by him while filing the petition.
It is no doubt correct that two persons, viz. R S Sishodia and A K Gulati, moved this Court for being impleaded as respondents.
It is also correct that they have been impleaded as respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
The fact remains that a number of other persons are not before this Court.
No order to their prejudice can be passed in their absence.
11.
From whatever angle the matter is examined, the petitioner's claim for seniority at Sr. No. 4 cannot be sustained.
It is consequently rejected.
12.
It is then contended that the post of District Manager has to be filled up by direct recruitment.
The claim has been made on the premises that in the year 1986, the Corporation had decided to fill up the posts of District Managers by promotion and direct recruitment in the ratio of 75 : 25.
On this premises, it is claimed that the position of vacancies which have occurred after the fixation of the quota in the year 1986 has to be seen.
13.
It is the admitted position that there are a total of 8 posts in the cadre of District Manager.
It is also not disputed before me that four of these posts are at present held by direct recruits and three by promotees.
It has also not been contested that originally the posts had to be filled up in the ratio of 50 : 50.
This position was later on changed in the year 1981 and it was directed that the posts of District Managers shall be filled up by way of promotion only.
In the year 1986 a quota of 25% was fixed for direct recruitment.
Even if, for the sake of argument, it is assumed that the position as it existed originally, i.e. the posts had to be filled up in the ratio of 50 : 50 is applied, the direct recruits cannot have more than four posts.
When the quota of direct recruits has been reduced from 50% to 25%, their share cannot exceed the number of posts already occupied by them.
Admittedly, only three promotees are in position today.
With the ratio of 75 : 25, share of promotees would be 6 : 2.
The direct recruits would be entitled to only two posts.
If the Corporation decides to fill up the posts by direct recruitment, it would be an act of violation of the quota fixed by it.
No other point has been raised.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed, except in so far as it relates to the claim to salary.
This claim shall be made by the petitioner in appropriate proceedings.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.