Arun Kumar Mitra, J - In this writ petition the petitioner challenges the appointment of Headmaster at Dakshin Nangla KU Institution, P.O.
Kumara Kashipur, Habra.
North 24 Parganas (hereinafter termed as said School).
The petitioner in this writ petition prayed for quashing the panel for the post of Headmaster of the said School and also prayed for placement of his name at the top in the revised panel for appointment of headmaster.
2.
The petitioner in the writ petition claims that he is an MSc.
B.Ed.
and he was appointed as an Assistant Teacher in Pure Science group in Jaigachi Shyama Prosad Vidyatan, Habra.
The petitioner in the writ petition has annexed the documents showing his qualification as well as the approval letter of his appointment dated 18.01.1993.
3.
The petitioner was promoted to the post of Assistant Headmaster in the said School on 11122001 and the said appointment was subsequently approved by the District Inspector (S.E.).
Barasat who has been made respondent No. 5 herein.
The petitioner has annexed this approval letter dated, 16022002 as annexure `P3'.
4.
The petitioner obtained a certificate from the Secretary of the said School on 21.01.2003 wherein it has been stated that the petitioner has been working as Assistant Headmaster in the said School.
Advertisement dated 01082002 was published in the newspapers and in the Notice Board of the West Bengal Central School Service Commission for appointment at the post of Headmaster of the said School.
The said School is a Higher Secondary School and Bengali medium.
The said advertisement was published by the West Bengal Regional School Service Commission, Southern Region, respondent No. 2 herein.
In pursuance of the said advertisement the petitioner made an application for the said post of Headmaster on 14082002 along with requisite fees.
The said School/Institution is a non-Government aided recognized School.
5.
In paragraph 7 of the writ petition the petitioner has quoted the essential qualifications for the said post.
The said quotation is as under :  "(i) Master degree with degree in Bachelor of Teaching/Bachelor of Education/ Post Graduate Basis Training from any recognized University or any training recognized by the Government of West Bengal as equivalent to Bachelor of Teaching/Bachelor of Education/Post Graduate Basic training 10 years continuous teaching experience in approved service in a Higher Secondary/ High School/ High Madrasah/Junior High Madrasah/Junior High School/Senior Madrasah recognised by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education/West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education/West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education on the date of advertisement.
(D) Essential additional points : (1) There will be no written test for such selection for all the above posts.
But for selection for the post in Higher Secondary/ High School/ High Madras/Senior Madrasah the candidates for all the categories of posts as mentioned must have obtained at least (a) 45% (forty-five per cent) marks both at the Secondary and the Higher Secondary levels.
(b) 40% (forty per cent) marks at the pass level for a candidate without having Hons.
and (c) 40% (forty per cent) marks at the post graduate level to become eligible for such posts."
6.
An interview letter dated 8th November, 2002 was issued in favour of the petitioner by the Assistant Secretary to the said Commission requesting the petitioner to appear before the Personality Test Board constituted by the said Commission at 11 AM on 25th November, 2002.
The petitioner has annexed a Xerox copy of the said interview letter as annexure `P7' to the writ petition.
The petitioner in paragraph 9 of the writ petition stated the respondent No. 8 stood first in the panel for appointment for the post of Headmaster in the said Institution prepared by the said School Service Commission.
7.
The writ petitioner in his writ petition in paragraph 10 has stated that the respondent No. 8 passed Secondary School Certificate Examination in 1977 in Second Division under the Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Jessore, Bangladesh and also passed Higher Secondary Examination in Second Division in 1979 under the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education.
The said respondent No. 8 appeared at the BA Part-I (3 years Hons.)
Examination in 1983 under the University of Calcutta.
He failed in Honours subject and was declared BA pass securing 397 marks which is below Second Division marks i.e. 450.
He passed 1 year Condensed Honours Course Examination in English under Rabindra Bharati University in 1987 and was placed in Second Class.
He obtained MA Degree in Second Class under Rabindra Bharati University.
He passed B.Ed.
Examination in 1986 in Second Class under the University of Calcutta.
He came to India from Bangladesh after 1971 which was a cut off year for the Bangladesh refugees.
According to the petitioner the respondent No. 8 is a less qualified candidate in comparison to the petitioner and in paragraph 11 the petitioner has given a comparative chart concerning his qualifications and the qualifications of the respondent No. 8.
The petitioner stated that the respondent authorities have failed to consider the results of examinations of the petitioner reasonably and fairly which is illegal and in violation of the provisions of Art. 14 of the Constitution of India.
According to the petitioner, the recruitment rules for appointment of a Headmaster in Secondary School provides for 45% marks for pass graduate candidates and essential additional point is that the candidate must have Master/Honours (Regular) degree with degree in Bachelor in Education but the respondent authorities have failed to consider that respondent No. 8 has not got 45% marks in BA Pass Examination and he is not a regular Honours or Master degree holder and as such the panel prepared by the respondent authorities for the post of is illegal, mala fide, unreasonable, after thought collusive and unwarranted by law.
8.
The petitioner submitted that the panel was prepared without following recruitment rules for appointment of Headmaster and without application of mind while the respondent No. 8 is not eligible for appearing at the interview held on 25112002 for the post of Headmaster of the said School and as such the entire action of the respondent authority is arbitrary, illegal, without jurisdiction and without any authority of law.
The petitioner also submitted that a panel was prepared after the interview and the petitioner was astonished to come to learn that he was placed below the respondent No. 8 in the panel.
According to the petitioner, the panel was not prepared in accordance with law.
9.
The petitioner further stated that the entire process of selection followed by the Selection Committee has no reasonable basis and the said panel should be qushed and/or set aside.
The petitioner in his writ petition and in his reply to the affidavit-in opposition filed by the respondent No. 8 took a stand that respondent No. 8 cannot be selected for the post of Headmaster in the said School on the following grounds :  (i) As an immigrant from Bangladesh the respondent No. 8 joined the interview but his certificates were not verified through External Affairs Ministry of Govt. of India which is provided in a Government circular dated 3rd August, 1982 (annexed by the petitioner in his affidavit-in-reply).
(2) The respondent No. 8 is not a regular Honours graduate and he completed 1 year Condensed Honours Course.
(3) The respondent No. 8 in different documents annexed to his affidavit-in-opposition made inconsistent or contradictory statements and as such the said documents cannot be relied upon.
(4) The petitioner had no eligiblity at all to appear in the interview as per the advertisement published on behalf of the School Service Commission.
The petitioner also filed a supplementary affidavit in which the petitioner incorporated certain facts insofar as the recruitment process is concerned.
The statement of the petitioner made in supplementary affidavit relates to the recruitment process as provided in the advertisement of the Commission.
The petitioner also annexed a copy of the procedure prescribed by the West Bengal School Service Commission regarding appointment of Headmasters.
The petitioner in his supplementary affidavit laid emphasis on paragraph D (iv) of the said advertisement.
10.
Separate affidavits were filed by respondent No. 2 and respondent No. 8.
On behalf of respondent No. 8 an application being CAN 3409 of 2003 was also filed for vacating the interim order dated 5th March, 2003 passed by Hon'ble Justice Girish Chandra Gupta and also for early hearing of the main writ petition.
It may be stated in this context that against the order dated 5th March, 2003 the petitioner preferred appeal and the Hon'ble Division Bench refused to grant stay and as stated by the respondent No. 8 in his affidavit- in-opposition, the Hon'ble Division Bench expressed their views that the documents on which the respondent No. 8 wants to reply upon may be placed before the learned trial Judge at the first instance.
11.
In the light of the views expressed by the Hon'ble Division Bench, the respondent No. 8 filed said application as pleaded by the respondent No. 8.
The stand taken by the respondent No. 8 in his affidavit-in-opposition as well as in the application for vacating his that as an immigrant from Bangladesh his certificates need not be verified in view of the two Government circulars and he annexed two Government circulars as annexure `R6' to the affidavit-in- opposition.
12.
The respondent No. 8 in his affidavit-in-opposition also stated that he has got `Ration Card', `Voters' Identity Card PAN Card to establish that he is a citizen and the respondent No. 8 annexed Xerox copies of the three documents referred to above in support of his statements made in the affidavit-in-opposition.
Respondent No. 8 also stated that he is an Honours Graduate and he has passed MSc.
and B.Ed and he had got eligibility to apply for the post of Headmaster and he was rightly called for interview.
The respondent No. 8 in his opposition also annexed Xerox copies of all the testimonials.
13.
The respondent No. 8 in fact denied all the allegations made by the petitioner in all the counts that is he denied that he had not got the eligibility, he denied that he is not the citizen of India, he denied that he has no qualification or the qualification of the petitioner is higher than his qualification and his selection was not proper.
14.
The respondent No. 2 filed a separate affidavit and submitted that the petitioner is not correct in making averment that the petitioner stood second in the interview.
According to the respondent No. 2 the respondent No. 8 Kishalay Paul stood first, one Ramesh Chandra Sen Chowdhury stood second and the petitioner got the third position and the panel of three candidates was sent and since Kishalay Paul, the respondent No. 3 topped the panel, his name was recommended for appointment.
15.
According to respondent No. 2 no illegality or infirmity is there in the selection of Kishalay Paul for the post of Headmaster in the said School.
The respondent No. 2 supplied the contentions made by the respondent No. 8 and the respondent No. 8 also stated in the same line.
16.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that from the Comparative Chart of qualifications it would clearly appear that the petitioner is higher qualified than the respondent No. 8 and if that is so, in any even the respondent No. 8 cannot get higher marks in the interview and he cannot top the panel.
17.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that School Service Commission did not at all consider the documents of the respondent No. 8 and made wrong selection process.
They placed the respondent No. 8 in the first position.
The respondent No. 8 gave different statements in different places and in different documents regarding his citizenship as well as date of birth and his certificates in that view should have been verified through the External Affairs Ministry of the Govt. of India.
18.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the respondent No. 8 had no eligibility at all to appear in the interview and mainly because of the provisions of selection embodied in Clause D(i) of the selection procedure for the post of Headmasters as formulated and/or framed by the West Bengal School Service Commission.
19.
The learned counsel also submitted that in illegal manner the respondent No. 8 got entry into service and he is now working as Assistant Teacher in Rajbpur Anglo Vernacular High School where he got entry in the same illegal method.
The learned counsel for the respondent No. 8 submitted that petitioner has no right to challenge his appointment in Rajbpur Anglo Vernacular High School inasmuch as the same is not the subject matter here.
20.
The learned counsel for the respondent No. 8 also submitted that the petitioner made incorrect averments regarding the citizenship of the respondent No. 8 and/or regarding the eligibility of the respondent No. 8.
21.
The learned counsel submitted that he has produced enough documents and/or sufficient documents to prove the eligibility and/or the qualifications of respondent No. 8.
22.
The learned counsel relied on a decision reported in 1995(3) SCC 486 (Madan Lal & Ors v. State of J & K & Ors.).
The learned counsel for the respondent No. 8 submitted that in this judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed "mainly in paragraph 9" that a candidate taking a calculated chance to appear in the interview having been unsuccessful cannot turn around and challenge the selection process.
The learned counsel submitted that in this case also, the petitioner joined the interview having full knowledge and when he became unsuccessful he challenged the selection process alleging that the selection process is unfair.
For convenience of discussion the said paragraph 9 is quoted hereinbelow :  "9.
Before dealing with this contention, we must keep in view the salient fact that the petitioners as well as the contesting successful candidates being respondents concerned herein, were all found eligible in the light of marks obtained in the written test, to be eligible to be called for oral interview.
Up to this stage there is no dispute between the parties.
The petitioners also appeared at the oral interview conducted by the Members concerned of the Commission who interviewed the petitioners as well as the contesting respondents concerned.
Thus the petitioners took a chance to get them selected at the said oral interview.
Only because they did not find themselves to have emerged successful as a result of their combined performance both at written test and oral interview, they have filed this petition.
It is now well settled that if a candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview, then only because the result of the interview is not palatable to him, he cannot turn round and subsequently contend that the, process of interview was unfair or the Selection Committee was not properly constituted.
In the case of Om Prakash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla, it has been clearly laid down by a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court that when the petitioner appeared at the examination without protest and when he found that he would not succeed in examination he filed a petition challenging the said examination, the High Court should not have granted any relief to such a petitioner."
The learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 toed the same line with the respondent No. 8 and submitted that the petitioner cannot come to the fore in any event in view of the fact that the petitioner is third in position and assumingly the candidature of the respondent No. 8 goes in the second position there is another candidate named Ramesh Chandra Sen Chowdhury.
23.
On behalf of respondent No. 2 the learned counsel submitted that there is no illegality in the selection process or the selection method and in the opposition filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 the Selection Chart has been annexed and the same goes to show that selection was proper and Kishalay Paul was rightly placed in the top position.
24.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
It is to be decided first as to whether the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Madan Lal (supra) is applicable here or not and if that is applicable then the writ petitioner fails.
25.
In my view, the said case of Madan Lal (supra) is not relevant and the said provisions are not applicable inasmuch as in the said judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court made the observations in a different context and in different background but neither the case of OP Shukla referred to in the said judgment of Madan Lal nor in the case of Lila Dhar or Ashok Kr.
Yadav this was the ratio.
The case of Madan Lal was mainly based on making method.
The petitioner therein had full knowledge about the marking process and the making method and knowing fully well the petitioner appeared in the interview and challenged the said marking method alleging it to be biased but here in the instant case the petitioner has challenged the Comparative Qualification Chart in between the petitioner and the respondent No. 8 and the petitioner in this case has also challenged the eligibility and/or the candidature of respondent No. 8.
It is not disputed by the respondent No. 8 that he is an immigrant from Bangladesh.
The qualification details about the petitioner and the respondent No. 8 have also not been disputed.
The documents annexed by the respondent No. 8 in his affidavit-in-opposition in support of his contentions cannot also be disputed by the respondent No. 8.
26.
Let us examine the said documents first.
In this context it may be stated that this Court is not entering into any disputed question and this Court is relying only on the admitted documents.
27.
The respondent No. 8 in support of his claim regarding his genuinity of Indian citizenship has annexed three documents viz.
Voters Identity Card, Ration Card and PAN Card.
In the Voters Identity Card the age of the petitioner has been given as 37 years as on 01012000 but in the PAN Card the date of Birth has been declared as 23.06.1982.
Though there are inconsistencies in the two documents but that may be a minor one inasmuch as in the Voters Identity Card normally, exact age is not given but the Ration Card cannot be relied upon as a cogent evidence inasmuch is the same has been issued in the year 1991.
28.
The main discrepancy, arises from the Comparative Educational Chart from the petitioner as well as the respondent No. 8 inasmuch as it clearly appears and/or admitted that the petitioner has got higher qualification than the respondent No. 8 and it also appears from the results or score-sheets annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition of the respondent No. 2 that the petitioner is more qualified and if that is so the marking cannot be less.
It is also an admitted fact that the respondent No. 8 was not an Honours graduate in the meaning and/or sense in which the publication or advertisement was made.
29.
Let me quote Clause D(iv) of Information Brief for the Candidates for appointment of Head Masters/Head Mistresses/Superintendents of Senior Madrasahs in Recognised Non-Govt. Aided Schools including Madrasahs or which may be termed as procedure for selection which has been annexed to the Supplementary Affidavit on behalf of the petitioner.
"(iv) MODE OF SELECTION : There will be no Written Test.
Initial selection of eligible candidates not exceeding 5 (five) depending on the number of available candidates, will be made for each individual School or Madrasah, on the basis of merit list prepared on total 40 (forty) marks calculated on the basis of (a) academic qualifications including professional qualification carrying 30 (thirty) marks (b) Higher Qualifications viz. M Phil and or PhD carrying 3 (three) marks and (c) Experience in teaching carrying 7 (seven) marks.
Each Regional School Commission shall call for interview such candidates for Personality Test, carrying 10 (ten) marks.
The final merits list (Panel) will be prepared by the Commission on the basis of 50 (fifty) marks as mentioned above, consisting of not more than three candidates, depending on the number of available candidates, for each School/Madrasah.
There shall be separate individual panel for each School/Madrasah."
From this Clause it will appear that initial selection of eligible candidates not exceeding five depending upon the number of available candidates will be made for each individual School but in the instant case as it appears from the affidavit-in-opposition of the respondent No. 2, the number of eligible candidates were made seven which exceeded five.
30.
The Selection Committee and/or the authority took the interview and/or who made the selection did not consider at all the essential additional points as embodied in Clause D(i) of the advertisement.
The said Clause is quoted here-in-below :  "D. Essential additional points.
(i) There will be no Written Test for such selection for all the above posts.
But for Selection for the post in Higher Secondary/ High School/ High Madrasah/Senior Madrasah, the candidates for all the categories of posts as mentioned, must have obtained at least (a) 45% (forty five per cent) marks both at the Secondary and the Higher Secondary levels.
(b) 40% (forty per cent) marks in the Hons.
subject or 45% (forty five per cent) marks at the Pass level for a candidate without having Hons.
and (c) 40% (forty per cent) marks at the Post Graduate level to become eligible for such posts."
In the said Clause it has been made clear that the candidate is to get 40% (forty per cent) marks in the Hons.
subject 45% (forty five per cent) at the Pass level for having without Hons.
But here, the respondent No. 8 cannot be termed to be a Hons.
candidate inasmuch as the respondent No. 8 completed Condensed Hons.
Course subsequently and in the advertisement there is no scope for application by the candidates who have passed Condensed Hons.
Course subsequently and taking advantage of it.
31.
In the above view of the matter it appears to me that there are irregularities in the marking method as well as in the matter of selection of candidates.
32.
I, therefore, set aside the entire selection process and/or the panel impugned in the writ petition and I, direct the respondent No. 2 to recast the panel of three candidates i.e. the petitioner.
Kishalay Paul and Ramesh Chandra Sen Chowdhury in the light of the observations made above.
33.
The respondent No. 2 authority will consider the same and recast the panel within a period of one month from the date of communication of the order.
34.
The respondent No. 2 after taking decision of recasting the panel will make necessary recommendation in favour of the first candidate and the School will give appointment to the said candidate whose name will be recommended by the respondent No. 2 after recasting.
If appointment letter has been issued in favour of the respondent No. 8 that would stand quashed.
35.
The writ petition is thus disposed of.
All the interim orders stand vacated.
There will be no order as to costs.
Urgent Xerox certified copy, if applied for, will be given to the parties as expeditiously as possible.
Order accordingly.