HS Bedi, J - On 22.7.1989 vide Annexure P-2, the State of Punjab invited applications from prospective candidates to fill in eight posts to the PCS (Executive Branch), four posts of Excise and Taxation Officers and five posts of Assistant Registrars, Co-operative Societies.
In addition to the reserved posts for various other categories one post was reserved for the wards of freedom fighters for appointment as an Excise and Taxation Officer.
The advertisement also provided for the method of selection and postulated that a preliminary competitive examination would be held at Patiala and those who were successful therein were to appear in the main competitive examination to be held thereafter.
The petitioner who claimed to be the son of a freedom fighter duly applied for entrance in the examination and gave his first choice of service as the PCS (Executive Branch) and the second that of Excise and Taxation Officer.
It is the admitted case of the parties that there was no reservation in favour of the wards of the freedom fighters either in the PCS (Executive Branch) or against the posts of Assistant Registrars, Co- operative Societies.
The petitioner qualified the main competitive examination and also appeared in the viva voce and as envisaged by the Rules governing the examination, a joint merit list was prepared and appointments were ordered to be made on merit; to the posts in the PCS (Executive Branch), then to those Excise and Taxation Officer and finally to those of Assistant Registrars, Co-operative Societies.
The grievance of the petitioner is that respondent No. 2, the Punjab Public Service Commission did not consider his candidature for the PCS (Executive Branch) on the premise that as he had applied as a ward of a freedom fighter against the reserved post in the category of Excise and Taxation Officers, he was entitled to consideration only in that category.
The present petition has been accordingly filed challenging this action of the Commission.
In the written statement filed on 2591991 it was admitted that the petitioner had been considered only against the post of Excise and Taxation Officer and selected for appointment thereto but the commission thereafter filed an additional affidavit in which it was categorically averred that even if the case of the petitioner had been considered for a post in PCS (Executive Branch) he was not liable to selection on the basis of his merit as per the provisions of Rule 13-A read with the Regulations contained in Appendix-III of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class-I) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter called the Rules) as respondent No. 4 Gagandeep Singh, who had got more marks in the viva voce was required to be selected on that basis.
On the apparently conflicting stands taken by the respondent the petitioner filed an amended petition and the matter was ultimately admitted to a Division Bench vide order of this Court dated 3101991.
The case of the petitioner now is that both he and respondent No. 4 had secured 448-1/2 marks in the examination but as he had received 64 marks out of 75 in the interview and respondent No. 4 had secured 68, the latter had been declared successful by resolving the tie by misapplying and misinterpreting Regulation 8.
It has also been averred that should it be found that the Rule had been interpreted correctly by the Public Service Commission, it was liable to be struck down as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution on account of various judgments of the Supreme Court, particularly Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 454 and Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SLR 540 : 1991 (1) SCT 647 (SC).
The final argument is that there had been a violation of Rule 18 of the Rules inasmuch as the posts in the PCS Executive Branch were required to be filled in the ratio of 50% by nomination and by direct recruitment and as ten persons had been nominated, another ten ought to have been selected by direct recruitment and in that eventuality, the petitioner was entitled to selection.
2.
The respondents have controverted the stand of the petitioner on the questions posed and have stated that Rule 13-A had been correctly applied as in the case of a tie a candidate securing more marks in the viva voce was liable to be declared successful.
It has also been urged that the petitioner having taken his chance in the examination could not now turn around and challenge the selection process as being arbitrary.
In this connection reliance has been placed on Manak Lal, Advocate v. Dr. Prem Chand Singhvi and others, AIR 1957 SC 425, Dr. G Santa v. University of Lucknow and others, 1976 (2) SLR 509 and Annie v. Commissioner Chalakudy, Municipality and others, 1983 (3) SLR 451.
3.
At one of the initial hearings, the counsel for the petitioner had expressed an apprehension that as the objection with regard to the lower merit of the petitioner had not been taken at the initial stage, it appeared that the commission had tampered with the record to frustrate the case of the petitioner.
To allay these fears and to appreciate the arguments raised before us, we summoned the record and have examined it minutely and from a perusal thereto, we find that the fear of the petitioner is not warranted.
We find that the petitioner and respondent No. 4 had been given 380-1/2 and 388-1/2 marks respectively in the written examination but while entering these marks in the detailed Master Result sheet some mistake appears to have been committed in the case of respondent No. 4 and it appears that 388-1/2 marks were first entered but was subsequently corrected to 380-1/2.
The argument of the petitioner's counsel, therefore, really goes against him as if at all a grievance could be made, it would be at the instance of respondent No. 4 whose marks have been reduced.
It is further to be noted that in the master sheet aforementioned the total marks had been given not only in figures but also in words and same have been duly checked and signed.
In this situation, it is clear that the total marks given to the petitioner and respondent No. 4 were correctly recorded and no case of tampering has been made out.
4.
The other arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties call for a reference to the Rules.
Reference has firstly to be made to Rule 7 which provides that appointments to the service shall be made from amongst accepted candidates whose names have been entered in the Registers of accepted candidates to by maintained under the Rules.
Rule 8 provides that persons to be appointed by direct recruitment will be taken from Register B wherein the names are to be entered on the basis of the merit determined in the main competitive examination.
Appendix-III framed under Rule 13-A contain the Regulations which provide for holding of a main competitive examination, and Regulation 1 provides that this examination shall "include compulsory and optional subjects".
Regulation 4 further provides that no candidate shall be considered qualified in the main competitive examination unless he obtains 45% marks in the aggregate in all subjects including the viva voce.
Regulation 5 specifies compulsory and optional subjects and the marks earmarked for those subjects and categories the viva voce with a maximum of 75 marks as a compulsory subject.
Regulation 8 on which the fate of the case substantially hinges is reproduced below :  "Names of qualified and unqualified candidates shall be arranged in order of merit according to the aggregate marks obtained at the main competitive examination.
Note :  In the event of the order of merit shall be determined in accordance with highest marks Secured in viva voce, should the marks in the viva voce of the candidates whose tie is equal, the order of merit shall be decided in accordance with the highest marks obtained by such candidates in the aggregate of the compulsory subjects."
5.
Mr. Vinod Sharma learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that from a reading of the Regulations referred to above it was clear that the main competitive examination did not include the viva voce and if the note below Regulation 8 was read in that light the tie visualised therein would be only at the stage when the marks of the written examination were to be tabulated and as the petitioner had admittedly higher marks in that examination he was, entitled to be selected in preference to respondent No. 4.
This argument of the learned counsel has been stoutly controverted by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram appearing for respondent No. 4.
He has focussed our pointed attention on Regulation 1 which says that the main competitive examination shall include compulsory and optionat subjects and on Regulation 5 which provides that the viva shall be one of the compulsory subjects.
He has also urged that the reference in Regulation 8 to a comprehensive list of qualified and unqualified candidates being prepared to be appointed in order of merit was merely for the purpose of tabulating the result of the examination and nothing more.
It has, therefore, been urged that the tie envisaged in the note below Regulation 8 was at the stage when the final result including the marks in the written-test and viva voce were tabulated.
We find that the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the respondent has merit.
A bare reading of the Rules alongwith Regulation 8 clearly indicates that tie envisaged is at the stage of the completion of the Final result.
The inclusion of the viva voce as a compulsory subject further denotes that the viva voce is in fact an integral part of the main competitive examination.
It is in this situation that Regulation 8 provides that the names of the qualified and unqualified candidates shall be arranged in the order of merit according to the aggregate marks in the main competitive examination and this would obviously include the marks in the viva voce.
It is further to be noted that if the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the viva marks are not to be taken into account is accepted it will mean that the tie visualised in the Note, below Regulation 8 would be at a stage when the final merit in the examination had not yet been determined.
We are, therefore, of the view that the Commission was right in resolving the tie in the manner it did.
6.
Mr. Sharma learned counsel for the petitioner had then gone on the ancillary argument that if the viva voce marks were to be taken into account in resolving the tie the rule in question would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in the light of Ashok Kumar Yadav's and Mohinder could not be allowed to tilt the balance and determine the fate of' a candidate.
The counsel for the respondent has, however, relied upon State of UP v. Rafiquaddin and others, AIR 1988 SC 162.
If the two cases relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner the question posed for decision was as to maximum number of marks that could be reserved for the viva voce and in that situation it was held that the marks so reserved were excessive as they could tilt the balance and upset the merit determined by the written examination.
The question before as in the case in hand is as to whether the marks in the viva voce can be allowed to tilt the balance specifically in the case of a tie in the final merit and this matter was not before the Supreme Court.
Nevertheless even in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case it was pointed out that "while a written examination assesses the candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, a viva voce test seeks to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
While a written examination has certain distinct advantages over the viva voce test, there are yet no written test which can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, resourcefulness, dependableness, co-operativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities can be evaluated perhaps with some degree of error, by a viva voce test, much depending on the constitution of the interview Board."
In other words the written examination tests the intellect of a candidate whereas the viva voce tests his mettle.
The Supreme Court also observed that the marks of the viva voce were to be determined keeping in view the fact as to whether the personality of the candidate was required to be mature or whether it was in the formative stage and such determination was required to be made according to the requirement of service, the minimum qualification prescribed, the age group from which selection was to be made and the body to which the body task for holding the viva voce rested and so on, and as these matters were not within the province of court is should not ordinarily interfere.
It will be seen from the facts of the present case that primacy has been given to the written examination and only 75 marks that is 125 per cent of the total have been reserved for the viva voce.
It is also to be noted that service in the PCS (Executive Branch) requires extensive public dealing and the Note below Regulation 8 only envisages that if the intellectual ability of the candidate has been found to be equal on account of the written test plus the viva voce, only then the tie is to be resolved by giving precedence to the candidate who had the better overall personality determined on the basis of the viva voce marks.
In Rafiquddin case (supra) a somewhat similar matter had been raised and the Supreme Court upheld the vires of Rule 19 of the UP Civil Service (Judicial Branch) Rules 1951 which provided that even if a candidate had obtained the required aggregate marks in the written test but had failed to secure the minimum marks in the viva voce, his name could not be included in the select list.
In the case before us, the performance in the viva will determine the merit only in the rare case of a tie in the main entrance examination and can by no means be taken as a factor that can tilt the balance of the main examination.
It will be seen from the resume of the decisions referred to above that the broad arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot find support therein.
As already indicated, the PCS (Executive Branch) or as a matter of fact all public services require public dealings and if the intellectual capacity of two candidates is equal, no fault can be found with the Rule which gives precedence to a person having a better personality.
7.
The final arguments of the petitioner's counsel with regard to number of posts for appointment is also without merit.
The State Government has chosen to fill in the posts that were advertised and at this state the petitioner cannot make any grievance of the number of candidates selected.
8.
In view of the facts stated above, the arguments of the counsel for the respondent that having taken a chance and participated in the examination, the petitioner does not have the locus standi to challenge that selection, need not be gone into.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed but with no to order as to costs.