V K Bali, J - Central Co-operative Consumers Store Limited through the present petition filed by it under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated 2661991 Annexure P-8 vide which the Government referred the dispute to the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal Union Territory Chandigarh for adjudication which was with regard to termination of services of respondent No. 2 Smt. Usha Rani.
2.
The only contention that has been raised in the petition and likewise argued by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that since Smt. Usha Rani had preferred a statutory appeal under the provisions of Co- operative Societies Act and failed there, she was not competent to seek reference under Section 10(1)(C) of the Industrial Disputes Act as general principles of res judicata would bar this remedy to her.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel relies upon "Kapurthala Central Co- operative Bank Limited v. State of Punjab and others, (1991-1) 99 P.L.R.
624".
3.
I am unable to accept the contention of the learned counsel as in later judgment of this Court which was rendered by a Full Bench in C.W.P.
No. 19187 of 1991 "The Ambala Central Co-operative Bank Limited, Ambala v. The State of Haryana and others, (1993-1) 103 P.L.R.
424 (F.B.)
: 1993(2) SCT 310 (P&H) (FB)" wherein Kapurthala Central Co-operative Bank's case (supra) was also noticed, it was held that "after the Registrar decides the matter between an employee and employer of a Co-operative Society, with regard to the termination of his services under Sections 102 and 103 of the Haryana Co- operative Societies Act, 1984 the matter could be referred under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act as an industrial dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
It was further held that such a decision made by the Registrar under the Haryana Co-operative Societies Act would not operative as res judicata in proceedings initiated on reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act in the Labour Court".
4.
In view of the authoritative judgment of the Full Bench of this court, which as referred to above, also noticed Kapurthala Central Co-operative Bank's case (supra) this petition has to be dismissed and is therefore, accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Parties through their counsel, are directed to appear before the Labour Court where, it is stated that the proceedings are pending, on 2381993.
Petition dismissed.