Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The power to make appointments to public offices on an ad hoc basis has since long been recognised and this practice has also been accepted by the Courts.
However, the manner in which the appointments impugned in the present case have been effected, do engender the feeling that this practice should no longer be allowed to continue.
2.
By this judgment, we propose to dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 13130 and 13719 of 1993.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 13130 of 1993.
3.
In this petition a challenge has been made to the appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 10 as Executive Officers Class-III on a purely ad hoc basis vide order dated 8th October, 1993, appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition.
The petitioner, who since 1987 is a practising advocate at Gidderbaha claims to be qualified to be considered for the post of Executive Officer, Class-III.
The procedure for appointment to the abovesaid post is governed by the Punjab Municipal Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the '1975 Rules').
Rule 4 which lays down the qualifications necessary for direct appointment, inter alia, provides that the candidate must be a Law Graduate with a minimum experience of three years as an Advocate or with an experience of three years on a post not below the rank of a Superintendent in a Municipal Committee or an equivalent post in the government department or a postgraduate with at least 2nd division with an experience for a minimum period of one year on a post not lower than the rank of Superintendent in a Municipality or an equal post in a government department.
The qualifications have been appended in extenso as Annexure P-1 to the petition.
Rule 5 of the 1975 Rules further provides that after initial constitution of the service the subsequent vacancies shall be filled up by direct recruitment and by promotion in equal shares and if no candidates are available for promotion then by transfer or on deputation.
Sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 provides that the appointment shall be made on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted under sub-rule (4), and sub-rule (5) thereof stipulates that this Committee is to consist of a number of officers as also non-officials and the members of this Committee are also entitled to associate one or two persons who may be specialists or experienced professionals of examinence keeping in view the nature and the duties of the posts that are to be filled in.
The case of the petitioner in the writ petition is that respondent Nos. 3 to 10 were given appointments as Executive Officers Class-III on an ad hoc basis in a clandestine manner and no notice or advertisement was ever issued inviting applications for the posts in question nor was the selection made in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Rules.
It has also been pleaded that one of the qualifications for appointment was that the candidates must have at least three years of experience at the Bar and that respondent Nos. 3, 5 and 7 did not, as a matter of fact, have this experience.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents, it has been conceded that no application had been invited for the posts in question, but to justify this omission the stand taken is that the government had the power to make appointments on an ad hoc basis to meet an emergent situation and that as the government had created 21 new Notified Area Committees, there was an emergent need to fill up the posts in question as the normal selection procedures were likely to take some time.
After notice of motion was issued to the respondent, the order of appointment given to the private respondents was modified and the ad hoc appointment was limited to a maximum period of six months.
It has also been urged by the learned Advocate-General, appearing on behalf of the State, that the entire selection procedure for making regular appointment would be completed within the aforesaid period and that the petitioner could take his chance in that selection and in the light of this development the petition was liable to be disposed of.
During the motion hearing of this petition (which went on intermittently over several days) we felt that it was in the interest of justice that the State Government should be directed to file an additional affidavit bringing out the emergency or the dire need for making ad hoc appointments in the manner in which they had been made.
An additional affidavit dated 14.12.1993 has been filed by Mr. SP Karkara, Director Local Government, Punjab, in which it was pointed out that there were 44 Class-II Municipal Committees in the State and 33 Municipal Committees were manned by Class-II Executive Officers, whereas 7 Class-II Municipal Committees were being looked after by Class-III Executive Officers and that the promotion case of these seven Class III Executive Officers was under process for appointment to Class II posts, and as such 7 posts of Executive Officers were vacated on 8th October, 1993.
It has further been averred that 21 Notified Area Committees were created in January 1993 which too were required to be manned by Class-III Executive Officers and that after grouping these Committees 8 additional posts were required and these posts had been created on 7th October, 1993.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have also gone through the record of the case minutely to satisfy ourselves not only about the emergency or need of the State Government to make appointments as averred in the written statement but also in the manner in which the appointments have been made.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, while conceding that the State Government was competent to make appointments on an ad hoc basis, has urged that these appointments could not have been made without satisfying the requirement of Article 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as others who were eligible and qualified for appointment should have been given a chance to compete for them.
He has asserted that the appointments were made in an arbitrary manner; no applications were invited; no interview held and the appointments made at random on the basis of considerations other than merit.
Primary reliance for this argument has been placed by the learned counsel on a judgment of the Supreme Court reported as State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) : 1992(3) RSJ 235, and a Full Bench decision of this Court reported in Daljit Singh Minhas and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1978(1) SLR 32.
In paragraph 25 of the judgment in Piara Singh's case (supra) this is what the Hon'ble Judges had to say :  "Even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file.
If no candidate is available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent with the requirement of Article 16 should be followed.
In other words, there must be a notice published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response thereto should be considered fairly.
An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available through the above process."
Even the Full Bench of this Court in Daljit Singh Minhas case (supra) while leaving it to the discretion of the government to choose the manner in which the public offices that were required to be filled up were to be advertised, observed that a notice or advertisement inviting applications was required to be made so as to satisfy the requirement of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It will be seen from what has been stated above that though ad hoc appointments are visualised they must be made in a manner consistent with the requirement of Article 16 except in these extraordinary situations where the appointments brook no delay whatsoever and further an appointment made contrary to well settled principles, or with the connivance of the powers that be, must be set aside.
6.
Having held as above, the question now remains to be seen is as to whether there was in fact such a dire need or emergency for filling up these posts without following the procedure of inviting applications etc. and for that purpose we have chosen to examine the office files pertaining to the creation of the posts on 7th October, 1993 and the appointments made against them the very next day.
It is to be noted that the 1975 Rules specifically provide that in case eligible candidates for promotion to the Class-III Executive Officers were not available, the posts could be filled up by transfer or on deputation from other departments.
It is apparent further that 21 new Notified Area Committees were created(in January 1993 and if the said Committees could function successfully for a period of eight months, there was no earthly reason as to why they would continue as such for some time more so that the ad hoc appointment, if required, could be made in a manner so as to satisfy the requirement of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The impression that we gather from the noting file is that the posts in question were created not because of any administrative exigency but to accommodate respondent Nos. 3 to 10.
The selection was pre-conceived and the reckless manner in which the appointments were made smacks of arbitrariness and cannot be sustained in the light of the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It is significant that even in the note of the Secretary, Local Government, the suggestion was that candidates from the Employment Exchange be requisitioned, and pending their availability, ad hoc adjustments be made.
However, ignoring this factor, the State Government went on to make ad hoc appointments instead.
We have gone through the files pertaining to the appointments and they do make interesting reading and reflect very adversely in the manner in which the appointments have been made.
The Secretary Local Government has recorded on page 114 of the noting file that if some promotions were made from Class-III to Class-II posts some vacancies would result in the cadre of Executive Officers Class-III and at least 7 more posts would accrue on account of the newly created Notified Area Committees.
It was also suggested that the existing vacancies be filled up through the Employment Exchange as the process of direct recruitment through press publicity would entail must delay and that in larger public interest some purely ad hoc adjustments against existing vacancies may be made pending finalisation of list of candidates to be requisitioned from Employment Exchanges.
The matter was thereafter discussed with the minister concerned by the Secretary Local Government on 2091993 and the appointments of some of the respondents as per Flag 'A' with the file were approved, although Flag 'A' has not been made available to us and a note dated 21.9.1993 has been recorded on the noting file that it had been retained by the Secretary Local Government.
It was also proposed that as some of the proposed appointees did not have the requisite experience of three years at the Bar, this qualification was liable to be relaxed but as the minister concerned was to go abroad, ex-post-facto approval to the relaxation would be obtained on his return.
The matter was there-after referred to the Director Local Government who was the appointing authority of the Executive Officers Class-III who once again pointed out that some of the proposed appointees did not have the requisite experience and further that the power to relax given in Rule 22 of the 1975 Rules could be exercised only with respect to a class or a category of persons, and that no relaxation could be given to individuals.
The Director therefore suggested that the matter be referred to the Legal Remembrancer for advice on the question of relaxation, and that the four candidates namely S/Shri Balbir Singh, Yashvir Kumar, Ashok Kumar and Balwinder Singh who fulfilled all the qualifications could be given appointment immediately.
This note was once again put before the Secretary Local Government who (on 25.9.1993) noted that the question of relaxation be referred as per the note of the Director and that the case of another applicant Sumeshbar Kumar be also recommended for appointment.
This note of the Secretary was approved by the Chief Minister on 3101993 and the appointment of respondent Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9 was ordered.
It was also recorded by the Chief Minister that relaxation in the case of the other respondents who did not have three years' experience at the Bar should also be given.
However, on the very next day i.e. 4th October, 1993, the names of other candidates, that is, respondent Nos. 3, 8 and 10 were also included under the orders of the Finance Minister and formal order of appointment Annexure P-2 was issued on 3101993.
It will, therefore, be clear that as per the showing of the State Government itself that the posts against which the respondents were appointed were created on 7th October, 1993, i.e. only a day prior to the date of appointment.
7.
We have also gone through the file containing the applications of the private respondents as also the others and they too are illustrative.
8.
Admittedly, a very large number of applications had been received not on the basis of any advertisement of notice calling for them but appear to have been handed over personally to either political figure or to some officers working in the Department.
Respondent No. 3 made an application dated 23rd June 1993 to the Secretary Local Government, Punjab, but as it is not diarised there is no indication as to when it was received.
There is also no indication on the application nor any clear cut noting on the file as to how and why he was picked up for appointment.
Respondent No. 4 made an application to the Chief Minister on 16th September, 1993, and a note was made thereon by the Chief Minister on the very same day "To please appoint".
Respondent No. 5 also made an application dated 14th September, 1993 directly to the Chief Minister and a note was appended on this very application on 23rd September, 1993 in which it was observed "Given by CM with the advice that ad hoc appointment as EO III be given".
The case of Rajesh Kumar respondent No. 6 is somewhat unique.
He gave an application for appointment to the Director, Local Government, Punjab on 14th October, 1993 i.e. six days after his appointment had already been made.
Respondent No. 7 gave an application dated 3rd October, 1993 to the Secretary, Local Government and this application too was not diarised and as to how his name was picked up is once again a shrouded mystery.
Respondent No. 8 Ashok Kumar gave an application (bearing no date) to the Secretary, Local Government and this application was also not diarised nor is it clear as to how he was found fit for appointment.
Respondent No. 9 too gave an undated application and this too was not diarised but it does appear that it was at a belated stage as the name of this respondent appeared for the first time in the note of the Secretary Local Government dated 25th September, 1993, at page 120 of the noting file.
It appears that respondent No. 10 Balbir Singh gave an application to the Minister Local Bodies on 3rd July, 1993 (although an effort had been made to obliterate the date) but as this application too was not diarised nor any note recorded thereon, nothing can be said as to how his name was also approved.
It will be seen from what has been quoted above, that respondent Nos. 3 to 10 were picked up at random even out of a very large number of applications which were on the file, and although some of them had been given appointment on the express orders of the Chief Minister, yet the case of the others could not readily be screened to find out as to how they were given appointments.
It is also apparent that no advertisement or a requisition was ever made to the press or to the Employment Exchanges or any publicity given inviting applications for the posts in question.
9.
There is merit in the second argument of the petitioner's counsel that as a large number of persons were available who fulfilled the requisite qualifications even amongst those whose applications were on the file and, as such, the appointments to respondent Nos. 3, 7 & 10 by giving them relaxation in the period of practice at the Bar could not be made.
He has, in addition to the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) that unqualified candidates should be appointed only if qualified candidates were not available, relied upon the Punjab Government Instructions, Annexure P-4, filed with the rejoinder in which it has been stated as under :-  "I am directed to refer to the subject noted above and to say that it has been brought to the notice of Government by the PPSC that the various departments are appointing such persons on ad hoc basis who do not possess the minimum qualifications/experience prescribed in the respective rules.
Rule 3(c) of the PPSC (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1955 and Government Instructions issued from time to time only empower the appointing authorities to make appointments for a period not exceeding.
This is however to be done within the approved principles including qualifications prescribed for the post and no relaxation of the basic qualifications/experience etc. can be made therein.
You are therefore requested to ensure that no person with qualifications/experience lower than those prescribed in the respective rules, is appointed even on ad hoc basis."
Reliance has further been placed on a single Bench decision of this Court reported in Shanti Devi and another v. The State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) SIR 625 to the effect that relaxation though permitted by rules should be given only in a case where a candidate having proper qualification is not available.
We have heared the learned counsel on this aspect as well.
There are two facts of this argument which need to be examined; (1) Whether relaxation under the rules can be given and (2) If it is so held, whether in fact it has been given.
Rule 22 of the 1975 rules which deals with the question of relaxation is quoted below :  "Power to relax.
- Where the government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
A bare look at this rule indicates that power to relax is to be made only with respect to a class or a category of persons and not to individuals as has been done in the present case.
It was keeping in view this difficulty that the Director Local Goverment had in his note dated 24th September, 1993, sought the opinion of the Legal Remembrancer.
This opinion was never obtained and the matter was put up before the Chief Minister on 3rd October, 1993, who while ordering the appointments of the qualified respondents, directed that relaxation to the others should also be given.
On the very next day, however, although the opinion of the Legal Remembrancer had not been obtained the relaxation was ordered by the Finance Minister and the appointment letters were directed to be issued to them as well.
The file further shows that the matter with regard to relaxation had been taken up by the Secretary Local Government and in his note dated 2891993 (at page 126 of the file) had recorded that after discussion with the Chief Minister in the presence of the Chief Secretary and the Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister it was felt that relaxation under Rule 22 of the 1975 Rules was to be confined to (a) Wards of Freedom Fighters; (b) Wards of those affected by terrorism; and (c) Wards of those who had done some outstanding civil social service.
This note was approved on the next day ie on 29th September, 1993, by the Chief Minister.
The matter was thereafter processed by the office but on 27th October, 1993, a note was put up by the concerned administrative officer in which it was stated that it was not clear as to under which of the three categories some of the unqualified respondents who had been selected were entitled to seek relaxation in the light of the decision taken on 2891993.
On 28th October, 1993 the Director Local Government while referring the matter to the Secretary Local Government recorded as under :  "May kindly see above office note with reference to our discussion yesterday.
Worthy CM and FM must have considered S/Shri Ram Laxman Mittal and Parupkar Singh Ghuman as belonging to one or the other category mentioned at NP 17 before ordering their ad hoc appointments."
This is the last note recorded on the file and we are left guessing as to under which of the three categories these respondents were entitled to seek relaxation.
We, therefore, held that the unqualified respondents were not a class or a category of persons who could seek relaxation of their qualifications in terms of rule 22 of the 1975 Rules, they being mere individuals in favour of whom power to relax could not have been exercised and that in any case, they did not fall in any of three categories mentioned in the note dated 2891993.
We are further of the (sic) were available (even amongst those whose applications were on the file) no relaxation could be given in view of the decision in Piara Singh's and Shanti Devi's case (supra).
Furthermore it was to meet just such an eventuality that the Supreme Court in The University of Mysore v. Govinda Rao and another, AIR 1965 SC 491 made the following observations :  "Broadly stated, the quo warranto proceeding affords a judicial enquiry in which any person holding an independent substantive public office, or franchise, or liberty, is called upon to show by what right he holds the said office, franchise or liberty; if the inquiry leads to the finding that the holder of the office has no valid title to it, the issue of the writ of quo warranto ousts him from that office.
In other words, the procedure of quo warranto confers jurisdiction and authority on the judiciary to control executive action in the matter of making appointments to public offices against the relevant statutory provisions; it also protects a citizen from being deprived of public office to which he may have a right.
It would thus be seen that if those proceedings are adopted subject to the conditions recognised in that behalf, they tend to protect the public from usurpers of public office; in some cases, persons not entitled to public office may be allowed to occupy them and to continue to hold them as a result of the connivance of the executive or with its active help, and in such cases, if the jurisdiction of the courts to issue writ of quo warranto is properly invoked, the usurper can be ousted and the person entitled to the post allowed to occupy it."
The present is an eminently fit case where such a writ must issue.
10.
Before parting with this judgment, a thought comes to mind which we must share.
A government elected by a democratic process believing in the Rule of Law, must observe all democratic norms.
The right to run the government does not create a fiefdom in favour of the persons who are doing so nor does it give them a licence to make any order by an executive fiat.
The right to be considered for appointment against a public office is a matter which is guaranteed to all citizens under Article 16 of the Constitution and any attempt to circumvent that right would be struck down by the Courts.
The broad principles with regard to the bestowal of State patronage have been laid down in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India and others, AIR 1979 SC 1628.
It was observed as under :  "It is indeed unthinkable that in a democracy governed by the rule of law the executive Government or any of its officers should possess arbitrary power over the interests of the individual.
Every action of the executive Government must be informed with reason and should be free from arbitrariness.
That is the very essence of the rule of law and its bare minimal requirement.
And to the application of this principle it makes no difference whether the exercise of the power involves affection of some right or denial of some privilege."
and again - "It must, therefore, be taken to be the law that where the Government is dealing with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing quotas or licences or granting other forms of larges, the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and, like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be in conformity with standard or norm which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of largess including award of jobs, contracts quotas, licences etc., must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-discriminatory standard or norm and if the Government departs from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the action of the Government would be liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory."
These appointments have been made in reckless disregard of these principles.
11.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow these petitions, quash Annexure P-2 with the result that the appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 10 are also quashed.
The petitioner will have his costs which we assess at Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.