H S Bedi, J.(Oral) - This order will dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions No. 3324 of 1990 and 4875 of 1990 as common questions of law and fact are involved.
2.
The petitioners, who had been working as Headmasters/Headmistresses in the Education Department of the State of Haryana, were selected as Project Officers through the Haryana Public Service Commission, to serve in the Rural Functional Literacy Project, which was being financed partly by the Government of India and partly by the Haryana Government.
Under the letters of appointment Annexure P-1 dated November 25, 1981, it was provided that the post of Project Officer was purely temporary in duration.
In para No. (iii) of Annexure P-1, it was provided hereunder :-  "In case of resignation or discharge on grounds other than the abolition of the post (except as a result of disciplinary action) one month's notice or one month's pay and allowance in lieu thereof will be required to be paid on either side.
In case, you hold substantive post at presently you will be liable to reversion to that post without notice."
The petitioners accepted the conditions of appointment and, accordingly, joined the posts in question in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-1700/-.
In the meantime, the pay scale of the Headmasters/Headmistresses, who were drawing their pay in the scale of Rs. 800-1600 in Non-gazetted Class III posts, was revised to Rs. 2000-3500 and they were given the status of Class II posts, whereas the pay scales of the Project Officers were revised to Rs. 2200-4000 and redesigned as Class I posts.
It appears that in the year 1990, the scheme under which the petitioners had been inducted as Project Officers was wound up and the petitioners who were rendered surplus were returned to the parent Education Department under order Annexure P-6 dated February 28, 1990.
Prior to the winding up of the project and apprehending that they would be retrenched, the petitioners approached the Supreme Court praying that the respondent-State be restrained from winding up the department.
This plea of the petitioners was not accepted and the Supreme Court observed that "it was always open to the Government to continue or discontinue with the scheme."
The petitioners, thereafter, approached this Court by way of the present writ petitions, praying basically for two reliefs, firstly, that this Court issue a direction restraining the respondents from abolishing the posts of Project Officer and secondly, seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to adjust them against ex-cadre posts of equal status and pay.
3.
Mr. Pritam Saini, learned counsel for the petitioners, has urged that the first point does not survive any more in view of the fact that the posts have already been abolished and the Supreme Court has put its approval on this action in the words quoted above, but he has submitted that as far as the second point is concerned, the matter still survives because as a consequence of the reversion of the petitioners, they have lost their status as Class I Officers and their salaries and pay scales have also been brought down as the pay scale of Headmaster is Rs. 2000-3500, whereas that of the Project Officer was Rs. 2200-4000.
He has also urged that the respondents were adopting a policy of pick and choose and while allowing some Project Officers, specifically named in the petition, the same pay scale on their reversion to the parent Department, have declined this benefit to the petitioners.
He has also relied upon Haryana Tanneries Employees Union (Regd.
), Jind, Haryana v. State of Haryana and another, 1989(1) R.S.J., 619, in which it has been observed that on retrenchment, the State must ensure that the employees are appointed in alternative jobs.
4.
The stand of the respondents, however, is that those persons who had been mentioned in the writ petition, had been adjusted in the same pay scales as they were holding Ex-cadre posts of Class I status when they were taken as Project Officers and as such they returned to similar posts on reversion to the parent department.
It has also been asserted that before a mandamus can issue as sought by the petitioners, a right must accrue to them and a corresponding duty must lie on the State and if either of the two conditions are missing, a writ of mandamus will not lie.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the file carefully.
6.
Vide Annexure P-1, which is the letter of appointment as Project Officer, it was clearly stated that the posts were temporary and the persons so appointed were liable to be reverted to their cadre.
Moreover, I find that Mr. Saini's assertion that during the tenure of their service as Project Officers, the petitioners have been designated as Class II Officers as shown in the Gradation List for the year 1986, and would, therefore, be entitled to the benefit of that status, has not been denied by the respondents, but they would be entitled only to such salary as would be available to such officers in the regular cadre and they cannot be signed out for a preferential treatment so as to get the pay scales of Rs. 2200-4000.
Moreover, the petitioners accepted their appointments as Project Officers knowing fully well that it would be a temporary appointments and the winding up of the project having been impliedly upheld by the Supreme Court, the petitioners are not entitled to the pay scales of Project Officers while continuing to work as Headmasters/Headmistresses.
The judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners has no relevance to the facts of the case in hand.
Admittedly, in this case, the petitioners on reversion have been readjusted in their parent cadre in terms of the offer Annexure P-1.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no merit in these writ petitions and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.