Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays that the Punjab National Bank be directed to promote him with effect from February 10, 1983 and that the order passed by the Chairman and Managing Director by which his appeal was rejected (Annexure P12) be set aside.
2.
The facts relevant for the consideration of this prayer may be briefly noticed.
The petitioner was working in the Middle Management Grade Scale-II with the respondent-Bank.
On February 10, 1983, he was interviewed by the Selection Committee which met to consider the cases of various officers for promotion to Senior Management Grade Scale-IV.
The petitioner was not selected.
In accordance with the provisions of the Rules governing his conditions of service, he filed an appeal.
Vide letter dated September 20, 1986, the petitioner was informed that "you were not considered fit for promotion to Scale IV during the selection by the Interview Committee headed by the C&M.D.
(Chairman and Managing Director) himself who is also the appellate authority in terms of promotion policy.
Consequently, his appeal was rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner submitted a representation which was rejected vide order dated May 10, 1989.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 10278 of 1989.
In pursuance to the directions given by this Court, the petitioner's appeal was again processed.
It was rejected.
The decision was conveyed to him vide letter dated March 29, 1990.
The petitioner again filed C.W.P.
No. 16751 of 1990.
It was decided vide order dated August 29, 1991.
It was disposed of with a direction "to the respondents that the appeal filed by the petitioner on 2051983 shall be considered by a Committee to be constituted by the Chairman and the Managing Director, Punjab National Bank, New Delhi afresh and decided after hearing the petitioner within a period of three months."
The Committee was accordingly constituted.
The petitioner was given a personal hearing.
Vide order dated November 28, 1991, the Chairman and Managing Director has dismissed the appeal.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has again approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A short written statement has been filed averring inter-alia that the petitioner has no cause of action which may be remediable by resorting to the present proceedings.
4.
The only contention raised by Mr. Ram Swaroop, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the action of the respondents in ignoring the petitioner was arbitrary and unfair.
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was interviewed by the Selection Committee on February 10, 1983.
His claim for promotion was duly considered.
Once, that is so, the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 being limited, it is not possible to scrutinise the entries in the service record of the petitioner and to compare the respective merits of different candidates.
Fitness of an officer for promotion to a higher post has to be considered and decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee.
It is not the function of the Court to determine as to who is the best person to be selected and promoted.
The proceedings of a Selection Committee can be looked into only to determine any illegality regarding its constitution as prescribed by a Rule or Regulation or to ensure that relevant material was available to it while considering the respective claims of different candidates.
It is not the petitioner's case that the Committee was not validly constituted or that the record was not placed before the Committee.
His only grievance is that in spite of his record being outstanding/excellent, he has been arbitrarily ignored for promotion.
Is it so?
6.
A perusal of the impugned order rejecting petitioner's appeal shows that the Three-Member Processing Committee had found that the performance report rating of the petitioner for the three years immediately preceding the consideration of his claim in 1983 was only 'satisfactory'.
It is also the admitted position that in the year 1981 a minor penalty had been imposed on the petitioner.
In such a situation, if the Committee found certain other persons to be more suitable, it cannot be said that the action in not promoting the petitioner is either arbitrary or unfair.
The grievance made by the petitioner is wholly misconceived.
7.
As for the appellate order, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure "P12, it may be mentioned that the competent authority has considered all aspects of the matters.
Various contentions raised by the petitioner have been duly considered.
A proper speaking order delineating the reasons for rejection of the petitioner's claim has been passed.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, it is held that there is no infirmity in the order which may call for any interference.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Order accordingly