Mahitosh Majumdar, J - By this writ application the petitioner prays for mandate upon the respondent to pass an order on promotional post of Inspector of Police and further prays for such promotion with retrospective effect after properly maintaining the seniority of the petitioner and grant of service benefits.
The short point involved in this application as to whether consideration of the case of the petitioner for promotion to higher post could be otherwise rejected on the ground of the negative recommendation of D.C.C., AP Royganj or on the basis it does not appear to be deserving case of the confirmed post.
It is true that the petitioner was subjected to punishment of imposition of penalty which at the material time, ceased to remain in force.
Apart from that the petitioner was not given the copy of the negative recommendation which is the foundation of the rejection of the prayer of the petitioner for promotion.
It appears from the documents produced by Mr. Banerjee, which reveal the following facts :  The petitioner was appointed Temporary Ar.
SI on 21966 in the West Bengal Police vide College Order No. B-142(2) dated 22966 by the A.I.G.
of Police, West Bengal.
It is fact that the petitioner was dismissed from service w.e.f.
17.1.1977 on a departmental proceeding No. 11/75 of SAP, 4th Bn.
Raiganj.
The petitioner while attached to SAP 4th Bn., Kasba Raiganj, was nominated to undergo CSWT Training at Indore.
He was deputed to Barrackpore to accompany other trainees.
During stay at Barrackpore he indulged in misconduct in that (1) on 12.12.74 he went to draw Rifle in the Magazine of SAP 1st.
Bn.
in drunken condition.
Due to excessive drinking he had lost his balance and fell flat on the verandah of the Magazine.
(2) He could not be sent to undergo C.S.W.T.
Indore Training and was returned to SAP 4th Bn.
On arrival to SAP 4th Bn., he made false statement before the competent authority being a responsible officer of the disciplined Police force, for this Pro.
No. 11/75 was drawn up against the petitioner.
In the final order of the proceeding the then Commander, SAP, 4th Bn., reduced his pay from Rs. 465/- to Rs. 450/- for a period of 24 months and the proceeding file was forwarded to the D.I.G., AP., for his perusal.
D.I.G., AP took his personal hearing and in his revisionary power issued show cause notice and on receipt of reply of show cause notice he was dismissed from service we f 17177 (Ref.
D.I.G., AP Memo No. 426/R 17-76 dated 14.1.77 and BO No. 113 dated 17.1.77, BO No. 114 dated 17.1.77).
The petitioner then submitted Memorial before the Hon'ble Governor of West Bengal, Governor, WB, was pleased to peruse the memorial and records and set aside the order of dismissal considering his young age but order to reduce his pay from Rs. 465/- to Rs. 450/- for 24 months, granting EL and E.O.L.
for the absence.
(Copy of G.O.
enclosed)  The petitioner was re-instated to his former service as Ar.SI vide BO No. 878 dated 28478 and rejoined his duty on 28478 AM at Bn.
Hqrs (BO No. 879 dated 28478).
Proceeding No. 11 dated 26778 was drawn up against the petitioner for his gross misconduct and dereliction of duty and his pay was reduced for 4 months (Copy of Charge enclosed).
It is fact that Proceeding No. 2 dated 21.1.80 was drawn up against the petitioner for his gross dereliction of duty and his pay was reduced for 4 months (Copy of Charge enclosed).
It is fact that Proceeding No. 2 dated 21.1.80 was drawn up against the petitioner for his gross dereliction of duty and indisciplined conduct Copy of Charge enclosed).
Due to insufficient evidence, the proceeding was filed giving benefit of doubt.
It is fact that the petitioner was made quasi-permanent we f 21969 Vide S.O.
No. 2208 dated 61069.
He was not confirmed in time because of bad service records and due to pendency of departmental proceeding against him.
It is fact that due to pendency of enquiry into proceeding against him and running of pay reduction period he was not allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
It is fact that due to service record of the petitioner he was not considered fit to get benefit of N.T.S.C.
Post Vide AIG of Police, WB Memo.
No. 1559- ADM/SC dated 31585 and Special Officer, WB Police Directorate Memo.
No. 650 SC/SC 6-84 dated 6388 (Copies are posted in SS)  The petitioner was re-instated to his former service as Ar.SI Vide G.O.
No. 2550 PL dated 15378.
He was granted 320 days E.O.L.
from 12.6.77 to 27.4.78 as a result the periodical increment of pay is deferred.
It is fact that the pay of the petitioner was fixed at Rs. 450/- as per ROPA, 1981 in the time scale of Pay Rs. 380-15-500- 20-700-25-850-30-910/-.
It is fact that the petitioner was allowed to cross EB vide BO No. 1721 dated 3882, after completion of his period of punishment".
2.
It appears from the submission of Mr. Banerjee that the petitioner's scale was fixed at Rs. 540/- in terms of ROPA, 1981 the time scale of which is Rs. 380-15-500-20-700-25-850 30-910/-.
It is also an admitted position that the petitioner is allowed to cross-efficiency bar, at this stage Mr. Banerji is asked to explain as to how adverse factors which would operate to the prejudiced of the petitioner and why the petitioner could be denied the service benefit while the petitioner was granted service benefits as also the order allowing the petitioner to Cross Efficiency Bar.
It us well settled now the alleged misconduct if there be any or the imposition of punishment if there be any cannot operate to the detriment of the rights of a person in a case of the like nature.
The subsequent conduct and act of the respondent has and had the effect of wiping the misconduct and punishment.
Reference has to be made to a decision of the case of State of Punjab v. Dewan Chuni Lal reported in 1970 SLR 375 : AIR 1970 SC 2086 (SC) where the learned Judge of the Supreme Court dealt with the situation which is more or less similar to the facts of this case.
The relevant portion of the above decision is as follows.
"In our view reports earlier than 1944 should not have been considered at all inasmuch as he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar in that year.
It is unthinkable that if the authorities took any serious view of the charge of dishonesty and inefficiency contained in the confidential reports of 1941 and 1942 they could have overlooked the same and recommended the case of the officer as one fit for crossing the efficiency bar in 1944.
It will be noted that there was no specific complaint in either of the two years and at best there was only room for suspicion regarding his behaviour".
It is quite surprising that when an officer being fastened with the punishment and set with the charge of misconduct is allowed to cross Efficiency Bar.
The pleas of the respondent are that the petitioner cannot be granted the service benefit by reason of the punishment as indicated in the submission of Mr. Banerjee.
It is without any basis that the appeal in two different judgments viz. Collector of Customs v. Rebati Mohan Chatterjee, reported in 1976(2) SLR 897.
Relevant portion of the decision is quoted hereinbelow :  "Relying on these admitted facts, Mr. Chatterjee contended that by this action of promoting the respondent, the Customs Authorities should be deemed to have condoned any allegation of misconduct against the respondent.
He placed strong reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Dewan Chuni Lal reported in AIR 1970 SC 2086.
In that case during the pendency of the departmental proceedings the delinquent was allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
"Relying on these observations of the Supreme Court Mr. Chatterjee submitted that although that case was one of crossing the efficiency bar and the present one of promotion, the same principle must apply to the present case.
In other words, it must be held that by granting the promotion to the respondent the Customs Authorities must be deemed to have condoned any allegation of misconduct against the respondent.
Mr. Chatterjee submitted that the Customs Authorities must not be allowed to take up inconsistent positions and there must be some predictability in the action of executive or Statutory authorities".
3.
The other one is in the case of Union of India v. Habibul Haque, reported in 1978(1) SLR 748.
Relevant portion of the decision is quoted hereinbelow : "The learned Judge, in our view, has rightly observed that the authorities had condoned the misconduct of the respondent for which he had been punished and his slate had been wiped clean.
It is, however, contended on behalf of the appellants that the fact that the respondent was granted promotion in spite of the fact that he was punished is a matter to be considered by the reviewing authority.
We are, however, unable to accept this contention.
In our view, before issuing the show-cause notice, that authority should have taken into consideration the fact of the respondent being promoted to the post of Preventive Officer, Grade I The authority therefore, did not apply its mind properly before it proposed for the imposition of the penalty of dismissal on the respondent.
4.
This Court held that the misconduct or punishment by act of the condonation of misconduct shall be treated as wiped out and there should be some sort of predictability in the action of the respondents.
Such view was taken by this Court as far back as in the year 1925 in the case of Harry Playfair v. LW Middleton, reported in AIR 1925 SC 87 (sic) in the manner following "If a master on discovering that his servant has been guilty of misconduct which would justify a dismissal, yet elects to continue him in his service, he cannot at any subsequent time dismiss him on account of that which he has waived or condoned.
The view is supported by the observations of Bramwell B in Horton v. Mc Murtry, (1860)5 H and N 667 of Blackburn, J in Phillips v. Foxhall, (1872) 7 QB 666 and of Lord Esher N.R.
in Beattie v. Parnenter, (1889) St LR 396 also Boston Deep Sea Fishing Co v. Ansell, 39 Ch D 339 : 59 LT 345.
Federal Supply Co v. Anghern, (1810)80 LTPC 1.
Henry v Pease, (1915)1 KB 698.
We must consequently consider whether what happened between the 12th October, 1919, (when the notice was given) and the 3rd February, 1920, (when play-fair left), justified playfair in living the garden".
5.
The decision of the authority is founded upon negative recommendation of the DIG.
The expression `negative' operates to the prejudice to the petitioner and the same cannot but be treated as stigma.
It has some colour and i.e. bad odour in nature.
The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab, reported in 1979(1) SLR 804 (SC) : 1979 LIC 1186 : AIR 1979 SC 1622 relevant portion of the report reads thus :  17.
The principle is well-settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for one reason or another not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to support the non-issuance of the integrity certificate to the appellant.
The chain of reaction began with the adverse report and the infirmity in the link of causation is that no one has yet decided whether that report was justified.
We cannot speculate, in the absence of a proper pleading whether the appellant 2was not found suitable otherwise, that is to say, for reason other than those connected with the non-issuance of an integrity certificate to him.
6.
The contention of Mr. Banerjee that there is no breach of Rules of natural justice cannot be accepted.
Recording of adverse remarks and the reliance thereon by the higher authority has an adverse effect on the morale of the Government servant.
It is one of such cause.
Therefore, the order as contained in Annexure `B' at page 25 which not only involve the civil consequences but also visit the petitioner with punitive results.
I have effectively examined the entire-matter and also the submissions of Mr. Tapan Banerjee who has produced the statement of facts wherefrom it appears that the concerned authority admitted the act of the respondent which has and had the effect of wiping the punishment or misconduct.
Considering the pros and cons of the entire matter I set aside the order as contained in Annexure `B' page 24 and direct the respondents to determine the petitioner's case of promotion in accordance with the Police Regulations of Bengal.
In the event it is found that there are certain other adverse remarks which operate to prejudice of the petitioner the concerned authority shall communicate the same and obtain his representation within a reasonable period.
Since the application succeeds, his seniority may be recast strictly in accordance with law and such seniority shall be fixed after giving the petitioner an opportunity of hearing so that the petitioner could place the relevant materials in support of his case.
The service benefits which would have been accrued to the petitioner had this orders not been made and action not been taken or initiated, should be made available to him, provided the petitioner is found eligible for the same, within a period of six months from date.
7.
All parties concerned to act on the signed xerox copy of this dictated order to be supplied to them upon payment of requisite charges by each of them and on the usual undertaking.
Petition allowed.