Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a teacher, was posted at the Govt. Middle School, Barsana in district Bhiwani.
On August 30, 1993, the District Primary Education Officer, Bhiwani ordered her transfer to Govt. Primary School, Dhani Rawaldhi.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-1.
In pursuance to this order, the petitioner joined her new post on September 4, 1993 (F.N.).
Vide order dated September 6, 1993, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, the petitioner's transfer was cancelled.
Aggrieved by the cancellation of her transfer, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's transfer has been cancelled by the District Education Officer at the instance of Mr. Virender Singh, M.L.A.
who is a relation of respondent No. 4 and that, in fact, the impugned order had been actually passed on September 21, 1993 but was ante-dated and shown to have been passed on September 6, 1993.
2.
We have heard Mr. IS Balhara, ld.
counsel for the petitioner.
He has contended that the petitioner had been transferred after she had served for more than 8 years at Barsana and that the impugned order had been passed only on account of the directions given by Mr. Virender Singh, M.L.A.
Learned Counsel has relied on the two decisions of this Court in Tripta Malhotra v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SLR 220 : 1991(1) SCT 151 and NS Bhullar v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1991(2) SCT 392 : 1991(1) SLR 378.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner we are of the view that transfer of an employee from one place to another is primarily the prerogative of the competent authority.
It is an administrative order.
This Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction does not normally interfere with an order of transfer or posting.
It is only in a rare case where the administrative power is shown to have been exercised arbitrarily or in violation of the statutory rules and merely guidelines issued by the Government for the transfer of the employees that the remedy by way of judicial review can be resorted to.
4.
What is the position in the present case ?
The petitioner alleges that the order of her transfer had been cancelled at the instance of Mr. Virender Singh, MLA.
It has been averred that Mr. Virender Singh had defected from Janata Dal and joined the Congress Party.
A public meeting was held on September 19, 1993 at Narnaund in district Hisar.
The District Primary Education Officer, Bhiwani, "who was present in the meeting was ordered by the said Virender Singh, MLA in the presence of the Chief Minister that the order of transfer made against Smt. Chander Pal be cancelled forthwith and the order be passed in antidated (antedated) (with retrospective effective) i.e. 6.9.1993 by which date the DPEO, respondent No. 2 had power to make transfers."
In view of these averments, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and untenable.
5.
A perusal of the petition shows that the above-quoted averments have been made in paragraph 10.
The contents of this paragraph have been verified as true and correct to the petitioner's "knowledge and belief."
The petitioner has not averred that she was personally present at Narnaund in district Hisar on September 19, 1993.
Consequently, she cannot claim to have personal knowledge of the fact that Mr. Virender Singh had asked the District Primary Education Officer to cancel the order of her transfer.
Nor has the petitioner disclosed any source of information on the basis of which it may be inferred that she had reasonable grounds for entertaining such a belief.
In such a situation, it does not appear to be prima facie possible to rely on the petitioner's averments.
6.
It is true that the rules framed by this Court in regard to the filing of writs permit the verification of the contents of the petition by the petitioner and it is not necessary to file a separate affidavit.
However, the contents of the petition have to be verified by the petitioner so as to ensure that no false averments are made.
Even if the provisions of Order 19 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure are not attracted, the principle embodied therein is applicable.
Unless the verification conforms to the requirements of the said provision it would not be safe to rely on the averments made in the writ petition.
The verification in the present case is only to the effect that "the contents of my above petition from paras 1 to 16 and 19 and 20 are true and correct to my knowledge and belief and that of paras 17 and 18 are also believed to be true and correct as are based on legal advice sought.
"The petitioner has not indicated as to which averments are true to her knowledge.
She has also not disclosed the source of information or the grounds for the belief entertained by her.
Consequently, we are unable to find any prima facie basis for the averments in the petition.
Furthermore, it has not even been shown by the petitioner that she was not satisfied with her posting at Barsana, where she had continued for about 8 years.
She has not averred that any representation had been submitted by her for her transfer from the Govt. Primary School, Barsana to any other place.
In such a situation, the authority could have reasonably assumed that the petitioner was satisfied with her posting and that there was no need to transfer her.
Accordingly, the authority could have cancelled the order of transfer.
In such a situation we cannot hold that the administrative power was exercised for any extraneous consideration.
7.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that the order had been antedated.
It has been averred that the actual order had been passed on September 21, 1993 but was shown to have been passed on September 6, 1993.
The petitioner has produced a copy of her representation to the Education Minister, Govt. of Haryana as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
This representation appears to have been submitted on September 8, 1993.
In this representation the petitioner had made a request that the "transfer order may not be ordered to be cancelled in which I stand at Sr. No. 19".
It is thus obvious that even on September 8, 1993, the petitioner was apprehensive about the cancellation of her transfer.
It appears that she had come to know of the order of cancellation and had submitted the representation to the Education Minister only with the intention of ensuring that she was not sent back to her original place of posting.
Furthermore, on a perusal of the order dated September 6, 1993, it appears that a proper despatch number has been put on the order.
The petitioner was not the only person who had been transferred or whose order of transfer had been cancelled.
In fact, the order had been passed in respect of 65 persons.
In such a situation, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the order had been antedated does not even prima facie appear to be correct.
8.
This brings us to the consideration of two decisions cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The first of these cases is that of Tripata Malhotra (supra).
She was a "deserted woman with two sons."
Initially her children were being looked after by her parents.
But "after their death, she applied for transfer from Sangrur to Patiala.
This request was accepted on compassionate grounds and the petitioner was transferred to Patiala...".
It was in view of these peculiar facts that the Division Bench had intervened and quashed the order of her transfer.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
So far as NS Bhullar's case (supra) is concerned, a perusal of the judgment shows that the Division Bench had found as a fact that ".... the power to transfer seems to have been used for collateral purposes to avoid disciplinary proceedings ... the order of transfer, Annexure P-1, qua the petitioners was not straight and simple administrative order or routine transfer but was for collateral purpose and by way of punishment."
It had also been noticed by their Lordships that the transfers had been made on the basis of certain complaints and adverse remarks.
Nothing of the sort is even alleged to have happened in the present case.
As such, the decisions are of no assistance to the learned counsel for the petitioner.
9.
In view of the above, we find no ground to admit this writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.