VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of Writ Petitions No. 2608 and 2609 of 1981 as common question of law and fact is involved in both these petitions.
The facts, however, have been extracted from C.W.P.
No. 2608 of 1981 Workmen of Haryana Woollen and General Mills Pvt. Ltd. Panipat v. M/s Haryana Woollen & General Mills Private Limited and another.
2.
Workmen of the Haryana Woollen General Mills Pvt. Limited, Panipat (hereinafter called the petitioners) seek writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the award of the Industrial Tribunal Faridabad dated 26th February, 1981 vide which it was held that the workmen had failed to prove espousal of their demand by a substantial number of workmen thereby not making the reference as industrial dispute and consequently answered the reference in the aforesaid terms.
3.
The brief facts of the case reveal that some of the factory workers of M/s Haryana Woollen & General Mills Private Limited, Panipat (hereinafter called the management) were served retrenchment notices on 2521979.
The same were effective from 24.3.1979.
However, when the notice period had not expired, the management with mala fide intention as alleged laid off 26 workmen who were doing same nature of job, which was done by the proposed retrenched workmen.
Being aggrieved by the said illegal action of the management, the union served a demand notice of the management asking for full wages as also to take them back in service.
The Conciliator Officer, as required under Section 12(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act, called the parties, but the management did not give any comments in writing.
The Conciliation Officer sent failure report (Annexure P-3) to the Government.
On receipt of the said report to the State of Haryana vide notification referred the following matter for adjudication :  "Whether the action of the management in laying off the workmen mentioned in Annexure - 'I' is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief are they entitled ?
(attached list of 26 workers)."
It is pleaded that the petitioners filed statement of claim (Annexure P-3) before the Industrial Tribunal and the management filed written statement (Annexure P-6).
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :  "1.
Whether the demand has been espoused by a substantial number of Workmen ?
2.
Whether action of the management in laying off the workmen mentioned in Annexure 1 in is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief are they entitled ?
Issue No. 1 was considered as preliminary issue and the Tribunal decided the same by returning a finding that there was no espousal and the reference had not become Industrial dispute.
It is this order as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment which has been challenged by the petitioners.
4.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, i.e. management.
It has been pleaded in the preliminary objection that the petition has not been filed by the aggrieved persons.
So far as 26 workmen are concerned, it is pleaded that they did not authorise the petitioner to file the present petition.
Locus standi of the petitioner has thus been questioned.
It is further pleaded that the petitioner union is not a union of the workers of the management but is a Union of Engineering and Textile Workers in general and that being -so the petitioner is considered to be stranger for the purpose of the present writ petition.
It is further pleaded that the Industrial Tribunal has recorded a finding of fact that the demand has not been espoused by substantial number of workmen of the management of the respondent and the same cannot be disturbed in writ jurisdiction as there is no error of law.
On merits, it is pleaded that none of the 26 aggrieved workers ever authorised the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
The alleged resolution dated 26.9.1981 was by a stranger union which did not confer on the petitioner any valid authority to file writ on behalf of the aggrieved persons.
The workmen to whom retrenchment notices were issued, were retrenched after 24.3.1979.
However, the retrenchment matter has no relevancy with the present reference which pertains to the lay off of twenty six workers.
It is further pleaded that 26 laid off workers were doing the same nature job which was being done by the retrenched employees while in service.
The lay off was perfectly legal and in accordance with law and no illegality has been alleged.
According to the demand notice the aggrieved workers authorised only Shri Ram Lochan Mishra in his individual capacity, who happened to be General Secretary, to serve a demand notice on the management.
The petitioner union never served the demand notice in representative capacity nor it is union exclusively of the workers of the management.
The other facts were admitted but the impugned order passed by the Tribunal is defended on the ground that there was no valid industrial dispute.
5.
Mr. JC Verma, learned senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioners, contends that it was admitted fact that the cases of 26 workmen were taken up by the Union and the taking up of the dispute by the Union itself was the industrial dispute as held by Supreme Court in 1965(1) LLJ 668, AIR 1970 SC 1205 and 1972(2) LLJ 132.
The onus to prove that the dispute as referred to by the Government was not an Industrial Dispute, was on the management and it did not produce any evidence on that count.
It is thus argued that the management was to discharge the onus of proving the part that the dispute was not an industrial dispute.
Therefore, the Industrial Tribunal erred in law in putting the onus of the workmen in this regard.
Even otherwise the learned counsel contends that the total strength of the factory being 55 out of which 26 were laid off, the case of the said persons itself had converted the dispute into industrial dispute as defined in Section 2(k) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Provisions of Section 2(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act which itself contemplates the case of even individual dispute to be the industrial dispute if it relates to the termination, discharge or retrenchment of the workmen was totally ignored, contends the learned counsel.
6.
Before the question posed by the learned counsel, as have been referred to above, the answered it is useful to see as to how the Industrial Tribunal dealt with the matter.
After noticing the evidence produced by the parties, the Industrial Tribunal went on to observe as under -  "I have gone through the pleadings and documents and find that Ex. W1 was Form F filed before the Labour Officer-cum-Concilation Officer, Panipat.
The column in the matter of demand notice date is blank.
His authority is as under :  We the employed persons hereby authorise Shri Ram Lochan Misra - General Secretary and Jai Pal-Secretary a official of Engineering and Textile Workers Union, Panipat which is a Registered union to appear and act of our behalf in above dispute.
1.
Sd/ 2.
Sd/ Signature of the employees.
3.
Sd/ 4.. Sd/ I accept the authorisation Sd/- Jai Pal Sd/- Ram Lochan Misra Signature of the official of Registered Trade Union Demand notice Ex. W.2 is signed by Shri Ram Lochan Misra only.
The burden of proving a fact rests on the party who substantially asserts affirmative of the issue and not upon the party who denies, it, for a negative is usual my capable of proof.
The workmen have failed to prove that the dispute in question was sufficiently and properly sponsored or espoused by their union or a substantial number of (some words appears to be missing) workmen adopting espousal of the produce a copy of resolution or proof of a meeting of substantial number of workmen adopting espousal of the cause before raising the present demand.
So much so even office-bearers of Union or the signatory of the demand notice or form F did not appear in the witness box.
As regards Ex. W1 it is under Rule 36 of the Industrial Disputes (Punjab Rules) which runs thus :  "Representation of patties :- The authority in favour of a person or persons to represent a workmen or group C of workman or an employer in any proceeding under the Act shall be in form F Therefore, this document is not a substantive proof of the espousal of demand.
It is like a power of attorney only to appear and represent before the authority under the Industrial Disputes Act.
In these circumstances, I hold that the workmen have failed to prove espousal of their demand by a substantial reference as an industrial dispute.
I decide this issue against the workmen.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case I am of the considered view that the order passed by the Industrial Tribunal is not in accordance with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and the same thus deserves to be set aside.
8.
On the record of the case there is available Annexure P-2 which is a demand notice dated 1141979 and which has been addressed to the Manager, Haryana Woollen and General Mills (P) Limited, Panipat.
The same was given by Shri Ram Lochan Mishra, General Secretary of the Engineering, and Textile Workers Union (Registered) Panipat (Haryana).
A copy of this demand notice was sent to the Conciliation Officer, Panipat for necessary action.
The Labour and Conciliation Officer, Panipat sent failure report (Annexure P-3) by noticing the view of the workmen.
It has been clearly mentioned in Annexure P3 that on 1141979, the representatives of the workers demanded through a demand notice that the management though had issued retrenchment notices to a few workers yet they started laying them off during the notice period on the plea that there is no work and this was in respect of senior workers and the junior workers had been allowed to continue.
The workers, thus, stated that action of the management was illegal.
The views of the representatives of the management who participated in the meetings from time to time could not be ascertained as the management failed to file the written reply till 4.7.1979 despite the fact that reminders and letters were sent to it.
As mentioned earlier, the Government through notification issued on that behalf referred the following dispute for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal :  "Whether the action of the management in laying off the workmen mentioned in Annexure 'I' is justified and in order.
If not, to what relief they are entitled to."
9.
Before the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal Faridabad, Shri Ram Lochan Mishra, General Secretary of the Union, filed a statement of claim on behalf of the workmen on 18.7.1980.
This document recites the names of 26 workmen.
The management filed its written statement and its first preliminary objection was as follows :  "That the demand notice in question was never converted into industrial dispute as per the scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and as such the present reference is not competent and is not maintainable.
It is, therefore, requested that the present reference may pleased be rejected on the above legal objection alone which goes to the very root of espousal of the dispute in a legal manner and in absence of the same, there is no industrial dispute in existence which could be validly adjudicated upon.
It is, therefore, requested that the reference may be rejected on the above legal objection alone."
The objection extracted above, would, thus, manifest that the same was that the demand notice was never converted into an industrial dispute as per Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
10.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, appears to be right in contending that demand notice issued through a General Secretary of the Union followed by reference made by the Government under Section 10(1) (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act would be an industrial dispute and it being espousal of cause of workmen by substantial number of workmen had to be converted into industrial dispute.
He further contends that it was not even necessary, to serve demand notice and reference made by the Government under Section 10(1) (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act was enough to conclude that there was a dispute between the parties which was to be adjudicated upon on merits.
11.
In Workmen of Dharam Pat Prem Chand (Saugandhi) v. M Dharam Pal Prem Chand (Saugandhi), AIR 1966 Supreme Court 182 the facts were that a firm which was carrying on business as perfumers and tobacconists dismissed the services of its 18 employees on the same day.
On the date of dismissal, it had in its employment 45 employees.
The cause of dismissed employees was represented by a registered Trade Union, viz, Mercantile Employees' Association of which they and none others, were members, at the relevant time.
The conciliation proceedings failed and reference under Section 10 was made at the instance of the Association.
It was held that the dispute was an industrial dispute and not an individual one and reference at the instance of the Association was valid.
The Supreme Court held that "while dealing with industrial disputes, industrial adjudication will not generally lay down any hard and fast rule or adopt any test of general or universal application.
The approach has necessarily to be pragmatic, and the tests which it will apply and the considerations on which it will rely would very from case to case and would admit of no rigid or inflexible formula.
The limitations introduced by the decisions of Supreme Court in interpreting the effect of the definition in Section 2(k) were based on such pragmatic considerations.
It may also be said that if the dismissal of an individual employees working in an establishment in Delhi is taken up by the Union of workmen in a place away from Delhi, that would clearly not make the dispute an industrial dispute.
Section 36 of the Act dealing with the representation of parties, incidently suggests that the Union which can raise an individual dispute as to a dismissal validly, should be a Union of the same industry, It is generally the Union of workmen working in the same establishment which has passed the impugned order of dismissal.
But it is conceivable that the workmen of an establishment have no Union of their own, and some or all of them join the Union of another establishment belonging to the same industry.
In such a case, if the said Union takes up the cause of the workmen working in an establishment which have no Union of its own, it would not be reasonable to hold that the dispute does not become an industrial dispute because the Union which has sponsored it is not the Union exclusively of the workmen working in the establishment concerned.
In every case where industrial adjudication has to decide whether a reference in regard to the dismissal of an industrial employee is validly made or not, it would always be necessary to enquire whether the Union which has sponsored the case can fairly claim a representative character in such a manner that its support to the cause would made the dispute an industrial dispute."
12.
From the facts as have been noticed above, it would be seen that the cause of 26 workmen was taken up by the Union through the Secretary and as to how it was not espousal of cause of workmen by substantial number is not understandable at all.
Even if it was an individual dispute, the same would be converted into an industrial dispute.
Even on a date when reference was taken up, it was supported by the union of workmen or by appreciable number of such workmen.
The parties to the reference being the employer and his employees, the test must necessarily be whether the dispute referred for adjudication is one in which the workmen or a substantial section of them have a direct and substantial interest even though such a dispute relates to a single workman.
Thus, existence of a dispute evidenced by the espousal at the date when the reference is made would make it an industrial dispute.
The Labour Court was, thus, not justified in rejecting the reference on the technical plea as noticed above.
13.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents in Civil Writ Petition No. 2609 of 1982 has, however, endeavoured to defend the order passed by the Industrial Tribunal on the ground that the Secretary of the Union Shri Ram Lochan who acted on behalf of the petitioners had no authority to plead or appear on their behalf and even to file the present writ petition.
In the petition, it has been clearly pleaded that vide resolution passed, the General Secretary of the Union has been authorised to file the writ petition.
The date of resolution has also been mentioned in the petition.
As to whether Ram Lochan Mishra who filed statement of claim on behalf of the workmen was authorised or not is a question of fact and even if he was authorised, what would be the effect of the same has to be gone into by the Industrial Tribunal.
14.
For the reasons recorded above, both the petitions are allowed.
Award rendered by the Industrial Tribunal on both the cases is set aside and a direction is issued to the Industrial Tribunal to dispose of the case on merits.
It shall also include disposal of the preliminary issues with regard to authorisation and other allied matters.
The parties, through their counsel, have been directed to appear before the Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad on 2.11.1993.