VK Bali, J - Madhu Sood, petitioner through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise her services as a teacher in view of the instructions issued by the State of Punjab from time to time.
2.
The brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner passed BA as also JBT examinations.
It is pleaded that on the basis of her educational qualifications, as referred to above, she was appointed as a teacher on ad hoc basis in the Punjab Education Department on 1161975, through Employment Exchange.
She joined on the post of teacher on 1161975 in the Government Higher Secondary School, Garhshanker, District Hoshiarpur.
Since then she is continuing in service regularly without any break in her service.
It is pleaded that the petitioner had completed 10 years of regular service before she came to the Court for filing the present petition.
The Government instruction and the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) SPJ 1 : 1992(2) SCT 201 is relied upon to ask for regularisation.
3.
The petitioner had admittedly put in about ten years of service prior to the filing of this petition.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner relies upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) as also instructions Annexures P3 and P4 and other instructions that may be in existence on the subject to contend that the petitioner is entitled to regularisation.
The learned Assistant Advocate General Punjab appearing for the respondent-State of Punjab has made a statement that the case of the petitioner shall be considered for regularisation in view of judgment of Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) as also instruction Annexures P3 and P4 as other instructions that may be available on the subject and if she is entitled to regularisation in accordance with the judgment and the instructions, referred to above, her services would be regularised.
4.
In view of the statement made by the learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State, it is ordered that the respondents would consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra) and instructions Annexures P3 and P4 and any other instructions that may be available.
Till such time, however, final orders are passed in the matter she shall be permitted to continue on the post on which she is working.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.