VM Jain, J - This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner Smt. Surinder Kaur Uppal under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari, for quashing the order dated 23101996, copy Annexure P-5 and also for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the pensionary benefits, gratuity and provident fund to the petitioner and to consider the case of the petitioner for pay fixation.
2.
In the writ petition it was alleged that the petitioner was appointed as a Science teacher with Sohan Lal DAV Senior Secondary School, Ambala City on 1671959 and she served the said school till 20.10.1966.
Copy of the letter dated 1011996, certifying that her qualification was B.Sc.
BT and the above said institution was recognized and aided by the Govt., was attached as Annexure P-1.
It was further alleged that the petitioner joined the Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 4) on 21.10.1966 as Science and Mathematics teacher and she worked there upto 3111982 and that it was a recognized and aided School.
It was alleged that the petitioner thereafter joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 5), vide letter dated 14101981 and as per the appointment as Head Mistress in the said School, which was a recognized and aided School and that her appointment as Head Mistress was subject to the approval of DPI (Schools) Punjab.
In the appointment letter, it was mentioned that the petitioner was appointed as Head Mistress in the said School, which was a recognized and aided School and that her appointment as Head Mistress was subject to the approval of DPI (Schools) Punjab.
In the appointment letter (copy Annexure P-2), it was also mentioned that the petitioner will remain on probation for one year and her confirmation will depend upon the work and conduct after the expiry of the probation period.
It was alleged that in pursuance of the said appointment letter, the petitioner joined the BSM Sikh Girls High School at Kharar on 121982 and had completed her probation period successfully and was confirmed by the management, as the approval has already been made by the DPI (Schools) Punjab.
It was alleged that the petitioner retired from service on 8111995 after completing 36 years 3 months and 22 days service with the recognized and aided Schools.
It was alleged that the petitioner applied for the grant of pension, gratuity and provident fund on 241996 and also submitted her pension papers on that date and the papers were returned with some objections and the petitioner submitted the said papers again on 2671996 after removing the objections but till the date of the filing of the writ petition, the petitioner had not been paid the pensionary benefits including gratuity and provident fund.
It was alleged that the petitioner applied to the Director Secondary Education, Haryana to give the service book and certificate regarding the service of the petitioner in Sohan Lal DAV Senior Secondary School, Ambala from 1671959 to 20.10.1966 and that the Director asked the District Education Officer Ambala, vide letter dated 1841996, copy Annexure P-3, to prepare the service book of the petitioner.
It was alleged that the petitioner was entitled to get the provident fund for the period from 21.10.1966 to 3111982, which was to be paid by Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 4) and for the period from 121985 by BSM Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 5).
It was alleged that the petitioner had already got the provident fund for the period from 1671959 to 20.10.1966 from the Sohan Lal DAV School Secondary School, Ambala City when she had joined the Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar on 21.2.1966.
It was alleged that the BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 5) had recommended the release of the provident fund amounting to Rs. 37618/- to the District Education Officer but no amount had so far been paid to the petitioner.
It was alleged that the petitioner had approached the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar for the refund of the provident fund and to supply the service particulars in the service book, which was required for pension.
It was alleged that the petitioner was drawing Rs. 880/- as substantive pay as a teacher in Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar and that the State Government vide letter dated 20.10.1983 had agreed to protect the substantive pay of Rs. 880/- per month on the new job.
It was alleged that the pay fixation of the petitioner at the time of joining the BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar as Head Mistress on 121982 was to be done under the provisions of Section 9(2) of the Security of Service Act, 1979 and the pay was to be fixed under Rule 12 of the 1981 Rules framed thereunder.
It was alleged that in June, 1981, the petitioner had made a representation to the concerned authorities seeking fixation of pay but the Education Department, without giving any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, rejected the representation of the petitioner vide letter dated 23101996, copy Annexure P-5 without assigning any reason.
It was alleged that action of the respondents in not granting the petitioner pensionary benefits, provident fund and gratuity and the order dated 23101996, copy Annexure P-5, were illegal and void, on the various grounds detailed in para 10 of the petition.
It was accordingly prayed that the writ petition be allowed and the order dated 23101996, copy Annexure P-5, be quashed and the respondents be directed to release the pensionary benefits including provident fund and gratuity to the petitioner and the respondents be further directed to fix the pay of the petitioner as per the provision of 1979 Act and 1981 Rules framed thereunder.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it was alleged that as per the Education Code and Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, the employees can be transferred from one recognized School to another recognized School under the same management with the prior approval of the Director or on the request of the employee under intimation to the Director.
It was further alleged that an employee may seek appointment to an aided post in other privately managed recognized School through his previous employer.
It was alleged that in the present case, the petitioner had changed Schools from one management to another without seeking permission from her previous employer/management and as such the service rendered by the petitioner in the previous Schools under different management cannot be counted for the benefit of pension, gratuity etc.
It was further alleged that the record of the previous service had not been produced.
It was further alleged that as per the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefit Scheme, 1992, the service rendered on an aided post in another privately managed recognized School shall be counted for retirement benefits provided that contributory provident fund account of the subsequent School to which the employee is transferred or appointed, there is no break in service and the qualifying service shall be taken into account with effect from the date the employee had started contributing towards the General Provident Fund.
It was alleged that the petitioner was not covered under these Rules as the petitioner's contributory provident fund was never continued in the subsequent School.
It was alleged that the petitioner joined as Head Mistress in BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar on 121982 but she started contributing towards contributory provident fund with effect from 111986 according to the record made available by her last employer and as such her service did not qualify for pension because she had put in less than 10 years of qualifying service, as required under Rules 6(4) and 8 of the Pension Scheme, 1992.
It was alleged that the petitioner had put in only 9 years 10 months and 8 days service and as such, she had not completed the requisite "qualifying service" to enable her to claim pension.
It was alleged that the department had sanctioned the gratuity on 21.3.1997.
It was alleged that as per the record, the petitioner has joined Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar on 21.10.1966 as Science Mistress and she was given appointment as a fresh candidate.
It was alleged that the services of the petitioner had never been transferred from Sohan Lal DAV Senior Secondary School, Ambala City to Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar and that the petitioner had left the former School of her own and joined the subsequent School as a fresh candidate and that both the Schools had separate managements.
It was alleged that the appointment of the petitioner in BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar was not by way of transfer but as a fresh candidate as she was on probation for one year as per the condition of the appointment letter.
Furthermore, it was alleged that the management of the previous school i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, had no link with the management of BSM Sikh Girls High School and as such the petitioner could not claim the benefit of the service rendered by her in previous school.
It was admitted that the petitioner had retired on 8111995 but it was denied that she has put in 36 years 3 months and 22 days of service.
It was alleged that the petitioner has served with different managements and she had been joining and leaving the service with different managements of her own and as such the entire service could not be counted which she had put in with the previous managements.
It was alleged that the petitioner could not claim the benefit of 30 years service for pension and gratuity etc.
It was alleged that the pension case of the petitioner received from her last employer had been finalized and due pensionary benefits, as per Pension Scheme, 1992, had been sanctioned.
It was alleged that the pay of the petitioner was never protected by the answering respondent and she was not entitled to get the benefit of past service under the provisions of Section 9(2) of the 1979 Act because she has never applied through proper channel and the management of the institutions were different.
It was alleged that the representation of the petitioner was rightly rejected and that the petitioner was not entitled to any relief.
It was accordingly prayed that the petition be dismissed.
4.
Respondent No. 4 Henderson Memorial Girls High School, in its separate written statement, alleged that the petitioner had joined respondent No. 4 - School as Science Mistress on 21.10.1966 and served as such till 3111982.
It was alleged that with effect from 141982 the petitioner had applied for two months leave without assigning any reason by simply mentioning "due to personal reasons".
It was alleged that the leave application of the petitioner was declined by the School Management and she was duly informed about it.
It was alleged that inspite of the repeated requests of the answering respondent to joint her duties, the petitioner did not join her duties as a teacher and in the meantime without getting necessary relieving orders from the answering respondent and without resigning from the School of the answering respondent, the petitioner had joined as a Head Mistress of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar.
It was alleged that the answering respondent had sent several reminders to the petitioner to come and join but she failed to do so, whereupon a Show-Cause notice dated 2511983 along with charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner and in pursuance of thereof she replied submitting that she had joined the new School without getting necessary permission or relieving order from the answering respondent.
It was alleged that resultantly the post held by the answering respondent was declared vacant vide letter dated 951985 and necessary information was sent to the DPI Punjab, Chandigarh, for permitting the answering respondent to appoint a new teacher against that post and after obtaining the approval of the DPI a new teacher was appointed.
With regard to the payment of contributory provident fund, it was alleged that the same had remained up-paid because of the fact that the petitioner never came to collect the money.
It was alleged that so long as the petitioner was working with the answering respondent her contribution to the provident fund along with answering respondent's contribution was being duly deposited in the account of the petitioner bearing Account No. 1189069 in the post office, Kharar and the pass book was duly sent to the DPI, Punjab.
It was alleged that for that period, no money was withdrawn by the answering respondent from the said account and that the said amount along with interest was still lying in her account in the post office and the petitioner could herself withdraw that amount.
It was alleged that the petitioner had never approached the answering respondent for withdrawing that amount.
It was alleged that the only amount payable by the answering respondent to the petitioner, was provident fund, which was lying deposited in her account in the post office and the pass book had been sent to the District Education Officer and the petitioner could withdraw the same at any time.
5.
The petitioner filed replication to the written statement filed by respondent No. 4.
It was alleged that the petitioner applied for leave from 121982 to 3131982 and not with effect from 141982.
It was alleged that since the petitioner had been put on probation for one year by respondent No. 5 - School, the petitioner wanted to safeguard her interest by getting her leave extended from respondent No. 4 for that period so that she may be able to join respondent No. 4 in case she did not complete the probation period successfully.
It was alleged that her leave for two months had been sanctioned upto 3131982, as would be apparent from letter dated 1941982 from respondent No. 4, copy Annexure P.18.
It was alleged that in response to the said letter, the petitioner had given the reply dated 2041982, copy Annexure P-19.
It was alleged that the petitioner was asked to resign, which direction could not have been complied with as she had applied through proper channel, whereupon the petitioner sent suitable reply vide letter dated 1451982, copy Annexure P-20.
It was alleged that the letter dated 3171982, copy Annexure P-21, was also received from respondent No. 4 asking for her resignation and not granting leave for the entire period of probation and the petitioner had sent a reply to the same, copy of which was Annexure P-22.
It was alleged that the petitioner has also sent reply to the charge- sheet, whereupon the matter was closed by respondent No. 4, vide letter dated 1451985, copy Annexure P-23.
It was alleged that since the petitioner had applied through proper channel, the question of joining the new assignment without prior permission did not arise and that the same was implied when respondent No. 4 had forwarded her application.
It was alleged that no reply was given by respondent No. 4 to the letters Annexure P-9 to P-11 and that the petitioner had been requesting respondent No. 4 to release her provident fund.
6.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner had filed Civil Misc. No. 3234 of 2003, seeking permission to place on record certain documents i.e. Annexures P-9 to P-17 and it was prayed that the said documents may be allowed to be placed on the record for the just decision of the case.
A reply to the said application was filed by the District Education Officer (S) Ropar, alleging therein that the petitioner did not join BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar with prior permission of the Managing Committee of Henderson Memorial Girls High School.
It was alleged that the Head of the BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar had sent original letter dated 1842001 written by the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, copy Annexure R-1, on 2342001.
It was alleged that from the perusal of Annexure R-1, it would be clear that the petitioner had applied for leave with effect from 121982 to 3131982 but the leave was not sanctioned by the Committee and the petitioner had not submitted any resignation and the petitioner was also not relieved of her duties for joining BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar.
It was further alleged that the contributory pension fund from Henderson Memorial Girls High School was not transferred to BSM Sikh Girls High School.
It was alleged that the petitioner has started contributing towards contributory pensionary funds from 111986 and thus according to Rule 6(6) of the Scheme, the qualifying service shall be taken into account with effect from the date the employee had started contributing towards the contributory pension fund.
Vide order dated 1222003, this application was allowed and the documents were taken on record.
7.
As per the letter Annexure P-2 dated 14101981, the petitioner was appointed as Head Mistress in BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar with a stipulation that she will be on one year probation and her confirmation will depend upon her good work and conduct after the expiry of her probationary period.
In the said letter, it was mentioned that she was being appointed as Head Mistress in the grade permissible by the Punjab Government, Education Department for the post of Head Mistress in Privately Managed Government Aided Schools.
Annexure P-4 is the copy of Legal Notice dated 24.8.1996, whereas Annexure P-5 is the copy of the letter from the Education Department vide which her representation regarding fixation of pay for the post of Head Mistress was rejected.
Annexure P-6 is the copy of a letter allegedly written by the petitioner to the Manager, BSM Khalsa Girls High School, Kharar, seeking appointment to the post of Head Mistress.
As per the said letter, Annexure P-6, which was through proper channel and had been recommended strongly (by whom not mentioned).
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner placed on the record the document, of which Annexure P-6 was stated to be the true copy.
A perusal of the said document, which was produced before me, would show that it was the original letter written by Smt. Surinder Kaur Uppal (petitioner) to the Manager of BSM Khalsa Girls High School, Kharar and underneath the said letter, one N Bala Sundaram, Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School had "recommended strongly" on 581981.
Since the original application submitted by the petitioner to BSM Sikh Girls High School, seeking appointment to the post of Head Mistress and bearing the recommendation of the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, was still in possession of the petitioner, the authenticity of this document cannot be taken at its face value, inasmuch as there is nothing on the record to show that this was the application submitted by the petitioner to BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, seeking appointment to the post of Head Mistress.
If this was the application form submitted by the petitioner to respondent No. 5, the same would not have been in the possession of the petitioner.
It appears that at some subsequent stage, the petitioner prepared this document and obtained the recommendation of Nira Bala Sundaram, Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School.
However, the authenticity of this document would be in doubt and it could not be made the basis for holding that the petitioner has applied to BSM Sikh Girls High School for the post of Head Mistress through proper channel i.e. through the institution where she was previously working i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School.
8.
Along with Annexure P-6, there is another letter dated 881981, allegedly written by Nira Bala Sundaram on the letter head of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar addressed to Sardar Amrik Singh that she was recommending and forwarding the application of Mrs. Surinder Kaur Uppal for the post of Head Mistress in BSM Sikh Girls High School.
However, the authenticity of this letter later dated 881981 would again be in doubt, inasmuch as if Nira Bala Sundaram as Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar had recommended and forwarded the application of the petitioner for the post of Head Mistress in BSM Sikh Girls High School, through this letter dated 881981, then this letter would not be in possession of the petitioner and would be available on the record of BSM Sikh Girls High School, especially when this document could be created at any time.
9.
Annexure P-7 is the copy of letter dated 23111981 written by the District Education Officer, Roopnagar to the Circle Education Officer, Nabha informing that the petitioner Smt. Surinder Kaur Uppal was serving as regular Mistress with Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar and that she had been selected as a Head Mistress by the Management of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar against a vacant post and that she has requested for the protection of her pay and that she was drawing basic pay of Rs. 880/- and that necessary sanction for the same may be considered.
10.
Annexure P-9 attached with the Civil Misc. No. 3234 of 2003 is the copy of the letter of May, 1995 written by BSM Sikh Girls High School to Henderson Memorial Girls High School to the effect that Mrs. Surinder Kaur Uppal was retiring from service in November, 1995 and that to finalize her case of pension, the provident fund amount of hers, lying with them may be remitted to the District Education Officer, Ropar along with the service book in respect of the period from October, 1966 to 3111982.
Annexure P-10 is the copy of the letter dated 30101995 allegedly sent by the petitioner to Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar for the same purpose.
Annexure P-11 is the copy of the letter dated 1111996 sent by the petitioner to the Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar for the supply of particulars regarding the date of joining etc. and also the amount of provident fund as these particulars were required for pension.
Annexures P-12 is the copy of the Peon Book in respect of the aforesaid letters, Annexures P-9, P-10, P-11.
Annexure P-13 is the copy of the letter dated 2081998 (during the pendency of the writ petition) sent by the Punjab Government Finance Department Local Audit Wing to the DPI, Schools, Punjab, Chandigarh intimating that Rs 29175/- being 50% share of the incumbent provident fund had already been deposited in the pension fund of the employee and that in addition to this the provident fund for the period from 121982 to 31121985 amounting to Rs. 10685/-, which was not deducted from the employee's salary, had already been deposited on 3171998 in the treasury and it was requested that the request of the incumbent be accepted for the grant of the pension.
Annexure P-14 is the copy of the challan showing the deposit of Rs. 10665/- towards contributory provident fund arrears for the period from 121982 to 31121985.
Annexure P-15 is the copy of the letter from the petitioner to the DPI, Schools Punjab, Chandigarh intimating about her appointment as Head Mistress in BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar and seeking sanction to join the new School on probation.
Annexure P-16 is the copy of the letter dated 23111981, copy of which has already been produced as Annexure P-7.
Annexure P-17 is the copy of the circular dated 2841993 from the Director Education (Schools) Punjab to all the District Education Officers, with regard to the fixation of pay.
11.
Annexures P-18 to P-23 were attached by the petitioner along with the replication to the written statement filed by respondent No. 4.
Annexure P-18 is the copy of the letter dated 941982 sent by the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the petitioner informing her that her two months leave for the period from 121982 had expired on 3131982 and she had not resumed her duties so far and that she was absent from duty without leave since 141982 and she was required to resume her duty immediately failing which the Managing Committee shall initiate action against her.
Annexure P-19 is the copy of the letter dated 2041982 sent by the petitioner to the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the effect that her case under Section 9(2) of the Punjab Security of Teachers Services Act was still in the process with the Government and it was requested that leave may be granted to her during the period of her probation and in case the Govt. decides not to protect her pay she will be reverting back to her own School.
Annexure P-20 is the copy of the letter dated 1451982 sent by the petitioner to the Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the effect that under Section 9(2) of the aforesaid Act, resignation was not warranted and that Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar was at liberty under the Rules to appoint a substitute during the period of her probation.
Accordingly, she requested for leave for the period of her probation as she was a confirmed employee of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar holding a lien for the post.
Annexure P-21 is the copy of the letter dated 3171982 sent by the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the petitioner asking the petitioner to submit her resignation and also informing the petitioner that her request for leave had not been approved by the management and that she was verbally requested to submit her resignation.
Annexure P-22 is the copy of the letter sent by the petitioner to the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, in reply to the letter dated 3171982, reiterating that resignation under Section 9(2) of the Act was not warranted during the period of probation.
It was mentioned that she did not understand the logic in calling for the resignation during the period of probation and that the management should wait for the period of probation and fixation of her pay.
Annexure P- 23 is the copy of the letter dated 1451985 from the Manager of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the petitioner, in reference to her letter dated 1451985, informing her that she joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar as Head Mistress on 121982 and her appointment had been approved by the DPI (S) Punjab.
Accordingly, she was informed that she ceased to be the member of the staff of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, with effect from 121982, the date when she joined the other School as Head Mistress.
12.
In the written reply filed by Shri Ujagar Singh Mahi, District Education Officer (S) Roper to CM No. 3234 of 2003 filed by the petitioner to place on the record documents as Annexures P-9 to P-17, it was alleged with regard to those documents that the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without seeking prior permission of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar and she had misled the Managing Committee of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, as she applied for leave for the period from 121982 to 3131982 but as admitted by the petitioner herself, she joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar on 121982.
It was further alleged that the petitioner had not deposited her provident fund contribution for the period from 121982 to 31121985 herself and that she herself was at fault because she had deposited her amount of provident fund too late on 3071998 (during the pendency of the writ petition) and without paying any interest.
It was further alleged that letter dated 2081998, copy Annexure P-13, had not been written by the DPI (S), who was the competent authority.
It was alleged that under Rule 6(5) of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefits Scheme, 1992, the petitioner was not entitled to any pension as contributory pension fund account of the previous School was not continued in the subsequent School and according to Rule 6(6) of the said Rules, the qualifying service will be taken into account with effect from the date an employee started contributing towards the contributory provident fund.
It was alleged that in the present case, the petitioner herself had started contributing towards the contributory pension fund from 11986.
In respect of the letters Annexures P-15 and P-16, it was alleged that these letters were not accepted by the competent authority under the Rules.
In respect of the letter Annexure P-17, it was alleged that the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without taking prior permission of her previous employer i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar.
Furthermore, along with the said reply filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, copies to two documents were attached as Annexure R-1 to R-2.
Annexure R-1 is the copy of the letter dated 2342001 sent by the Head Mistress of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar to the District Education Officer, Ropar forwarding the letter dated 1842001 written by the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar.
Annexure R-1/A is the copy of the aforesaid letter dated 1842001 sent by the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to the Head Mistress of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, to the effect that the petitioner had applied for leave with effect from 121982 to 3131982 giving personal reasons but leave was never sanctioned by the Managing Committee.
It was alleged that the employee had given her own reasons for proceeding on leave.
It was further alleged that the petitioner did not give her resignation and that the Committee did not sanction leave to her for joining BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar as Head Mistress.
It was further alleged that the employee's amount of CPF amounting to Rs. 28809/- was still lying in the post office, vide account No. 1189069.
It was further alleged that the CPF of the employee from Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar to BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, had not been transferred at any time.
13.
The Government of Punjab had issued the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 under the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979.
As per Rule 9(1) of the aforesaid Rules, the Managing Committee which is running two or more Privately Managed Schools may transfer any employee from one School to another School under its control with the prior approval of the Director or on the request of the employee under intimation to the Director, provided that no employee shall be transferred to a post lower in rank or carrying a pay or pay scale which is less than the basic pay or the pay scale he would have drawn but for his transfer.
Under Ruler 9(2) of the said Rules an employee may seek appointment to an aided post in another Privately Managed Recognised School through his previous employer.
Under Rule 22 of the aforesaid Rules, it is provided that every Managing Committee of a Privately Managed Recognised School shall establish provident fund for the employees of such School and that an employee shall be entitled to contribute to the provident fund established or to be established by the Managing Committee at such rate as may be specified by the Government from time to time, provided that an employee who is governed by the provisions of the Scheme shall contribute towards the General Provident Fund in accordance with the provisions thereof.
Under Rule 22-A of the aforesaid Rules, it is provided that the Government shall made a scheme for the grant of retirement benefits to the employee of the Privately Managed Recognised Schools.
14.
In pursuance of the aforesaid Rule 22-A of the aforesaid Rules, the State Government had framed a Scheme called the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefits Scheme, 1992, with the stipulation that it shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the 5th day of February, 1987.
Clauses 6, 7 and 8 of the said Scheme read as under:  "6.
Qualifying Service - (1) The service of employee shall not qualify for retirement benefits under this Scheme unless -  (i) he attains the age of eighteen years;  (ii) he takes charge of the aided post to which he is first appointed except for which it is otherwise provided by special rules or contract; and (iii) the service is on an aided post on regular basis.
(2) The leave admissible under the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 and under the instructions issued by the Department from time to time, shall qualify for pension but leave without pay and period of suspension, overstay of leave not subsequently regularised under the above said rules and the period of break in service shall not be reckoned as qualifying service.
(3) The service rendered in one or more privately managed recognised aided schools under the same management shall count for retirement benefits; provided the transfer was made in terms of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employee (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
(4) In the case where the total qualifying service is less than ten years, no pension benefit shall be admissible.
(5) The service rendered on an aided post in another privately managed recognised school in the State of Punjab, shall count for retirement benefits : Provided that the Contributory Provident Fund Account of employee in the previous school continued as such in the subsequent school to which he is transferred or appointed and there is no break in service.
(6) The qualifying service will be taken into account with effect from an employee started contributing towards the Contributory Provident Fund.
7.
Condonation of Interruption - (1) In the absence of specific indication to the contrary in the service record of the employee, an interruption between spells of service rendered by an employee under the same Managing Committee, shall be treated as automatically condoned and shall be treated as qualifying service for retirement benefits : Provided that the interruption caused by resignation, dismissal, removal from service or due to participation in strike shall not be condoned.
(2) The period of interruption not condoned by the Managing Committee shall under no circumstances be reckoned as qualifying service for retirement benefits.
8.
Entitlement for pension.
- An employee shall be entitled for pension under the Scheme only after he completes ten years (twenty half years) qualifying service."
Under Clause 28 of the aforesaid Scheme, it has been provided that "notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the provisions of this Scheme shall have over-riding effect."
15.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record carefully.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted before me that the petitioner was entitled to combine the period spent by the her on duty with Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, (respondent No. 4) with the period of duty spent by her with BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar (respondnet No. 5), in view of Rule 9(2) of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules 1981, especially when the petitioner had applied to BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar for the post of Head Mistress, through proper channel with the prior permission of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar.
However, I find no force in this submissions of the learned counsel for the petitoner.
As referred to above, respondent No. 4 - Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, in its written statement had specifically taken the plea that the petitoner had joined the new School i.e. BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without getting the necessery permission or relieving orders from the answering respondent.
It was alleged that in fact the petitioner had applied for leave without assigning any reason by simply mentioning personal reasons and the leave application was declined and that without getting necesary relieving orders from the answering respondent and without resigning from the School of the answering resondent, the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, as its Head Mistress.
The petitioner has failed to prove the authenticity of the application, copy Annexure P-6, accompanied by the forwarding letter dated 881981 (part of Annexure P-6) inasmuch as there is no proof on the record to show that the petitioner had applied for the post of Head Mistress with BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, through proper channel with the prior permission of the Head Mistress/Management of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar.
As alredy refered to above, the originals of Annexure P-6 were still with the petitioner, which were produced before me during the course of arguments and as such the authenticity of these documents cannot be accepted.
If the petitioner had applied for the post of Head Mistress, vide application Annexure P-6, the original application containing the recommendatino dated 581981 from the Head Mistress of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, would not be with the petitioner.
Similarly, if the Principal of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar had made the recommendation dated 881981, which is part of Annexure P-6, the said recommendation would not be with the petitoner.
Under these circumstances, in my opinion, the authenticity of these documents cannot be accepted, especially when throughout the case of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, is that the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without any intimation to them and without seeking their permission etc.
This fact would be clear not only from the writen statenent filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, referred to above, but also from the copies of the various letters, which have been placed on the record.
Reference in this regard may be placed to the letter dated 981982, copy Annexure P-18 and subsequent letters exchanged between the petitioner and Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, which would clearly show that the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without even intimating Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar in this regard.
It appears that the petitioner applied for leave for 2 months period from 121982 to 3131982 and during the subsistence of the said period, she joined as Head Mistress with BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar on 121982 itself.
Under these circumstances, in my opinion, it would be clear that the petitioner joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, without applying for service in the said School through proper channel and without seeking permission from Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar in this regard.
Under the facts and circumstances, in my opinion, the petitioner would not be entitled to the continuity of service by combining the service in the two institutions, referred to above, inasmuch as she joined the BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar without permission/approval of the previsions employer i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar.
16.
It was then submitted before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner that under Clause 6(4) of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefits Scheme, 1992, in the case where the total qualifying service is less than 10 years, no pension benefit shall be admissible.
It was submitted that according to the respondents, the petitioner had started contributing to the aforesaid Scheme with effect from 11986 and since she had retired from service on 18111995, her qualifying service would come to 9 years 10 months and 8 days instead of 10 years of qualifying service.
It was submitted that under Rule 61 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. II, while calculating the length of service, fraction of/or equal to six months and above shall be treated as a completed 6 months period for the purpose of calculation of any pension.
It was submitted that in view of Rule 61 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. II, the qualifying service of 9 years 10 months and 8 days could be calculated as 10 years qualifying service and the petitioner would be entitled to the grant of pension under the aforesaid Scheme.
17.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the State submitted before me that the Punjab Civil Service Rules would have no application to the case of the petitioner.
It was submitted that in Rule 11 of the Punjab Civil Service Rule Vol.
I, it has been specifically mentioned that these Rules shall apply to all Government Employees, who are under the administrative control of the Punjab Government and whole pay is debitable to the consolidated fund of the State Government.
It was submitted that admittedly, the petitioner was neither a Government employee nor was under the administrative control of the Punjab Government and as such the Punjab Civil Service Rules would have no application to the case of the petitioner.
It was further submitted that in any case under Clause 28 of the aforesaid 1992 scheme, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the provisions of the said Scheme shall have over-riding effect.
Since the scheme was silent with regard to the fraction of the period while calculating the qualifying service, the period of 9 years, 10 months and 8 days could not be treated 10 years qualifying service.
18.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after perusing the record, in my opinion, the qualifying service of the petitioner, which comes to 9 years 10 months and 8 days, could not be treated as 10 years qualifying service by considering the fraction of the period, which was less than six months.
So far as the aforesaid Scheme under which the petitioner is covered is concerned, the said scheme is absolutely silent in respect of treating the fraction of the period of less than 6 months for the purpose of calculation of the pension.
If there is any such provision in Rule 61 of the Punjab Civil Service Rule Vol. II, in my opinion, the same would have no applicability to the case of the petitioner, especially when, Punjab Civil Service Rules are applicable only to the Punjab Government Employees and/or those employees to whom the competent authority may by general or special order make them applicable.
In the present case, nothing has come on the record to show that the Punjab Civil Service Rules were ever made applicable to the case of the petitioner.
Under these circumstances, in my opinion, the petitioner cannot take any benefit of the provisions of Rule 61 of the Punjab Civil Service Rule Vol. II.
This is especially so when under Clause 28 of the Scheme, it is mentioned that notwithstanding anything contained in any law or rule for the time being in force, the provisions of the said Scheme shall have over-riding effect.
Furthermore, Clauses 6(4) and 8 of the aforesaid Scheme specifically point out that an employee shall be entitled for the pension under the Scheme only after he completes 10 years of qualifying service.
19.
It was then submitted before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner that under Clause 6(5) of the aforesaid Scheme, the petitioner was entitled to count the service rendered by her in Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar while calculating the qualifying service for the purpose of retirement benefits.
However, I find no force in this submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Under Clause 6(5) of the aforesaid Scheme, it is provided that the service rendered on an aided post in another Privately Managed Recognised School in the State of Punjab, shall count for retirement benefits, provided that the contributory provident account of the employee in the previous School continued as such in the subsequent School to which he is transferred or appointed and there is no break in service.
In the present case, it is the admitted case of the parties that the contributory provident fund account of the petitioner in the previous School i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, did not continue as such in the subsequent School i.e. BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, to which the petitioner was appointed.
On the other hand, the specific case of Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar (respondent No. 4) in its written statement is that as long as the petitioner was working with the answering respondent, her contribution to the provident fund along with answering respondent's contribution was being duly deposited in the account of the petitioner, bearing account No. 11899069 in the post office, Kharar and that the petitioner could herself withdraw the amount whenever she wanted.
Annexure R- 1/A is the copy of the letter dated 1842001 sent by the Head Mistress of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, in which it was specifically mentioned that the employee's amount of CPF amounting to Rs. 28809/- was still lying in the post office vide Account No. 189069.
Furthermore, it is not the case of the petitioner that the contributory provident fund account of the petitioner in the previsions School i.e. Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, continued as such in the subsequent School i.e. BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, to which the petitioner was appointed.
In this view of the matter, in my opinion, the service rendered by the petitioner in Henderson Memorial Girls High School, Kharar, could not be counted for the purposes of retirement benefits, as per Clause 6(5) of the Scheme.
20.
It was then submitted before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner had joined BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar with effect from 121982 as its Head Mistress and had retired from service from the said School on 8111995 and in this manner, the petitioner had served the said School for 13 years 9 months and 7 days and as such it could not be said that the qualifying service of the petitioner was less than 10 years or that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of pensionary benefits.
It was further submitted that the petitioner had deposited the employer share amounting to Rs. 10665/- for the period from 121982 to 31121985 on 3071998 (during the pendency of the writ petition), as would be clear from the copy of the challan, Annexure P-14 and as such the entire period from 121982 to 8.1.1995 should be counted for the purpose of qualifying service.
Reliance was placed on Tej Ram v. Indian Overseas Bank and Others, JT 2002(6) SC 76 and Jai Parkash v. State of Haryana, 2003(1) SCT 412.
21.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted before me that the late deposit of the employer's share in the contributory provident fund on 3071998 would not entitle the petitioner to the pensionary benefits by treating the qualifying service of the petitioner as more than 10 years, especially when no explanation has come forward to show as to why the contributory of provident fund had not been deposited during the relevant period i.e. from 121982 to 30.12.1985.
It was submitted that the petitioner herself was the Head Mistress of the School and it was incumbent upon the petitioner herself to have deposited the employer's share as well as the employee's share of the provident fund in the contributory provident fund, so as to claim the benefit of the same in respect of the aforesaid Scheme.
It was further submitted that in any case the employer's share of the provident fund had been deposited by the petitioner without depositing the interest calculated thereon.
22.
Under Clause 6(6) of the aforesaid Scheme, it has been specifically provided that the qualifying service will be taken into account with effect from the date an employee started contribution towards on contributory provident fund.
In the present case, the petitioner being the Head Mistress of BSM Sikh Girls High School, Kharar, was required to contribute the employer's share as well as employee's share to the contributory provident fund for the period from 121982 to 31121985.
Admittedly, neither the petitioner had contributed to the provident fund nor the management had contributed its share to the contributory provident fund for the period from 121982 to 31121985 inspite of the fact that the petitioner herself was the Head Mistress of the said School during the relevant period.
The contribution to the contributory provident fund was started only with effect from 111986 till 8111995 when the petitioner retired from the service.
In this manner, the period for which the contributory provident fund was deposited was less than 10 years and in this manner the qualifying service would also come to less than 10 years.
If the petitioner had deposited the employer's share to the contributory provident fund for the period from 121982 to 31121985 during the pendency of the present writ petition, in my opinion, it would be of no help to the petitioner, especially when this deposit was required to be made at the relevant time i.e. for the period from 121982 to 31121985.
However, this was not done.
Any deposit made subsequently, in my opinion, could not be made the basis for holding that the petitioner had completed the qualifying service of 10 years for the purpose of pensionary benefits under the aforesaid scheme, especially when it is specifically mentioned in Clause 8 of the said Scheme that an employee shall be entitled for pension under the Scheme only after he completes 10 years of qualifying service and where the total qualifying service was less than 10 years, no pension benefits shall admissible as provided under Clauses 6(4) of the said scheme.
In this view of the matter, in my opinion, the petitioner having not completed 10 years of qualifying service, would not be entitled to the pension under the aforesaid Scheme even if she had deposited the employer's share of the contributory provident fund for the aforesaid period during the pendency of the present writ petition.
23.
The authority 2003(1) SCT 412 (supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, in my opinion, would have no application to the facts of the present case.
In the reported case, a sum of Rs. 19184 had been retained by the State Bank on account of non-receipt of the share from the Municipal Committee, Ladwa, which already stood deducted each month from the monthly salary bill of the petitioner.
The petitioner filed the writ petition seeking the release of his pension arrears amounting to Rs. 19184/-.
It was found by a Division Bench of this Court that the petitioner had taken loan of Rs. 5000/- and and this was also one of the reasons for sending less pension share.
It was also found that the petitioner had also taken advance of Rs. 5000 and Rs. 2000/- and this was also to be recovered from the provident fund of the petitioner at the time of final payment of GPF and it was for these reasons that the amounts were deducted from the pension of the petitioner.
Resultantly, the writ petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
In my opinion, the law laid down in this authority would have no application to the facts of the present cases.
In JT 2002(6) SC 76 (supra), the appellant was an employee of Indian Overseas Bank.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court for directing the Bank to allow him to be in the pension scheme in accordance with the Scheme of 1994 as well as the regulation of 1993, which was framed under the Staff Pension Scheme.
The High Court found that since the employee had not indicated the authorisation, which he was supposed to do within 60 days from the date of the scheme, the Bank was justified in refusing his prayer.
Before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that in accordance with the scheme that came into existence on 461994, the appellant had exercised his option on 291994 to the effect that the employee wanted to become a member of the Bank's Pension Scheme and authorised the Bank to transfer the entire contribution of the Bank along with interest accrued thereon to the credit of the pension funds to be created for the purpose.
It was also indicated by the employee that with effect from 1st November, 1993, the Bank shall not make any contribution to the provident fund account of the employee concerned.
It was not disputed by the Bank that the said authorisation was duly received by the Bank and that subsequent to the said authorisation, the Bank promulgated the regulation by Notification dated 1111995.
Since the appellant before the Hon'ble Supreme Court had exercised the option which did not reach the Bank within 60 days, but later than 60 days, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that it would be equitable to allow the appellant to be brought over to the pension Scheme evolved by the Bank particularly when the entire contributory provident fund stood transferred to the Bank account and there had been no contribution from the Bank since November, 1993.
In my opinion, the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this authority would also be of no help of the petitioner.
In the present case, as referred to above, the petitioner herself was the Head Mistress of the School for the period from 121982 to 31121985, the period during whcih the contributory provident fund was not deposited, either by the employer or by the employee and for this lapse the petitioner has herself to blame and now after such a long period, the petitioner cannot be allowed to come forward and claim the pensionary benefits by depositing the employer's share to the contributory provident fund on 3071998, in respect of the period from 121982 to 31121985.
No other point has been urged before me in this writ petition.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in this writ petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.