JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The dispute is between the petitioner and respondent No. 2.
Both are members of Scheduled Castes.
Initially respondent No. 2 was senior to the petitioner.
Both were considered for promotion to Class I.
The grant of actual promotion to respondent No. 2 was delayed on account of the pendency of enquiry.
The orders imposing minor penalties were passed.
Thereafter respondent No. 2 was promoted retrospectively with effect from the same date as the one on which the petitioner was promoted.
On April 19, 1989, the Govt. passed two orders.
By the first order it was declared that respondent No. 2 had completed the period of probation without any extension.
By the second order the petitioner was ordered to be reverted from the post of Superintending Engineer to that of Executive Engineer.
The attempt on the part of the Government was to restore the seniority of respondent No. 2 vis-a-vis the petitioner.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner, a Graduate in Civil Engineering, was appointed as a Sub-Divisional Engineer on October 19, 1970.
On June 13, 1976, the petitioner was promoted as an Executive Engineer on purely ad hoc basis.
3.
The members of the Class-I Service are eligible for appointment to the Class-I Service by promotion.
Appointments to Class-I service are governed by the Rules called The Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Class-I Rules.)
In accordance with the provision of Rule 8, a committee was constituted to consider the claims of the various eligible persons.
The Committee met in December, 1977.
Recommendations of the Committee were considered by the Government and finally by the Commission.
On November 10, 1978, the Commission forwarded the final list of persons considered suitable for promotion to Class-I service.
A copy of this communication has been placed on record as Annexure R-2/4.
In pursuance to this, vide order dated October 10, 1979, the petitioner was promoted as an Executive Engineer.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P.1.
On May 7, 1981, it was declared that the petitioner had completed his period of probation successfully w.e.f.
October 9, 1980.
The petitioner has produced a copy of this order as Annexure P.3.
On February 19, 1988, the petitioner was provisionally promoted as a Superintending Engineer.
4.
Respondent No. 2 had competed with the petitioner for direct recruitment to the Class-II service.
He was placed higher than the petitioner in order of merit.
Consequently, even though respondent No. 2 had joined service as a Sub-Divisional Engineer on November 11, 1970, while the petitioner had so joined on October 19, 1970, he was senior to the petitioner in Class-II service.
Presumably on the basis of that seniority, respondent No. 2 was promoted as an Executive Engineer on ad hoc basis, vide order dated May 26, 1975 while the petitioner had been similarly promoted on June 13, 1976.
A copy of this order has been produced on record by respondent No. 2 with his written statement as Annexure R-2/1.
He was considered along with the petitioner for promotion to Class-I service.
The Screening Committee had declared respondent No. 2 suitable for promotion to the Class-I service subject to the result of the pending enquiry.
However, after the meeting of the Screening Committee, the State Government informed the Public Service Commission through the Chief Engineer vide its letter dated January 9, 1978, that the enquiry against respondent No. 2 had been dropped.
Accordingly, while forwarding the list of suitable candidates, the commission in its communication of November 10, 1978, inter alia observed that "the Commission, therefore, accords approval for promotion to PSE Class-I Service in Public Health Branch in respect of Kanwar Jaswant Rai ........"  5.
In spite of the fact that the Commission had approved respondent No. 2 for promotion to Class-I Service, the Government did not promote him on October 10, 1979 when various other persons were actually promoted.
This was on account of the fact that inquires were pending against the respondent.
The enquiries culminated in passing of the two orders dated May 18, 1982 and September 27, 1984.
Copies of these two orders are at Annexures P6 and P.7.
By the first order, a punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect was imposed on respondent No. 2.
By the second order of September 27, 1984, the respondent was censured.
After the completion of the enquiries the Government issued an order dated February 21, 1985 promoting respondent No. 2 as an Executive Engineer w.e.f.
October 10, 1979.
A copy of this order has been produced by the respondent with his written statement as Annexure R2/6.
Vide order dated February 19, 1988, it was declared that the respondent had completed his period of probation, successfully w.e.f.
April 10, 1982.
"Thereafter, the Government issued two orders dated April 19, 1989.
By the first order, it was observed that "in pursuance of Rule 11 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class-I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961, the President of India is pleased to declare that Kanwar Jaswant Rai, Executive Engineer, PW (Public Health Branch) has successfully completed his probation period of one year without extension on 15.4.1982...." Another order was passed in consultation with the department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
The seniority of respondent No. 2 over the petitioner was ordered to be restored.
He was further directed to be promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer.
The petitioner was ordered to be reverted and posted as Executive Engineer.
Aggrieved by the restoration of the seniority of respondent No. 2 and his reversion to the post of Executive Engineer while respondent No. 2 had been directed to be promoted in his place, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
A prayer for the issue an appropriate writ, order or direction for the quashing of the orders dated April 19, 1989 has been made in this petition.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that respondent No. 2 having been found guilty of the charges levelled against him and the two orders of punishment having been passed against him, he could not have been promoted with retrospective effect, so as to upset the seniority of the petitioner.
It has been further contended that the impugned order is absolutely arbitrary and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
A specific reference has been made to an order dated May 31, 1985 passed in the case of Sh. MS Kaushal and MS Kailey to contend that these two officers had been reverted from the post of Executive Engineer to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer only on the award of the punishment of censure and warning respectively.
Respondent No. 2 has been promoted in spite of the fact that two punishments have been imposed on him.
It has been further contended that in accordance with the provisions of the Class-I Rules respondent No. 2 cannot be senior to the petitioner.
7.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia contended that respondent No. 2 had been found to be suitable by the Commission along with the petitioner on November 10, 1978.
Learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 further pointed out that the Government had acted arbitrarily in not promoting respondent in spite of his having been found to be suitable by the Commission when person junior to the said respondent were actually promoted.
According to the learned counsel, the Government has merely undone the injustice done to respondent No. 2 by passing the impugned order.
The respondents maintain that the action is in strict conformity with the Rules and does not suffer from any infirmity whatsoever.
Mrs Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondent-State had produced before me certain files in support of the contentions raised by her on behalf of the Government.
8.
Admittedly, the conditions of service governing the petitioner and respondent No. 2 are laid down in the rules called the Punjab Service of Engineer, Class-I PWD (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961.
Rule 8 of these rules provides as under :-  "8.
Appointment by promotion.
:- (1) A Committee consisting of the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend any other member of the Commission representing it, the Secretary, PWD (Public Health Branch), and the Chief Engineer, PWD, Public Health Branch, shall be constituted.
2) The Chairman or the member of the Commission, as the case may be, shall preside over the meetings of the Committee.
3) The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year, and consider the cases of the eligible officers for promotion to the senior scale of the service, as on the first day of January of that year.
4) the Committee shall prepare a list of officers suitable for promotion to the senior scale of the service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regards to seniority.
5) The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Class-II Service.
Provided that any junior officer, who in the opinion of the Committee is of exceptional merit and suitability, may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him.
6) The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
7) If in the process of preparing the list or its revision, it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officers and may record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
8) The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rule (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government along with :-  (i) the records of all officers included in the list;  (ii) records of all officers proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee;  (iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any officer;  (iv) the observations, if any, of the State Government on recommendations of the Committee.
9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by Committee along with other documents from the State Government and, unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from the Government, the Commission shall inform the Government of the changes proposed and after taking into account the views, if any, of the Government, may approve the list finally with such modification, if any, as may in its opinion, be just and proper.
11) Appointment to the Service shall be made by the Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
12) Appointment by promotion may be made to an ex cadre post, or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list prepared under this rule.
13) It shall not ordinarily be necessary to consult the Commission before appointment under sub-rule (11) and sub-rule (12) are made, unless during the period intervening between the inclusion of the name of the officer in the list and the date of the proposed appointment there occurs any deterioration in the work of the officer, which, in the opinion of the Government, is such as to render him unsuitable for appointment to the Service."
A perusal of the above rules shows that the Committee constituted under this rule has to meet at intervals ordinarily not exceeding one year and the list has to be revised every year.
As observed by a Division Bench of this Court in OP Jindal v. State, CWP No. 4377 of 1973 decided on September 6, 1976 this rule embodies a directory provision regarding the meeting of the Committee.
Further, on a perusal of Clause (11) it is apparent that the appointment to the Service have to be made by the Government from the list as approved by the Commission under Clause (10) in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission."
The only situation in which a departure may be made from this Rule is when the conditions as laid down in Clause (13) viz., deterioration in the work of an officer which in the opinion of the Govt., is such as to render him unsuitable occurs during the period intervening between the inclusion of the name of the officer in the list and the date of the proposed appointment is clearly established.
Has anything like this happened ?
9.
Admittedly, respondent No. 2 was senior to the petitioner in the Class II service, it is also not contended that the petitioner was found to be a person of outstanding merit and was thus placed higher in the list than respondent No. 2.
Consequently, in view of the provisions of clause (5) as produced above, the names had to be included in the list "in order of seniority in Class-II services".
Accordingly, the name of respondent No. 2 would appear higher than that of the petitioner.
Still further, it is the admitted position that vide order dated November 10, 1978, a copy of which has been placed on the record with the written statement of respondent No. 2, the Commission had approved the inclusion of the name of respondent No. 2 in the list of suitable candidates.
Further, the appointments to the Class-I service had to be made from the list in the order in which the names were placed by the Commission.
In other words, the appointments had to be made in the order of seniority in the Class-II service.
Accordingly, respondent No. 2 had a right to be appointed to the Class I service prior to the petitioner if owing to the pending of an enquiry he was actually not promoted on October 10, 1979 when the petitioner was promoted, the Government was not precluded from appointing him later on with effect from the same date as the one on which the petitioner had been promoted.
This is precisely what has been done by the impugned order.
Accordingly the action of the State Govt. does not appear to be in violation of the Rule.
Further, no one has even suggested that there was any situation as contemplated under clause (13) and that the Govt. had noticed any deterioration in the working of respondent No. 2 during the period between November 10, 1978 and October 10, 1979.
10.
Mr. Sarjit Singh, however, contends on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in S Nagaraja v. Vasant K Gudodagi and others, AIR 1990 SC 1377 that the Government cannot retrospectively promote a person so as to affect the seniority of another who has already been appointed.
This was a case where the inter se dispute was between a direct recruit and a promotee.
The Govt. had ordered promotion retrospectively of an Assistant Director in spite of the fact that a direct recruit had already been confirmed on the post, and retrospective promotion was not covered by the provisions of the rules.
In this view of the matter, the Tribunal had taken the view that the retrospective promotion was illegal.
This view was sustained by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
In the present case, however, the dispute is between promotees only.
Further, the mandate of the rule is clear.
The appointments to the service have to be made in the order in which the names appear in the list.
It is not shown that the name of respondent No. 2 did not appear above that of the petitioner.
Further, it has also not been shown that the list as approved by the Commission in the year 1978 had been subsequently revised so as to place the petitioner higher than respondent No. 2.
In this situation, no fault can be found with the impugned order.
11.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner was promoted vide order dated October 10, 1979 subject to the condition that the order "is without prejudice to the question of inter se seniority of the above officers vis-a-vis others in the category of Executive Engineer whose cases are pending or would be rescreened etc. etc." The claim of respondent No. 2 had yet to be decided.
The Govt. took the final decision, vide order dated March 20, 1985, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-2/6 on the record when it promoted respondent No. 2 with effect from October 10, 1979.
In view of the specific stipulation in the order promoting the petitioner that it was without prejudice to the question of inter se seniority, no vested right of the petitioner can be said to have been affected in the circumstances of the present case.
12.
It was then contended that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and discriminatory.
It was pointed out that M/s MS Kaushal and MS Kailey had been promoted as Executive Engineers and on the award of punishment of censure and warning respectively to the two officers, they were reverted from the posts of Executive Engineers to those of Sub-Divisional Engineers.
On this premises, it has been contended that the action was discriminatory and was thus arbitrary.
Reference in this behalf was made to the order dated May 31, 1985 passed by the Govt.  13.
A perusal of the order referred to above shows that these officers had been promoted as Executive Engineers on ad hoc basis.
Their cases were referred to the Punjab Public Service Commission for approval in the light of the punishments, awarded to them.
The Commission had declined to accord approval to their appointments.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
Herein, the Govt. has considered and found the respondent suitable for promotion with effect from the date of person junior to him was promoted and the Punjab Public Service Commission had not refused to accord approval to this promotion.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination or arbitrariness.
The contention is accordingly rejected.
14.
It was also contended that originally the period of probation of respondent No. 2 was extended, vide order dated February 19, 1988.
However later on, by the impugned order the Govt. had declared that Kanwar Baswant Rai had cleared his probation without any extension and thus restored his original seniority.
This decision was taken by the Govt. on the advice of the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
It has held that respondent No. 2 had completed the period of probation of one year without any extension on April 15, 1982.
The detailed order passed in this behalf has been produced as Annexure R-2/8 with the written statement filed by respondent No. 2.
Nothing has been pointed out from the record to show that the performance of respondent No. 2 as an Executive Engineer was found wanting.
It is also clear from the provisions of rule 11 that period of officiation shall be reckoned "as period spent on probation ......" The period of probation could have been extended only if it was found that the performance was not satisfactory.
That is not the case.
In such a situation, no fault can be found with the action of the State Govt.
If it has the effect of restoring the seniority of respondent No. 2, it cannot be helped.
The Govt. has merely corrected an error.
No principles of natural justice were attracted.
It cannot be said that a member of the service has a right to be heard before the Govt. decides a representation against its order extending an officer's period of probation.
It is a matter directly between the Govt. and the employee.
Principles of natural justice are not attracted in such a situation.
15.
It is not correct that the Govt. had initially promoted the petitioner and ignored a person senior to him on account of the pendency of certain enquiries.
However, after the culmination of the inquiries, the Govt. has considered respondent No. 2 to be suitable for appointment with effect from the date of persons junior to him were promoted.
The action is neither without jurisdiction nor so arbitrary so as to shock the conscience of the Court.
In such a situation, no case for interference in the exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
16.
There is another aspect of the matter, Respondent No. 2 was appointed as an Executive Engineer with effect from October 10, 1979, vide order dated March 20, 1985.
This order has not been challenged by the petitioner.
Further, the only orders impugned are those passed on April 19, 1989 copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-4 and P-4/A By the order at Annexure P-4 it was declared that respondent No. 2 had completed his period of probation of April 15, 1982 without any extension.
Further the petitioner who had been promoted as a Superintending Engineer "on a provisional basis subject to the vigilance enquiry pending against him .... against a newly created temporary post" and without prejudice to the claim of others and will not establish any right of higher seniority as Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer cannot claim that his rights have been adversely affected by the action of the State Govt. His promotion was expressly stated to be provisional without any right to higher seniority and without prejudice to the claim of others.
By the impugned order of Govt. has found that respondent No. 2 who was senior to the petitioner was entitled to the restoration of this position and promotion as Superintending Engineer.
No infirmity can be found in the action of the State Govt. A provisional promotion like the one granted to the petitioner, vide order dated February 19, 1988 did not confer any indefeasible right.
No other ground was urged.
Accordingly there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.