Sivaraman Nair, J - I ascertained from the Government Pleader as to whether the Government had received any representation from either of the parties.
I was told that there was no such representation.
It is surprising that the 4th respondent who had not protested against his transfer from 3rd respondent factory in any representation before any competent officer or the Government could obtain the impugned order cancelling his transfer in spite of the department requiring him to implement the earlier order dt. 28.8.91.
That was obviously because he had a patron to take up his cause.
The only reason mentioned in the letter of the M.L.A.
for retransfer of the 4th respondent to the 3rd respondent factory was that the petitioner was a relative of another Minister, due to whose influence, he was transferred to the 3rd respondent before the 4th respondent could complete even one and half years at Renigunta.
Apparently not to lag behind, the petitioner also moved through a Minister for his retention at Renigunta, stating that the 4th respondent "is moving earth and heaven to come back as M.D.
He is a local man belonging to Srikalahasti area and the petitioner was working for the interests of roots who were happy and did not want any change.
Apart from these two letters, the only other material in the file is the telegram allegedly sent by the Secretary of the Employees Union of the 3rd respondent Factory, in favour of the 4th respondent.
I do not find any administrative exigency as justifying the impugned order as mentioned anywhere in the files.
Nor do I find any reference to any personal representation of either of the parties requiring posting or retention at Renigunta.
They seem to have been conducting a proxy war through influential patrons.
It appears that what was important was the prestige of the patrons and their factional interests and not administrative exigencies nor any genuine difficulty of either of the two contestants in carrying out administrative orders regarding transfer and posting.
I would have expected the administrative authorities wielding power to consider relevant matters in passing orders of transfer and posting of personnel under their control.
In the normal course, they should also have taken note of the refusal to carry out government orders in spite of reminders and the attempts to influence decisions of the government in routine administrative matters through patrons.
Unfortunately, these were the only factors which figured no-where while passing the impugned order.
The Supreme Court had occasion to consider the effect of irrelevant considerations influencing administrative decisions or relevant factors being overlooked by administrative authorities in SR Venkatarman v. Union of India, 1979 (1) SLR 130 (SC) in the following words :  "it is however not necessary to examine the question of malice in law in this case, for it is trite law that if a discretionary power has been exercised for an unauthorised purpose, it is generally immaterial whether it's repository, was acting in good faith or in bad faith.
As was satated by Lord Goddard, CJ., in Pilling v. Abergele Urban District Council (1950) (1) KB 636) where a duty to determine a question is conferred on an authority which state that reasons for the decision and the reasons which they state show that they have taken into account matters which they ought not to have taken into account, or that they have failed to take matters into account which they ought to have taken into account, the court to which an appeal lies can and ought to adjudicate on the matter."
It is true that transferability is an incidental service; and if an officer is transferred in administrative exigencies, courts will not interfere with such orders of transfer.
But in cases where it is alleged that the power of transfer was used for collateral purposes or as an instrument of harassment or for punishing an employee, different considerations arise.
Such may be frequent orders of transfer unrelated to any administrative exigency.
In Shanti Kumari v. Regional Deputy Director, 1981 (3) SLR 215 (SC) the Supreme Court observed :-  "the authorities ordering transfer of employees are bound to act in a reasonable manner and any complaint of unreasonableness must be considered by the authority superior to that which orders transfer."
In R. Vardha Rao v. State of Karnataka, 1986 SC 1955 the court observed :  "it is no doubt true that if the power of transfer is abused, the exercise of the power is vitiated" and "One cannot but deprecate that frequent, unscheduled and unreasonable transfers can uproot a family, cause irreparable harm to a Government servant and drive him to desperation.
It disrupts the education of his children and leads to numerous other complications and problems and results in hardship and demoralisation.
It should be reasonable and fair and should apply to everybody equally.
But, at the same time, it cannot be forgotten that so far as superior or more responsible posts are concerned, continued posting at one station or in one department or the Government is not conducive to good administration.
It creates vested interest and therefore we find that even from the British times the general policy has been to restrict the period of posting for a definite period."
In Gujarat Electricity Board v. Atmaram, 1989 (2) SLR 684 (SC) the court observed :  "Transfer of a Government servant appointed to a particular cadre of transferable posts from one place to another is an incident of service.
No Government servant or employee of Public Undertaking has legal right for being posted at any particular place.
Transfer from one place to other is generally a condition of service and the employee has no choice in the matter.
Transfer from one place to an another is necessary in public interest and efficiency in public administration.
Whenever, a public servant is transferred he must comply with the order but if there be any genuine difficulty in proceeding on transfer, it is open to him to make representation to the competent authority for stay, modification or cancellation of the transfer order.
If the order of transfer is not stayed, modified or cancelled the concerned public servant must carry out the order of transfer.
If public servant has no justification to avoid or evade the transfer order merely on ground of having made a representation, or on the ground of his difficulty in moving from one place to the other.
If he fails to proceed on transfer in compliance to the transfer order, he would expose himself to disciplinary action under the relevant rules, as has happened in the instant case.
In a still later decision in Union of India v. HN Kirtania, 1989 (4) SLR 9 (SC) the Supreme Court observed :  "Transfer of a public servant made on administrative grounds or in public interest should not be interfered with, unless there are strong and pressing grounds rendering the transfer order illegal on the ground of violation of statutory rules or on ground of mala fides."
Dealing with a similar question Lord Denning observed in Merricks v. Not Bower, 1964 WLR 702 at p. 707 :  "It is a well known principle of our law that any power conferred by statute or regulation on an executive or administrative authority must be exercised in good faith for the purpose for which they are granted.
They must not be misused or abused by being applied to an ulterior purpose.
Whether that principle applies here or not, I do not say, all I do say is that if the plaintiffs allege, as they do, that this was a misuse of the power of transfer, that it was used, nor for the purpose of good administration and efficiency but for the motive of punishment they have an arguable case which they are entitled to have tried by the courts."
Held that it is necessary to ensure that orders of transfer are issued in bona fide exercise of administrative power, in public interest, in exigencies of administration and the requirements of public service.
It shall not be used for purposes which are totally extraneous to the above considerations or to settle personal scores between patrons who take civil servants under their wings.
It is always better and safer to leave the question of transfer and postings of government servants to be handled by top personnel in the department after laying down policy guidelines which should usually apply to all such cases.
The power of transfer shall not be used for extraneous purposes; it shall be confined to considerations which are germane and relevant.
It is necessary that orders of transfer shall be made or modified only on the basis of the above considerations).
(It is not so much public interest but perhaps the weight of the patrons that determined the fate of the parties.
The only fact that such persons undertake to plead the cause of a government servant shall not, by itself, be the only reason for ordering or modifying transfers.
Unfortunately that was exactly what happened in this case.
I am, therefore, not in a position to uphold the impugned order transferring the petitioner out of the 3rd respondent-Society to accommodate the 4th respondent.)
(I am in no position to hold that all was well with the manner in which the petitioner was inducted as the Managing Director of the 3rd respondent-Society.
The file does not indicate that the 4th respondent was transferred out due to any administrative reasons or that it was decided to retain him at Renigunta due to any representation relating to his personal problems which disabled him from complying with that order.
I would have expected the parties to place their respective cases before the concerned administrative authorities for dispassionate consideration and unbiased decision.
That was however what they refused to do; and apparently at least one of them was duly rewarded.
I, therefore, quash the order G.O.
Rt.
No. 981 Industries & Commerce (S-II) Department, dt. 30101991.
Order accordingly.