RS Mongia, J The petitioner appeared in the Common Entrance Test conducted by the Panjab University for seeking admission to Bachelor of Engineer Course (for short BE Course) for Session 1992-93 in the sports category against the seats reserved for sportsmen.
17 seats were reserved for the candidates belonging to sports category in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
After the Common Entrance Test and the interview petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 19 in the said category.
Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 namely Tejbir Singh and Harish Gandhi were placed at Sr. Nos. 17 and 18 respectively in the merit list of the candidates belonging to sports category.
2.
One Shri Shorab Jain who had applied for admission to BE Course in the Punjab Engineering College at Chandigarh in the general category claimed admission against the seat reserved for sportsmen, but his claim was rejected by the college authorities.
He filed civil writ petition in this Court (C.W.P.
No. 10521 of 1992) seeking a direction to the respondents for granting admission to him in the reserved category of sportsmen.
The said writ petition was admitted and interim directions were given to the college authorities to keep one seat vacant in the BE Course.
In the said petition Tejbir Singh, who is respondent No. 4 in the present writ petition and was placed at Sr. No. 17, in the merit list of the category of sportsmen, got himself impleaded as party as the success of the writ petition filed by Shorab Jain would have adversely effected him.
However, the said writ petition was dismissed by learned single Judge of this Court on 1091992.
3.
Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 in the meantime had got admission in BE Course in Thapar Engineering College, Patiala and College of Architecture, Chandigarh and consequently petitioner's merit in the sports category came to 17.
After the dismissal of writ petition of Shorab Jain, petitioner moved the college authorities that he be granted admission on the basis of his merit in the sports category as one seat was lying vacant.
The petitioner also approached the Vice-Chancellor of the Panjab University and vide his communication dated 22101992. the Vice Chancellor recommended the late admission of the petitioner in the college.
The petitioner, however, was not granted admission by the college authorities on the ground that a notice of motion in the Letters Patent Appeal filed by Shorab Jain has been received by them.
It may be stated that in the Letters Patent Appeal there were no interim directions not to fill in the seat.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by Sborab Jain was dismissed by this Court on 30th October, 1992.
Again the petitioner moved the college authorities for granting him admission and even the Vice Chancellor of the Panjab University again gave fresh sanction for grant of late admission to the petition.
It may be pertinent to note here that respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had given in writing that they were no more interested in the admission in BE Course in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
In spite of all this, the petitioner was not granted admission and consequently he filed the present writ petition.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the College authorities it is not denied that one seat in the sports category is vacant.
However, the objection being taken is that the writ petition is belated inasmuch as in December, 1992 the students of Ist Semester have already been promoted to the 2nd Semester.
5.
After going through the pleadings of the respective parties and after hearing the petitioner, I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
The BE Course is of four years duration leading to a degree of Bachelor in Engineering.
This four years course has been divided into eight semesters.
A candidate is deemed to have passed the Ist year if he clears both Ist and 2nd Semester.
A candidate can clear all the papers of the 1st and 2nd Semester simultaneously and this is not the requirement of any rule or regulation that for being promoted to 2nd Semester a candidate must clear all the papers of 1st Semester.
In these circumstances, the petitioner can be deemed to have appeared in the 1st Semester examination and failed in all the papers.
In the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner illustrations have been given where under similar circumstances earlier the college had allowed admission in the 2nd Semester somewhere in February of the year.
He has mentioned the names of one Alok Dhawan and Mr. Cheema who got admissions in the 2nd Semester in February, 1992 in the session 1991-92.
The petitioner immediately after the dismissal of Shorab Jain's writ petition approached the college authorities to grant him admission as respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were no more interested.
Even the Vice Chancellor of the Panjab University to which the Punjab Engineering College is affiliated sanctioned the late admission of the petitioner.
Time and again, it has been observed by this court as also by the apex Court that any seat in professional colleges should not go abegging as not only a candidate suffers in not getting admission but the nation as a whole suffers.
The college authorities do not gain anything by keeping one seat vacant.
In the present case, a seat had been kept vacant by this Court's order in Shorab Jain's cases.
If Shorab Jain was not to get that seat, the person on the merit list at Sr. No. 17 was to get that seat.
Since candidate s at Sr. No. 17 and 18 (respondent Nos. 4 and 5) gave up their right of being admitted to the college the petitioner was entitled to the admission against that seat being the next candidate.
There is no justification with the respondents to deny admission to the petitioner who otherwise was entitled to the admission.
Once the candidates higher in the merit than the petitioner i.e. respondent Nos. 4 and 5 made room for the petitioner, the college authorities were bound to offer the seat to the petitioner.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents-authorities are directed to admit the petitioner in BE Course Sessions 1992-93 in the 2nd Semester by deemingly taking him having failed in all the papers of 1st Semester.
Of course, he will have to pay all the dues of the 1st semester also.
The respondents are directed to grant admission forthwith to the petitioner in the BE Course in that discipline where his turn on the basis of his merit would have come.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.