Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioners were working in the Panjab University before their allocation to Punjab School Education Board.
The conditions of service of the petitioners were governed by the statutory regulations framed by the Panjab University.
Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) while absorbing the petitioners in the service of the Board it was decided that conditions of service of the persons, who were to be brought from the Panjab University would be the same as are applicable to them in the Panjab University at the time of their leaving the Panjab University.
Individual letters were also issued to the employees of the University who were allocated to the Board that their conditions of service would not be changed.
2.
In the Panjab University, there is no provision of reservation in promotions for the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
The policy of reservation in promotions had not been made applicable to the employees there.
That on 451975, the Board adopted the policy of the Panjab Government for reservation in promotion for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-3.
According to the instructions, 14% of the posts for promotion to or within class I & II categories have been reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes and 2 per cent for the members belonging to the Backward Classes.
Petitioners nave contended that there was no policy of reservation in promotions in Panjab University regulations for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes when they joined the Board after getting relieved from the Panjab University and their conditions of service as per the decision taken at the time of transfer to Board could not be changed and, therefore, the adoption of the policy of reservation by the Board would amount to a change in the conditions of service and, thus bad in law.
The appointment of respondents 2 and 3 in the cadre of Superintendents has been challenged on the ground that the petitioners are seniors as Assistants to them and, therefore, entitled to be promoted prior to them.
3.
Detailed written statement has been filed by the Board.
It has been pleaded that conditions of service have not been changed.
The chance of promotion is not a condition of service and, therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to the writ prayed for.
I have perused the writ petition as well as the written statement with the help of the counsel for respondent No. 2.
4.
It has been held by the Supreme Court as well as by this Court in a number of judgments that chance of promotion is not a condition of service.
Petitioners have not been deprived of their right of consideration for the post.
The matter on this point stands squarely concluded by a Full Bench of this Court in Kanwal Parkash and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1976(2) SLR 801 where it has been observed as under :  "......Last of all, it was argued that the reservation of seats for the members of the scheduled castes/tribes adversely affects the conditions of service of the petitioners and before increasing this percentage of reservation, the Stale Government should have obtained prior approval of the Central Government under Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1906.
In the State of Mysore and another v. GN Purohit and others, 1967 SLR 753, the Supreme Court held that chances of promotion are no( conditions of service.
This view was followed with respect by a Division Bench of this Court of which I was a member in a case relating to similar executive instructions in Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1975(1) SLR 241.
It was held that chances of promotion especially when their availability is remote and speculative in nature cannot be regarded as conditions of service.
This contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is accordingly repelled."
Accordingly it is held that by providing for reservation in promotions, conditions of service of the petitioners have not been changed.
5.
The second point pleaded by the petitioners in their writ petition is that no benefit of reservation in excess of the prescribed percentage can lie given to the members belonging to the reserved categories.
For this, reliance has been placed upon a judgment of this Court in Joginder Singh Sethi and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1983(1) SLR 442.
In the written statement filed, it has been stated that there is no conflict between the Government's policy and the judgment in question.
Petitioners have failed to place on record enough material to show that benefit of reservation has been extended in excess of the prescribed percentage to the persons belonging to the reserved categories.
I find no merit in this writ petition, and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.