Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Research Associate in the Department of Family Resource Management at the Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar, is aggrieved by the action of the University in considering her as ineligible for the post of Assistant Professor (Family Resource Management).
She filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4201 of 1991 when she was not being called for interview, for the post.
In pursuance to the orders of the motion Bench, she was interviewed but was not selected.
She then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4827 of 1991 challenging the selection of Miss Kiran Kairon and Miss Sunita Narang who have been impleaded as respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
2.
Since the facts and the points of controversy are inter-related, both the petitions viz. CWP Nos. 4827 and 4201 of 1991 are being disposed of by this common order.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner passed B.Sc.
(Home Science) Examination from the Haryana Agricultural University, in 1984.
She secured an overall grade point average of 373 out of 400.
In 1986, the petitioner qualified her MSc (Home Management) Examination from the MS University, Baroda.
A copy of the Certificate awarded by the University has been produced as Annexure P-1.
A perusal of the certificate shows that the petitioner is shown to have secured a grade point average of 478 out of 700.
Her final Class Grade has been described as `A'.
A perusal of this certificate further shows that the academic performance of a candidate is assessed in three forms viz. Grade, points and percentage.
It is apt to reproduce the exact provision :-  "Grade Description of grade Points Range of points of grade Equivalence of % O Outstanding 6 5.6-600 80% & above A Very Good 5 46-559 70% to 79% B Good 4 3.6 to 459 60% to 69% C Average/Fair 3 26-359 50% to 59% D Satisfactory/Below Average 2 1.6-2.59 45% to 49% E Poor/Pass 1 10-159 40% to 44% F Fail/Very Poor 099 0-099 39% & fail" On the basis of the above, the petitioner claims that with grade point average of 478, she has secured 72% marks in her MSc Examination and has been graded as `Very Good'.
After passing the MSc Examination, the petitioner was awarded Research Fellowship at the respondent-University where she joined in October, 1986.
She worked as a Research Fellow till August, 1987 when on her appointment to a teaching post at the Mohta College, Rajgarh, she relinquished her Research Fellowship.
She worked there till April 18, 1989.
In December 1989, the petitioner came back to the respondent-university as a Research Associate in the Department of Family Resource Management.
She continues to hold this post to date.
4.
The University advertised a post of Assistant Professor (F.R.M.)
in the year 1988.
The petitioner was one of the candidates who applied for this post.
She was interviewed on August 18, 1988, and was placed in the merit list at No. 2.
However, no appointment was made in pursuance to this advertisement.
The post was re-advertised in July, 1989.
The petitioner as also various other persons applied.
No interviews were held.
As a result, no selection was made.
The post was advertised for the third time on July 10, 1990.
However, again no interview or selection took place.
The post was advertised for the fourth time on December 4, 1990.
An extract of this advertisement was originally placed with the affidavit as Annexure P-6.
Subsequently, with an additional affidavit, another extract was produced as Annexure P-16.
5.
A perusal of the letter dated December 4, 1990 through which this advertisement was circulated within the University shows that it had been issued by Mr. GP Narang, Assistant Registrar (Recruitment), who is stated to be the father of respondent No. 4.
Further alongwith this advertisement, certain instructions/conditions were also circulated.
A copy of these has been produced by the University as Annexure R3/1 with the written statement.
It was inter alia provided that "the eligibility of candidates who have passed degree examinations under OGPA system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of the percentage of marks shown in their degree after conversion of OGPA and the eligibility of candidates passing degree examinations under traditional system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of percentage of marks shown in the approved qualifications The OGPA equivalent to 400 in the case of candidates who have obtained OGPA out of 300, 500, 600, 1000 etc. shall be worked out ......" It was further provided that "the applicants must possess prescribed qualifications and experience on the last date of receipt of applications.
Those who have submitted the thesis by last date of receipt of application can also be considered and they must attach certificate from the competent authority about the submission of thesis by the last date of receipt of applications."
6.
The petitioner avers that in spite of her being eligible, she was not called for interview.
Consequently, she filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4201 of 1991 on March 18, 1991.
The matter was considered by the Motion Bench on the same day when a direction for the issue of notice of motion for April 10, 1991 was given.
It was further ordered that "the petitioner shall also be permitted to appear in the interview at her own risk and responsibility and subject to final decision of the writ petition."
The interviews were actually held on March 20, 1991.
Five candidates had appeared.
Out of these two, viz. Miss Shashi Gupta and Miss Sangita were declared ineligible.
Out of the remaining three, respondent Nos. 3 and 4, viz. Miss Kiran Kairon and Miss Sunita Narang were selected while the petitioner was rejected.
Aggrieved by this, the petitioner has filed the present petition and impugned the selection of respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
It has been averred that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had appeared in their MSc examination in December, 1990.
The degree has been formally completed by them only in January, 1991 and that they did not have teaching experience of a single day to their credit.
As against this, the petitioner had three years' teaching experience to her credit, besides a meritorious academic career.
It has been further averred that the Selection Committee had allocated 24 marks for educational qualifications, 15 for interview, 5 for experience and six for publications.
The marks for educational qualifications were further divided under three heads, viz. Ph.D, MSc and B.Sc.
In each of these examinations, a candidate who had secured 1st class was entitled to the award of 8 marks while those placed in 2nd Class were entitled to the award of 5 marks.
Similarly, out of 15 marks allocated for interview, 9 were to be awarded for `general questions' six for `extempore'.
The petitioner avers that she has been awarded 255 marks while respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had been awarded 31 and 27 marks respectively.
According to the break-up given by the petitioner, it is shown that while respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were awarded 8 marks each for the qualification of MSc, she was treated to have been awarded a 2nd class and given only five marks.
It further appears that in the interview respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were awarded 14 and 11 marks respectively while the petitioner was given only five marks.
Further more, four marks have been given to the petitioner for her publications and three for experience.
As a result she got a total of 25 marks.
It is claimed that she had secured 722% marks in her MSc and was entitled to be assessed as having been placed in 1st division.
The University has wrongly treated her to have been placed in the 2nd division.
Accordingly, it is pleaded that she was entitled to the award of 8 marks for her MSc and if these were given to her, her scores would have been higher than that of respondent No. 4.
Respondent No. 3 had secured 31 while respondent No. 4 has secured only 27 marks.
It has also been averred that even according to the criterion followed by the respondent-University even if the petitioner was treated to have secured a gross point average of 273 out of 400, she would be deemed to have secured a total percentage of 642 which would entitle her to the award 8 marks.
The petitioner also states that the award of 14 marks to respondent No. 3 and 11 marks to respondent No. 4 while only five marks have been awarded to her shows "the favourtism and nepotism which has played a vital role in the impugned selection."
It has also been averred that in fact there are three posts of Assistant Professors (FRM) which are lying vacant.
In spite of the fact that only one post had been advertised, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were likely to be appointed against the available vacancies.
The petitioner states that "as both of them are fortunate enough that their fathers presently hold very responsible administrative posts in the respondent-University and in view of the personal interest taken by them, there seems to be no hindrance in appointment of both the respondents."
It has been further mentioned that the father of respondent No. 3, Dr. MS Kairon is holding the post of Director Extension and that of respondent No. 4 is the Assistant Registrar (Recruitment) in the respondent-University.
The selections of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have been challenged as being unfair, arbitrary, violative of Articles 14 and 16 and mala fide.
It has also been averred that the allocation of 15 marks out of a total of 50, viz. 30% for viva voce/interview was excessive.
The petitioner has also given instances to show that anybody who approaches a Court of law, is formed upon and has never been selected for any post in the University.
7.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondent-University and the private respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-University, the factum of repeated advertisement of the post has been admitted.
It has been further stated that as there are different sets of OGPA system in different Universities, there was a need to have a conversion formula and accordingly the respondent University adopted this formula for equating the grade secured by a candidate.
While supplying the application form, terms and conditions were supplied to the candidates and equivalent formula as adopted by the University for all teaching posts was given in these instructions.
The minimum requirement for eligibility for the post of Assistant Professor was that under the point scale system at Master's level is 32. out of 400 and even candidates from this University who have passed Master's degree with OGPA less than 32 out of 400 or with OGPA or 300 out of 400 followed by Ph.D are declared ineligible for the post.
Percentage of marks on conversion is not relevant in respect of such candidates as 60% of marks requirement is for those who have passed their examination under traditional system where only marks and percentage is shown.
It has been denied that the petitioner was eligible.
However, in accordance with the directions of the Court, she was permitted to appear in the interview on provisional basis.
It has been denied that Ms. Shashi Gupta and Ms. Sangita were declared ineligible.
It is further mentioned that Ms. Sangita, who was ineligible was allowed to appear in the interview on provisional basis as the petitioner who was also in eligible was called for the interview.
The averment of the petitioner that she has passed the MSc examination securing 722% marks under percentage system has been denied.
It has been averred that under the point scale system, division is not indicated whereas it is mentioned in certificates covered under the percentage system.
It has been further mentioned that marks for interview are 18%, which are not arbitrary.
No favourtism has been shown to anyone and the performance of the applicant has been evaluated by the experts of selection committee on merits.
It has been further stated that the averment that candidates had been appointed on the basis of any personal interest taken by their fathers is wrong.
The averment that Dr. MS Kairon, father of respondent No. 3 is working as Director of Extension Education and Sh. GP Narang, the father of respondent No. 4, is working as Assistant Registrar (Recruitment) has been admitted.
It has, however, been stated that they were in no way connected with the selection of the candidates and were not the members of the selection committee.
On these premises, the selection of the respondents has been stated to be legal and valid.
To the same effect are the written statements filed by respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
8.
The petitioner has filed an additional affidavit-replication, in which the averments made in the writ petition have been reiterated.
It has been averred that the method of calculating OGPA on decimal system adopted by the respondent-University has inherent lacunae and is a "glaring example of institutional preference."
The petitioner states that if a candidate takes identical course and secures identical marks with identical credit hours, the candidate from Haryana Agricultural University will always be the beneficiary and his OGPA as well as percentage of marks will be more than the candidates of MS University, Baroda, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and other agricultural universities.
A comparative statement has been produced as Annexure P11 in support of this contention.
It has been further stated that the formula adopted by the respondent-University is faulty and it has been laid down with a view to eliminate the brilliant Post-Graduate candidates from other universities.
It has also been averred that a candidate who has secured at least 50% marks in Bachelor's degree or 240 out of 400 in the point scale system and 320 out of 400 on the point scale system or 60% marks on percentage system are eligible.
The petitioner avers that even by this formula, she had secured more than 60% marks and should have been considered as eligible.
It is her claim that she had secured more than 60% marks and, therefore, she was entitled to be given 8 marks instead of 5 for her MSc qualifications.
It has been further averred that in the subject of MSc Home Science (FRM) 15 candidates have passed from the respondent-University till date and all of them have secured OGPA of more than 320 and are thus eligible for appointment as Assistant Professor.
As against this in the MS University, Baroda, there is no decimal system as followed in the respondent-University and resultantly the OGPA of the student in the said University will always remain less than a candidate who has passed from the respondent- University.
It has been mentioned that a candidate from the MS University, Baroda can secure a maximum of 600 points out of 700 while in the respondent-University, it is possible for a candidate to secure 400 out of 400.
It is also the petitioner's case that the impugned formula was in fact laid down for admission to the PhD courses.
She was not treated as ineligible on any earlier occasion.
It is also her case that the condition in the impugned advertisement was laid down without the approval of the Academic Council.
The petitioner avers that "this condition was laid down by Sh. GP Narang, Assistant Registrar (Recruitment) while issuing the advertisement dated December 4, 1990 under his own signatures."
The petitioner also points out that if the Academic Council has approved this condition on any earlier occasion or on April 4, 1989, the same should have been mentioned in the advertisement dated July 11, 1989 and July 10, 1990.
The fact that this condition was not mentioned shows that it was not a part of the decision of the Academic Council.
On these premises, very imposition of the condition has been challenged.
Reference has also been made to the case of one Chander Kala, who passed her B.Sc.
(Home Science) in the year 1986 with an OGPA of 224 out of 400, which is equivalent to 5268%.
She passed her MSc from Bhopal University in Child Development.
Though she was possessing 60% marks in MSc but her OGPA in B.Sc.
was less than the required OGPA of 250 out of 400.
Mrs. Chander Kala was rendered ineligible by the respondent-University for the post of Assistant Professor/Assistant Scientist (Child Development).
She filed a civil suit in the Civil Court at Hissar.
Vide order dated 27.8.1990, the Senior Sub Judge, Hissar directed the respondent-University to allow Mrs. Chander Kala to appear in the interview, which was held on August 28, 1990.
The contention raised on behalf of Mrs. Chander Kala that 50% on the percentage system made her eligible for consideration was accepted.
The said candidate was not only interviewed by the respondent-University, but was also selected and has been working as Assistant Professor.
Since respondent No. 1 accepted her claim and has appointed her, there was no reason for treating the petitioner differently.
On these premises, the petitioner reiterates that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
9.
So far as CWP No. 4201 of 1991 is concerned, it is not necessary to make any detailed reference thereto as we are now concerned primarily with the validity of the stand taken by the respondents in reply to CWP No. 4827 of 1991.
10.
I have heard Mr. Surya Kant for the petitioner and Mr. SC Mohunta for the respondent-University.
Mr. CM Chopra has appeared for respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
Mr. Surya Kant has contended that the petitioner is fully qualified for the post of Assistant Professor and that the action of the respondent-University in treating her as ineligible and as having secured only a 2nd division in the MSc examination is discriminatory and arbitrary.
It has been further contended that the criterion adopted by the University is absolutely arbitrary and that in fact the petitioner was entitled to the award of 8 marks for her academic qualifications of MSc instead of five marks allotted to her.
Learned counsel also maintains that the selection of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 was wholly mala fide and based on extraneous considerations.
The allocation of 30% marks for interview has also been questioned as being violative of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution.
11.
On the other hand, Mr. SC Mohunta, appearing for the respondent- University, contends that the qualification have been duly approved by the competent authority and in view thereof the petitioner was not eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor.
He further submits that an absolutely fair selection has been made and this Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction cannot interfere with the recommendations made by a duly constituted committee.
The stand taken by Mr. Mohunta has been reiterated by Mr. Chopra.
It has been further pointed out that the respondents have already worked for 1-1/2 years and, therefore, their selection should not be quashed at this belated stage.
It has also been contended that neither the father of respondent No. 3 nor of respondent No. 4 had played any role in the selection of the candidates and as such the plea of mala fide raised on behalf of the petitioner is wholly untenable.
12.
The primary question that arises for consideration is - Was the petitioner eligible for the post of Assistant Professor (Family Resource Management) ?
13.
In the advertisement an extract of which has been produced as Annexure P16, the following qualifications had been prescribed :-  "20.
Assistant Professor (Family Resource Management) :  21 to 30 xx xx  Note : Model qualifications for the posts from Sr. No. 9 to 30.  i) Bachelor's degree with atleast 50% marks on percentage system or atleast 250/400 or its equivalent on point scale system.
ii) Master's degree in the concerned discipline with atleast 60 per cent marks on percentage system or atleast 320/400 or its equivalent on point scale system.
Master's degree with atleast 55% marks on percentage system or atleast 300/400 or its equivalent on point scale system followed by PhD in the discipline concerned.
Note :- 1.
One or more qualifications relaxable in case of candidates found otherwise outstanding.
2.
Special weightage will be given to extension experience possessed by the candidates, for posts in disciplines amenable to extension."
14.
Alongwith the applications form supplied to the candidates certain instructions/conditions were also communicated.
A copy of these instructions/conditions has been produced as Annexure R.1 with the written statement filed by the University.
The relevant condition is contained in paragraph 2.
It provides as under :-  "2.
In case of eligibility for teaching posts, it is clarified that the eligibility of candidates who have passed degree examinations under OGPA system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of OGPA mentioned in the approved qualifications irrespective of the percentage of marks shown in their degrees after conversion of OGPA and the eligibility of candidates passing degree examinations under traditional system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of percentage of marks shown in the approved qualifications.
The OGPA equivalent to 400 in the case of candidates who have obtained OGPA out of 300, 500, 600, 1000 etc. shall be worked out as under :-  If a candidate gets an OGPA of 4.42/500, his OGPA out of 400 will be as under :-  4.42 X 400/500 = 353  Likewise if a candidate obtains an OGPA of 8.92/1000 his OGPA out of 400 will be as under :-  8.92 X 400/1000 = 356"  15.
The petitioner had secured an OGPA of 373/400 in her B.Sc.
examination.
So she fulfilled the first qualification as laid down in the above mentioned advertisement.
So far as the second qualification is concerned, a copy of the certificate awarded to the petitioner by the University of Baroda has been produced as Annexure P.1.
A perusal thereof shows that the petitioner has secured an average grade point of 478/700.
The final class grade made by her has been described as `A'.
In the certificate the system of evaluation has also been given.
According to this system, a person who has been graded as `A' is described as `Very Good' and if the candidate has secured a grade point average of 46 to 559, he is presumed to have secured 70% to 79% marks.
The petitioner had secured a grade point average of 478 and accordingly she is deemed to have secured 722% marks.
According to the advertisement, a person with 60% marks is eligible.
Apparently, therefore, the petitioner appears to fulfil even this qualification.
However, the respondents claim that the petitioner is not eligible in view of the condition contained in paragraph 2 as reproduced above.
It is contended on their behalf that since the petitioner has passed the degree examination under the OGPA system, her eligibility has to be considered with reference to that system only and the percentage of marks worked out on conversion be taken into consideration.
Is this stand of the respondents tenable ?
Mr. Surya Kant contends that this condition has not been prescribed by any competent authority and, therefore, it cannot be invoked in the present case.
16.
The affairs of the University have to be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Haryana and Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1970 and the statutes framed thereunder.
Section 23 of the Act inter alia provides that the Academic Council is the incharge of the academic affairs of the University and that it shall have power "to make recommendations regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for teachers in the University."
A perusal of the above provision indicates that the Academic Council has to make recommendations in respect of qualifications etc. which may be laid down for recruitment of teachers.
Statute VII relating to the conditions of service of the teachers provides that "the Academic and other qualifications of teachers shall be such as may be laid down by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Academic Council provided for reasons to be recorded in writing the Vice-Chancellor may appoint a person not possessing the prescribed qualifications."
While Section 23 of the Act authorises the Academic Council to make a recommendation, Statute-VII, as mentioned above, seems to clothe it with the power of final approval.
However, for the purposes of the present case it is not necessary to go into this controversy.
It has not been shown by the Counsel for the respondents that the condition contained in paragraph 2, as reproduced above, was either laid down by the Vice-Chancellor by Academic Council.
Nothing has been produced from the record to show that this condition had ever been prescribed by either of the two authorities as contemplated in Statute-VII.
17.
It is apt to refer to the pleadings of the parties in this behalf.
In paragraphs 9, 10 & 11 of the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner, it has been inter alia stated as under :-  "9.
That the conversion formula approved by the Academic Council which the deponent has placed on record as Annexure P/4, was laid down for admission to PhD Courses in the respondent-University.
This very formula, however, was applied for recruitment to the service also as mentioned in Annexure P.5.
The deponent was not treated ineligible on the basis of conversion formula because she having secured more than 60% marks on percentage system remained eligible.
However, she was sought to be rendered ineligible on the basis of instructions Annexure R/1 which the posts in question were advertised on 4.12.90.
In these instructions, condition No. 2 provides that in case of eligibility for teaching posts, the eligibility of candidates who have passed deree examinations under OGPA system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of OGPA mentioned in the approved qualifications irrespective of the percentage of marks shown in their degrees after conversion of OGPA and the eligibility of candidates passing degree examinations under traditional system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of percentage of marks shown in the approved qualifications.
This above stated condition however was never placed before the Academic Council and was never approved by the said authority while approving the conversion formula on 4489 vide Annexure P/4.
This condition was laid down by Sh. GP Narang, Assistant Registrar (Recruitment) while issuing the advertisement dated 4.12.90 under his own signatures.
(Emphasis supplied)  Had the Academic Council approved this condition on 4489, the same would have been mentioned in the advertisement dated 11789 and 10790 issued by the respondent-University for various posts including the post of Assistant Professor (FRM).
The relevant extracts of these advertisements are placed on record as Annexures P.14, P.15 and P16.
10.
That as a matter of fact, the condition No. 2 referred to above (as incorporated in Annexure P16) was placed before the Academic Council first time in the meeting held on 8th to 10th August, 1991.
In the said meeting, model qualifications for various posts were discussed and condition No. 2 referred to above was incorporated as Note No. 2.
The copy of the agenda item passed in the above stated meeting is annexed herewith as Annexuxe P17.
11.
That after discussing the model qualifications vide agenda item Annexure P17, in the meeting held on 8th to 10th August, 1991, the Academic Council approved the same in its next meeting held in the month of November, 1991.
Thus the condition No. 2 which inter alia provides that eligibility of a candidate shall be seen under the OGPA system if he has passed the degree under the said system and on the basis of percentage of marks if the candidate has passed under the traditional system was not validly in existence at the time when the deponent was considered for the post in question in March, 1991."
18.
A reply to the above mentioned affidavit was filed on behalf of the respondents.
In reply to paragraphs 9, 10 & 11, it has been stated as under :-  "9.
This is wrong that conversion formula as adopted for the recruitment of Asstt.
Prof. (FRM) was never approved by the Academic Council.
In fact the Academic Council in its meeting held on 4489 approved the conversion formula for admission purposes.
Academic Council in its meeting held on 26589 also approved that this formula, may be used for recruitment purposes.
The instructions were attached with the advertisement accordingly as per approved qualifications.
10.
As mentioned in para 9 the statement is false that the conversion formula was first approved by Academic Council in its meeting held from 8th to 10th August, 1991.
This formula was approved by the Academic Council for recruitment to various posts on 26589.
11.
The formula regarding conversion of OGPA system from other University to 400 for recruitment purposes was approved by the Academic Council in its meeting held on 26589.
This formula was again mentioned in the model qualifications put up to the Academic Council in 1991.
Condition No. 2 is mere clarification of the qualifications already approved by the Academic Council to make things more clear.
Such a Clarification does not require approval from the Academic Council."
A perusal of the above shows that the petitioner has categorically asserted that the condition contained in paragraph 2 was never placed before the Academic Council and had in fad been laid down by Shri GP Narang, Assistant Registrar (Recruitment), who is admittedly the father of respondent No. 4.
In reply to these averments, the respondents have averred that the Academic Council had approved the conversion formula for admission purposes on April 4, 1989 and for recruitment in the meeting hold on May 26, 1989 and that the instructions attached with the advertisement are in accordance with the approved qualifications.
Further, their reply to paragraph 11 shows that condition No. 2 is merely clarification and does not add to the decision of the Academic Council.
The specific averment that the condition had been laid down by Mr. GP Narang has not been denied.
It has also not been asserted that the condition had either been expressly laid down by the Vice-Chancellor or by the Academic Council.
In this factual background, it is clear that the condition had not been laid down either by the Vice-Chancellor or by the Academic Council.
It has also not been suggested that Mr. GP Narang or any Assistant Registrar had the jurisdiction to lay down such a condition.
19.
Is this a condition merely clarificatory or does it add to the rigour of the qualifications ?
A perusal of the extract of the advertisement, as quoted above, shows that conversion from OGPA to the percentage system is not barred.
In fact, the advertisement specifically provides that a candidate should have obtained "Master's degree, in the concerned discipline with atleast 60 per cent marks on percentage system or atleast 320/400 or its equivalent on point scale system."
This does not debar conversion or consideration of one or the other in a case where assessment is made under both the systems.
However, by the condition contained in the instructions it has been provided that "the eligibility of candidates who have passed degree-examinations under OGPA system shall be considered with reference to the requirement of OGPA mentioned in the approved qualifications irrespective of the percentage of marks shown in their degrees after conversion of OGPA ..." This is not a clarification.
It adds to what has been prescribed in the advertisement.
It is now shown to have been issued with the approval of the competent authority.
Consequently, this condition is invalid.
20.
In view of the above, it is clear that the petitioner's claim had to be considered on the basis of the degree awarded to her by the MS University, Baroda.
According to the certificate given to her, the petitioner had secured `A' grade with an OGPA of 478/700 which entitled her to the award of 722% marks as given in the conversion formula.
Her eligibility and candidature had to be accordingly considered.
The respondents erred in not doing so.
21.
Mr. Mohunta contended that the respondent-University has laid down a conversion formula, and in accordance therewith if the petitioner's OGPA is converted from 478/700 she would be deemed to have secured 273/400.
Accordingly, the learned counsel contended that she was ineligible.
22.
Mr. Surya Kant submits that even this stand of the respondents is untenable.
He contends that a candidate who has secured 60% marks in MSc examination, is eligible according to the advertisement and, therefore, the petitioner should be considered to be eligible.
Secondly, it is submitted that the Haryana Agricultural University has a conversion formula almost similar to the one adopted by the MSc University, Baroda.
He has produced a photo-copy of a certificate issued by the respondent-University.
It is taken on record as `Mark A'.
This is the transcript of Academic Record of some student.
However, the mode of grading under the Trimester system for the Post-Graduate Programmes has been given.
A perusal thereof shows that a person who is graded as `A' is deemed to have secured 4 points and is considered to be excellent.
Similarly, a candidate who is graded as `B' is deemed to have secured 3 points is considered to be `good'.
It is further clear that a candidate under the system adopted by the respondent-University can secure an overall grade point average of 400/400 and in that case he is deemed to have secured 80% and above marks.
A candidate who secured an OGPA of 3.4/400 has secured 72% marks.
Even if this conversion formula is applied, the petitioner who has secured 722% marks in her MSc examination is considered to have secured 60% marks.
Even according to the advertisement, a person with 60% marks is eligible.
Therefore, to insist that the petitioner who had secured an overall grade point average of 300/400 and that she was not eligible in spite of the fact that she had secured a higher percentage of marks is neither just nor fair.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the respondents erred in treating the petitioner as ineligible.
She has secured more than 60% marks and was thus fully qualified to be considered for appointment.
Their action in treating her as ineligible or as having secured only a second division in MSc was not legal and correct.
23.
Mr. Surya Kant also points out that Chander Kala's case is identical to that of the petitioner.
She had also passed her MSc examination from the Bhopal University.
She was considered ineligible by the University because she had secured an OGPA of 224/400 against the requirement of an OGPA of 250/400.
She had approached the Civil Court.
In pursuance to an interim order of the Court directing the University to interview her, the claim of Chander Kala was considered and she was appointed.
Learned counsel submits that the petitioner's case is identical to that of Mrs. Chander Kala.
Respondents in their reply to this averment have stated that "her performance in the interview was excellent, as per report of the selection committee.
Even after securing only 5 marks for B.Sc.
qualifications, she topped the panel of candidates and was appointed as Asstt.
Scientist (Child Development) in relaxation of qualifications of the Selection Committee."
Learned counsel contends that Mrs. Chander Kala in spite of the fact that she was ineligible was given appointment by relexation of qualification while the petitioner has been declined appointment in spite of the fact that she is fully qualified.
Learned counsel also submits that the sequence of events in this case clearly shows a bias and mala fides.
He points out that the post was originally advertised in the year 1988.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner was placed at No. 2 in merit list, the respondents did not make any appointment.
Instead the post was re-advertised on July 11, 1989.
Still no recruitment was made.
Even the interview was not held.
Thereafter the post was advertised on July 10, 1990.
In spite of the fact that the applications had been received, no interview was held.
The post was again advertised on December 4, 1990.
The advertisement appeared in the newspaper `The Tribune' on the said date.
The applications had to reach the Registrar of the University by January 2, 1991 However, in the conditions, which were not published alongwith the advertisement, it was stipulated as under :-  "8.
The applicants must possess prescribed qualifications and experience on the last date of receipt of applications.
Those who have submitted the thesis by last date of receipt of application can also be considered and they must attach certificate from the competent authority about the submission of thesis by the last date of receipt of applications."
24.
Learned counsel submits that even though the applicants were required to possess the requisite qualifications and experience on the last date of receipt of applications yet the provision was made that even those who have submitted the thesis by the last date of the receipt of the applications can also be considered.
Mr. Surya Kant has vehemently contended that the selection was being postponed periodically and this condition was specifically imposed in the advertisement only with the oblique objective of helping respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
It was precisely to help the respondents that even the petitioner's candidature was not accepted by the University.
25.
The argument raised by the learned counsel does not appear to be without basis.
However, in view of my finding on the first point, I do not consider it necessary to go into the matter in detail.
26.
Accordingly, both the writ petitions viz. CWP No. 4201 and 4827 of 1991 are allowed.
It is held that the petitioner was eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor (Family Resource Management).
The action of the respondents in considering her as ineligible or having placed in the second division was not correct.
The University will reconsider and decide her claim within two months from the date of the receipt of this judgment.
It may be added that according to the petitioner, she is entitled to be placed higher than respondent No. 4.
In that event, the services of respondent No. 4 may be liable to be terminated.
Mr. Surya Kant states that a post of Assistant Professor is available in the University.
If that be so, the University may accommodate respondent No. 4 against a vacancy which may have subsequently become available.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Writ petition allowed.