KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner applied for the post of Assistant Rural Sociologist/Economist to the Punjab Agricultural University Ludhiana.
The University, as per advertisement dated 17-9-1988. in the Daily Tribune (Annexure -P1) prescribed the following qualifications and experience for the post :-  ESSENTIAL :-  i) Second Class B.A/B.Sc.(Agri.)
with Economics/Sociology.
ii) PhD in Economics/Agri Economics/Sociology/Rural Sociology.
Note (i) for the posts at Sr. Nos. 12 to 14.
If a candidate possessing a Doctor's degree is not available or is not considered suitable by the Selection Committee, MA/MSc.
in the respective field of specialization against Ph.
D requirement for the post with consistently good academic record may be considered for appointment on the condition that he will have to obtain Doctor's degree within eight years of his appointment failing which he will cease to earn increments until he fulfills this requirement.
The petitioner possesses the requisite qualifications having 51% marks in MA She was interviewed by the Selection Committee on 1821989 and selected for the post.
The recommendation was forwarded by the Selection Committee to the Vice Chancellor.
The Vice Chancellor asked the Selection Committee to review the matter.
He also indicated that Smt. Milkho Kaur may be considered for appointment.
The Selection committee reviewed the matter on 17.5.1989 and unstead recommended Smt. Milkho Kaur (respondent No3) for the post.
At the time of review, the petitioner was not called for interview again.
On coming to know that Smt. Milkho kaur had been recommended for appointment, the petitioner approached this court by way of this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, challenging the selection of respondent No3, smt. Milkho Kaur.
2.
The Punjab Agricultural University has filed written statement and supported the selection of respondent No3.
However, respondent No3 has not filed any return.
3.
The petitioner filed an additional affidavit during the pendency of the writ petition with the permission of this court.
In the additional affidavit it has been stated that the petitioner reappeared in MA Economics and improved her marks.
She may be declared successful having attained in MA Economics 55% marks.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that once the petitioner was duly selected, the respondent No. 3, Smt. Milkho Kaur was not in the field and her selection ought to have been given effect to.
the Vice Chancellor, however, acted illegally in introducing the name of respondent No3, ignoring the petitioner, who was fully qualified for the post, and directing the review of selection of the petitioner by the Selection Committee.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the Vice Chancellor exercised the powers of review under regulations Clause 4(3)(vii) Chapter IV of the Punjab Agricultural University Act and Statutes, 1970, in a colourable manner.
It is submitted that the order of the Vice Chancellor directing the review or recommendation regarding selection of the petitioner affects the civil rights of the petitioner and is, therefore, against the law.
It was obligatory for the Vice-Chancellor to afford her an opportunity of being heard according to the principles of natural justice.
Strong reliance has been placed by the counsel for the petitioner on the decision of Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (miss) Binapani Dei and others, A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 1269 and Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, A.I.R. 1978 SC 851.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that respondent No. 3, Milkho Kaur does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed by the University, she being merely B.Sc.
in Home Science.
On the other hand, according to the University, the prescribed qualification was MA or MSc.
in Economic and B.A./B.Sc.
(Agriculture) with Economics/Sociology.
Admittedly, respondent No. 3 lacked the requisite qualification and, therefore, the Selection Committee had acted illegally in recommending respondent No. 3 for the post, ignoring the petitioner.
It has further been argued that the action of the Vice-Chancellor is wholly illegal, arbitrary, capricious and violative or Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is as much as the candidate duly selected i.e. the petitioner, has been denied appointment with a view to accommodating respondent No. 3 who does not possess the requisite qualification.
Counsel for the respondent University, on the contrary, argued that the impugned selection is proper, just and in accordance with the rules.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the petitioner on the date of her selection fulfilled the requisite qualifications for the post.
In the meanwhile, she has also improved her qualification whereby she has passed MA (Economics) with 55% marks.
Counsel for the respondent University had not been able to show me as to how respondent No. 3 was eligible for appointment to the post, because admittedly she is B.Sc.
(Home Science), whereas the qualification as notified by the University is B.A.
with Economics or B.Sc.(Agri.)
The selection or respondent No. 3 is, thus plainly illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable and as such liable to be set aside.
6.
The petitioner was a duly selected candidate, having the requisite qualifications.
The Selection Committee consisted of eminent expert in the relevant subject.
The Selection Committee unanimously recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment.
The Vice Chancellor was not justified in ordering review of the case by the Selection Committee with a view to accommodate the respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 also does not fulfil the qualification of the post.
7.
A duly selected candidate should be offered appointment, otherwise, the constitutional guarantee as enshrined under Article 16 becomes a mere formality.
The Vice-Challenor without affording the petitioner any opportunity of being heard ordered the review of her selection by the Selection Committee.
It was obligatory for the Vice-Chancellor, before exercising the power of review, to afford the petitioner an opportunity of being heard according to the principles of natural justice.
A duly selected candidate acquires a civil right to be appointed.
This right cannot be defeated without affording him an opportunity of being heard.
The Supreme Court in Binapani's case (supra) and Mohinder Singh's case (supra) has laid down that if an order affects the civil right of a person, no order adverse to him can be passed without affording him an opportunity of being head.
Binapani's case (supra) has been approved by the Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh case (supra).
The principles of natural justice have been applied by the Supreme Court to selection procedure.
(See AK Kraipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150).
8.
Now during pendency of the litigation, the petitioner has attained the age of 36 years.
On the date of her selection she was only 32 years.
The age prescribed for selection for the post is 35 years.
So on the date of selection, the petitioner was eligible for the post.
It is also significant to mention that the petitioner has improved her qualification having securing 55% marks in MA(Economics).
In these circumstances, it will be just and proper that the original recommendation of the selection committee should be given effect to by the Vice Chancellor and the Board of Management to do substantial justice to the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is allowed, the impugned order is set aside and it is held that respondent No. 3 Milkho Kaur was ineligible for the post advertised whereas the petitioner was fully eligible for the post.
In view of the foregoing discussion the writ petition is allowed, the respondents are directed to reconsider the matter and appoint the petitioner to the post in question.
This order be implemented within two months.
In the peculiar facts of the case, there will be no order as to costs.