RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 5421 of 1991 and 5730 of 1991.
2.
The petitioners in both these writ petitions were candidates for the posts of Sub Divisional Clerks/Accounts Clerks in the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board, Panchkula (hereinafter referred to as the `Board').
The posts were advertised on 4th November, 1989, along with various other posts, for which the interviews were held from 23rd November, 1989 to 30th November, 1989.
Some interviews were also held later on in the month of May, 1990.
The petitioners were interviewed on 23rd November, 1989.
However, their names did not find mention in the merit list prepared of the selected candidates.
Feeling aggrieved by their non-selection, they filed the present writ petitions'.
3.
It is not necessary for me to go into all the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, suffice it to observe that the primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Interview Committee had not laid down any criteria for judging the merit of each candidate, i.e. there was nothing before the interviewing committee as to how and under what heads the suitability of the candidate is to be judged for the job.
He further contended that in fact there were two interviewing committees for the posts.
Some candidates appeared before one committee and the others before the second committee.
According to the learned counsel, since no criteria had been laid down for judging the suitability, the interviews were wholly farce as there was no common yard-stick to judge the suitability by the various Committees.
Further, it was contended that on the day the petitioners were interviewed, more than 700 candidates were there before the two Committees.
The interviews lasted for about eight hours, with one hour lunch break and within such a short span of time, the suitability could not be judged of so many candidates and the interviews held were just eyewash.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has not been denied that there was no specific criteria or guidelines, which were before the interviewing Committees.
Even the factum that a large number of candidates were interviewed on the same day, has also not been denied.
5.
It has been laid down in the judgment of the Apex Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 454 and a judgment of this court in Jaswant Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, I.L.R (1989)1 Punjab and Haryana 33 that if sufficient time is not devoted for adjudging the suitability by the Selection Committee, the interview itself becomes a farce.
In R Chitralekha v. State of Mysore and others, A.I.R 1964 SC 1823 it was held that where the mode of selection is only by way of interview, then some reasonable criteria must be laid down for judging the suitability of the candidates.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully counter the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, especially in view of the pronouncements of the Apex Court.
It may be observed here that no record of the interviews has been produced before me nor any criteria, which may have been adopted by the Interviewing Committees.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that the selected candidates have been appointed quite some time back and their appointments be not disturbed at this stage.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that there is force in the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The arguments of the learned counsel, as have been noticed above, are well founded, especially in view of the judgment of the Apex Court.
However, I am of the view that to do substantial justice between the parties, the selected candidates' appointments at this stage need not be set aside, but a direction be issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioners also in the available vacancies that may be there now or that may exist in future.
8.
Consequently, these writ petitions are allowed.
However, the official respondents would not disturb the selected candidates, but would give appointments to the petitioners on the posts of Sub Divisional Clerks/Accounts Clerks on the available vacancies that may be there now or may arise in the near future.
Their appointments would be reckoned from the dates they are appointed for all purposes.
I make no order as to costs.