Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who was a Clerk in the DAV College, Karnal, filed C.W.P.
No. 4059 of 1990 claiming regularisation of his services.
This writ petition was dismissed in limine by a Division Bench of this Court.
It was held that the post of Clerk on which the petitioner had been appointed has not been sanctioned by the Education Department and that the salary was being paid to him only out of the amalgamated funds deposited for the benefit of the students.
Since the College was not getting any reimbursement qua the salary of the petitioner from the State, the Court found that there was no violation of the regulations of Service.
Accordingly, the writ petition was dismissed in limine on June 7, 1990 Presumably, in response to a letter dated July 29, 1990, the College informed the petitioner vide its registered AD letter dated August 17, 1990 that he had been relieved from service w.e.f.
June 8, 1990 vide letter No. 165 dated June 21, 1990.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court again through the present writ petition.
2.
A two-fold grievance has been made.
The order is challenged on the ground that the petitioner was entitled to the grant of an opportunity of hearing before his services could be terminated.
It is further claimed that the College has appointed one Mr. Pardeep Kumar as Clerk after terminating the service of the petitioner and as such the impugned action is vitiated.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the petitioner had been appointed purely on ad hoc basis and that he had no right to the post.
It has been further stated that the services of the petitioner had been terminated immediately after the decision of C.W.P.
4059 of 1990 and since the petitioner had not initially accepted the order, which were sought to be served him, it was sent to him vide registered letters dated June 21, 1990 and July 7, 1990.
It has been further pointed out that Mr. Pardeep Kumar has been appointed as a Clerk on Part-time basis and the petitioner cannot make any grievance in that behalf as he has no right to the post.
4.
I have heard Mr. Rakesh Nagpal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. CB Goel for the respondents.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed on purely temporary basis vide order dated August 8, 1984.
His services had been periodically terminated.
On his own showing the petitioner had worked as a Clerk from August 9, 1984 to April 12, 1985; from June 3, 1985 to April 1, 1986; from July 20, 1986 to April 1, 1987 and so on.
It has also not been disputed that the post of Clerk held by the petitioner is not one of the posts sanctioned by the Education Department.
It is also evident that the College is not getting any aid in respect of this post from the Government.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioner had no right to the post and consequently the question of giving him any opportunity to show-cause especially when the College was not intending to punish the petitioner is any manner did not arise.
Consequently, I have no hesitation in rejecting the first submission made on behalf of the petitioner on this ground.
5.
As for the appointment of Mr. Pardeep Kumar, it is stated on behalf of the respondents that he had been appointed purely on a part-time basis.
This has not been disputed.
It is also not the claim of the petitioner that he was willing to work on part-time basis.
In this situation, I am not persuaded to hold that any legal right of the petitioner has been infringed.
6.
In pursuance to the interim order passed by this Court on October 11, 1990, the petitioner was allowed to continue in service.
It is stated on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner has been paid his salary regularly.
Since I have found no merit in the claim made on behalf of the petitioner, interim order passed on October 11, 1990 shall not operate any further.
If any, arrears of salary are due to the petitioner till now, these shall be paid to him.
7.
Presumably, on account of the failure of the respondents to comply with the interm order of October 11, 1990, the petitioner had filed C.O.C.P.
No. 799 of 1990.
It was ordered to be heard along with this petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the order dated October 11, 1990 had been served on the respondents on October 15, 1990, but the petitioner was allowed to join duty only vide order dated November 21, 1990.
Mr. Goel, appearing for the respondents, points out that the petitioner had been paid salary for the entire period and consequently the order of this Court stands complied with.
In this situation, I am not persuaded to hold that the respondent was guilty of any wilful disobedience of the order of this Court.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition as well as the petition for initiating proceedings for contempt are dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.