Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Punjab State Electricity Board is the appellant.
It is aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the learned lower appellate court by which the plaintiff-respondent's suit was decreed and it is held that the policy of the Board as a result of which defendants - respondents No3 to 66 were promoted from the posts of Sub Station Attendants to that of Sub Station Operatiors, is unconstitutional and illegal.
2.
The only ground urged by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the suit was highly belated.
3.
A perusal of the plaint shows that in paragraph 16, the plaintiff has averred as under :-  "That the cause of action arose to the plaintiff when plaintiff came to know about his supersession by the defendant in August 1981 and arise on 1st of each calender month and is a recurring one.
Plaintiff has come to know about his supersession in August 1981 by defendant Nos. 3 to 66."
In reply to this, the defendants have stated as under :-  "Denied being incorrect.
The plaintiff has no cause of action.
No junior having equal/less qualification than the plaintiff has been promoted."
It thus appears that no question of limitation was raised by the defendant-appellant.
In fact, the learned trial Court framed only the following four issues :-  1.
Whether the policy of the Board for promotion of defendants No3 to 66 from Sub Station Attendants to Sub Station Operators on the basis of being diploma holder is unconstitutional and illegal as alleged, OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction as prayed for, OPP.
3.
Whether the written statement has been filed under proper and legal authority on behalf of the defendants No. 1 and 2, OPP.
4.
Relief.
4.
It is, thus, clear that no issue relating to limitation was framed by the learned trial Court.
In this situation, it is not possible to entertain the plea of limitation at this belated stage.
The question of limitation is not a pure question of law.
It is mixed question of law and fact.
If the appellant had raised a specific plea with regard to the limitation, the trial Court could have framed an issue thereon and the plaintiff-respondent would have been in a position to lead evidence to show that his claim was within limitation.
No plea having been raised, plea for the first time at the stage of hearing of the Regular Second Appeal.
5.
Mr. Jasminder Pal Singh Sandhu, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant points out that the learned trial Court had held that promotions of diploma holders were regulated vide "Ex. D-3 which was issued on 1781976 and the same has not been challenged for the last more than six years by the plaintiff."
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that the challenge to the instructions has not been made for six long year and therefore, the suit should be barred by limitation.
I cannot accept this plea.
The Board may have issued instructions on August 17, 1976.
The cause of action may not have accrued to the plaintiff-respondent immediately on the issue of the instructions.
According to the plaintiff-respondent, the cause of action had accrued to him only on August 19, 1981 when he came to know of his supersession by the defendants Nos. 3 to 66.
This averment having not been specifically controverted and the issue regarding limitation having not been specifically raised, I am not inclined to allow the Board to raise this plea at this belated stage.
Consequently, I find no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.