Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Petitioners herein are working as Foreman (Cable Jointing) in the Punjab State Electricity Board.
They have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly it is claimed that the Board has not implemented its decision dated August 25, 1973 by which it had been decided that the Posts of Special Foreman be divided between Foremen and Cable Jointers in the ratio of their strength.
The Petitioners claim that they have not been given their due share.
Secondly, Petitioner No. 1 claims that he has actually worked as a Special Foreman from December 10, 1974 to May 22, 1981 and is, therefore, entitled to the salary of the post.
On these premises, prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioners from the dates they became entitled to it with all back wages and other consequential reliefs and for such other relief as the Court may deem just and reasonable has been made.
It is averred that in spite of numerous representations, the Board has not implemented the order.
As a last resort the petitioners have approached this Court through the Present Writ Petition.
2.
On behalf of the respondent-Board, a detailed written statement was filed.
This was followed by a replication and a number of documents by the Petitioners.
The Board then filed a rejoinder.
In the rejoinder it has been admitted that "against 20 vacant posts of Special Foreman, the share of Cable Jointers comes to 16 Nos. posts against which 11 Nos. cable jointers were promoted as Special Foreman vide office order No. 228, dated 251974 against 11 Nos. available vacancies at that time leaving behind deficit quota of 5 Nos. cable jointer which will be made good on the availability of vacant posts.
3.
Keeping in view the fact that the Board admits that the Cable Jointers have not got their due share in accordance with its decision, it is directed that the posts of Special Foreman shall be filed up only from amongst the category of Cable Jointers till their quota is filled tip.
No vacancy shall be filled up from amongst the cadre of Foremen so long as the category of Cable Jointers is not given its due share.
4.
As for the claim of pay made on behalf of Petitioner No. 1 on the ground that he had worked' as a Special Foreman from December 10, 1974 to May 22 1981 and is thus entitled to the salary attached to the Post, the defence of the Board is two fold.
Firstly, in Para 2 of, he written statement, it has been averred that Surinder Singh (Petitioner No. 1) is not working, on the post of Special Foreman since 111975.
Consequently, there is a dispute with regard to the fact as to whether or not the Petitioner had actually worked as a Special Foreman.
Secondly, the claim as made by the Petitioner is highly belated.
Salary for the period from December 10, 1974 to May 22, 1981 is sought to the recovered through the present petition, which was filed in December, 1989.
It is highly belated.
5.
Mr. Girish Agnihotri, appearing for the Petitioners, however, points out that actually a representation had been submitted on July 1, 1981 and thereafter the matter had remained under correspondence for a long time.
Assuming it to be so, the fact remains that there is a triable issue of limitation.
It is settled that if there is triable issue of limitation, the writ Court does not normally exercise its jurisdiction.
Consequently, if the petitioner is so advised, he may resort to his alternative remedy before the Civil Court.
In the exercise of writ jurisdiction, I am not inclined to interfere in the matter.
6.
In the circumstances, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the respondents shall give the category of Cable Jointers their due share of posts in the cadre of Special Foremen and that nobody shall be promoted from amongst the Foremen till the deficiency in the quota of Cable Jointers has been made up.
7.
The Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of.
However, the Parties are left to bear their own costs,  Order accordingly.