JS Sekhon, J (Oral) - Harvinder Singh, petitioner appeared in the first professional examination of the MBBS from Guru Gobind Singh Govt. Medical College, Faridkot, affiliated to the Punjabi University, Patiala held in April 1991.
The result of that examination was declared in May, 1991.
The petitioner got re-appear in Biochemistry Paper.
After getting re-appear in the above referred subject the petitioner approached the said College for giving provisional admission to second professional course of MBBS but he was denied this admission.
Thereafter, the petitioner invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by filing C.W.P.
No. 9773 of 1991.
At the time of motion hearing the petitioner was given provisional admission by the Bench and in pursuance thereof he joined the second professional course on 12th July, 1991.
Meanwhile, the petitioner also reappeared in the first professional examination in Biochemistry on July 19, 1991.
The said writ petition was accepted on 7th August, 1991 vide order Annexure P-1 by the Single Bench of this court and the respondents were directed to regularize the admission of the petitioner to second professional course subject to his own risk and responsibility qua the clearing of the first professional examination.
The petitioner then continued attending the classes of second professional examination and completed 82% of the total lectures against the requisite 75% lectures, but the University did not allow him to appear in the second professional examination held in August, 1992 on the ground that he has not completed 1-1/2 academic years after completion of the first professional examination as per Ordinance 15 of the Punjabi University, Patiala.
Under these circumstances the petitioner has again knocked the door of this court by filing this writ petition.
2.
During the pendency of this writ petition the respondents were directed to allow the petitioner to appeal provisionally in the second professional examination.
Accordingly, the petitioner has appeared in the examination.
During the course of arguments, Mr. Roshan Lal Sharma, the learned counsel for the University has produced the result of the petitioner, wherein he has got re-appear in I, II and Vth paper pertaining to the subjects of Pathology, Microbiology and Community Medicines respectively.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties besides perusing the record.
Ordinance 15 pertaining to second professional examination reads as under :-  "15.
The examination shall be held twice a year in the months of May and September, at least 1-1/2 academic years after completion of the First Professional examination or on such other dates as may be fixed by the Academic Council and shall be open to any student who :  (i) has been on the rolls of a Medical College admitted to the privileges of this University or any other statutory University throughout 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination;  (ii) has passed previously the First Professional examination or an examination considered equivalent thereto by the Academic Council for this purpose on the recommendation of the Faculty of Medicine;  (iii) has his name submitted to the Registrar by the Head of the College in which he is enrolled;  (iv) produced the following certificates signed by the Head of the College in which he is enrolled:  1. of good character :  2. of having attended not less than 75% of the full course of lectures delivered and practical held separately in each of the subject of examination.
Provided that deficiency in the number of lectures and in clinical and practicals may be condoned by the Principal as decided by the Academic council;  3.
Of having studied the subjects of Pathology and Microbiology, Pharmacology, Forensic Medicine and Community Medicine.
A bare glance through the said Ordinance, no doubt, reveals that holding of the second professional examination twice a year in the months of May and September after the completion of 1-1/2 academic years at least from the completion of first professional examination or on such other dates, as may be fixed by the Academic Council is the general guideline regarding the holding of such examination.
It further provides that such examination will be open to any student who has been on the roll throughout 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination and has passed previously the First Professional Examination etcetera clause (iv) further provides that such candidate should furnish a good character certificate of the Head of the College and that he had attended not less than 75% of lectures delivered and practicals held separately in each of the subject of examination.
4.
It is admitted case of the parties that the petitioner had completed 82% of the lectures delivered and practical held separately in each of the subjects of examination, although the requisite percentage is 75 only.
The only disqualification of the petitioner to appear in the examination pertains to his non-completion of 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination.
The first para of regulation 15 providing 1-1/2 academic years for holding the examination pertains to the holding of second professional examination as such and not applicable to the concerned student.
Only clause (i) of this para relates to the qualification of a student to appear in such examination.
If we interpret this clause strictly, then it transpires that even those students who had cleared the first professional examination in May, 1991, held in February, 1991 came on the rolls of the College in second professional course on 14th May, 1991.
If that is so then they have also not completed 1-1/2 academic years when the second professional examination was held in August, 1992.
Consequently, withholding of permission to the petitioner to join or appear in the second professional examination on this account is not legally justifiable especially when he has lagged behind only two months' from the other students qua the attendance in the requisite academic period.
5.
Under these circumstances, the directions of the University being arbitrary are not sustainable and are hereby set aside by accepting this petition.
The result of the second professional examination of the petitioner shall be deemed to have been declared as per the endorsement of the Superintendent (Examination) figuring on the letter produced by Mr. Roshan Lal Sharma, learned counsel for the University, in Court today and the said letter has been taken on the record.
It is ordered accordingly.
However, in the peculiar circumstances of the case there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition accepted.