NK Sodhi, J - The petitioner who joined the Punjab Roadways as a conductor was confirmed in December, 1971 and was thereafter promoted as an Inspector on August 3, 1982.
His confidential reports for the years 1982-83 upto 1984-85 were `average' whereas for the year 1985-86 amongst others, his reputation for honesty was assessed as `below average' and his `over-all' grading was also `below average.'
This adverse report is stated to have been conveyed to the petitioner vide registered letter No. 16741/E.A.2 dated October 3, 1986 from the Divisional Manager, Transport Department, Punjab, Chandigarh.
According to the case of the respondents, the petitioner filed no representation against the adverse entry in his confidential report.
The petitioner was to cross his efficiency bar w.e.f.
1.3.1987 but due to his average record and also in view of his adverse confidential report for the year 1985-86, he has not been allowed to cross it and accordingly, a letter dated March 8, 1988, was issued giving him 15 days' notice to send his explanation, if any.
The petitioner made a detailed representation but the same does not appear to have been accepted.
He was, however, allowed to cross his efficiency bar w.e.f.
March 1, 1988 and an order dated September 28, 1988 was passed in this regard.
While the petitioner was working as an Inspector and after he had attained the age of 50 years, the Divisional Manager, Transport Department, Punjab, Chandigarh, in exercise of powers under Rule 3.1(a) of the Punjab Civil Services (Pre-mature Retirement) Rules, 1975, served upon the former a three months' notice of pre-mature retirement informing the petitioner that he would stand retired from service on the date of expiry of the notice.
The petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging this notice.
2.
In support of the writ petition, counsel for the petitioner has advanced the following two contentions before me :  (i) The adverse entry record for the year 1985-86 regarding his reputation for integrity was never communicated to the petitioner and as such, the respondents could not pre-maturely retire him from service on the basis of the said entry.
(ii) After the adverse entry for the said year had been recorded, the petitioner was allowed to cross his efficiency bar w.e.f.
March 1, 1988 and, therefore, any adverse entry prior to this date stood washed away and could not be taken into consideration while passing the order of pre-mature retirement.
3.
The stand of the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents and in the written statement filed on their behalf, it has been specifically pleaded that the adverse entry was communicated to the petitioner by a registered letter dated October 3, 1986 and since the petitioner did not file any representation against this communication, he could possibly make no grouse of it in the present writ petition.
Further plea of the respondents is that even a single adverse entry regarding doubtful integrity is sufficient to retire an official prematurely and for this contention, strong reliance has been placed on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) SLR 54 (SC).
4.
So far as the first contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is concerned, I find no merit in it.
It is not in dispute that the confidential report of the petitioner which was recorded for the year 1985-86 grades him as an Official `below average' and his reputation for honesty was not `below average.'
A copy of the confidential report has been appended with the written statement as Annexure R-1.
The only dispute raised by the petitioner is that this adverse report was never communicated to him.
In reply to para 5 of the writ petition, the case of the respondents in the corresponding para of the written statement is as under :-  "That Para No. 5 is denied as incorrect, the adverse entries in the ACR for the year 1985-86 were conveyed to him vide Divisional Manager, Chandigarh, letter No. 16741/EA-2 dated 31086.
It is neither mandatory nor obligatory on the part of the Management to ask for representation on the adverse remarks.
When the adverse entries were conveyed to the petitioner vide Divisional Manager, Chandigarh letter dated 31086, it was the duty of the petitioner to represent if the adverse entries were not acceptable to him."
In view of the controversy between the parties, sent for the original record which was produced before me by the learned counsel appearing for the State.
It is clear from the despatch register that a registered letter was despatched to the petitioner and the despatch number in the said register is 16741 and the subject matter of the communication is stated to be the confidential reports for the year 1985-86.
A copy of the postal receipt is also on the record.
The letter has not been received back and, therefore, it is presumed that the same must have been received by the petitioner.
The first contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is, thus, rejected.
5.
Now, I shall deal with the second contention of the writ petitioner.
It is true that the petitioner was allowed to crossed efficiency bar w.e.f.
March 1, 1988 and and order to this effect was passed by the competent authority on September 28, 1988.
The question to be seen is what effect does it have on the previous confidential reports of the petitioner for the year 1985-86 which was adverse to him.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, I am of the view that an adverse entry stands washed away if the official is subsequently allowed to cross his efficiency bar or is allowed to be promoted to a higher post or grade, no matter whatever may be allegations on which the adverse entry is based.
It is well settled that an official is not entitled to cross the efficiency bar as of right.
His performance from the service record has to be evaluated.
If he is found suitable and fit, only then he is allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
On the crossing of the efficiency bar, the official concerned is considered to be capable of performing the most onerous duties of the job that he is holding.
The purpose of the Rule conferring power on the Government to retire government servants prematurely is to energise its machinery by chopping of the `dead word' but with what logic, can an official who has been allowed to cross his efficiency bar be dubbed as inefficient, dishonest, corrupt or dead wood which needs to be chopped of from government service.
On the basis of the adverse entry for the year 1985-86, the petitioner was not allowed to crossed his efficiency bar on the due date i.e. March 1, 1987 and instead was issued a show-cause notice seeking his explanation as to why the same be not withheld for one year.
Thereafter, the petitioner cross his efficiency bar w.e.f.
March 1, 1988 nd with this, the previous adverse record, thus, stood obliterated.
The view that I am taking finds support from a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Om Parkash Gupta v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(1) R.S.J.
296.
The contrary view taken by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Satpal Singh v. Deputy Inspector General of Police and anr., 1985(2) S.L.R.
36 was specifically overruled.
This view also finds support from Swarmi Saran Saksena v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1979(2) SLR 781 (SC) wherein the petitioner had been prematurely retired only a few months after being permitted to cross his second efficiency bar, but their Lordships of the Supreme Court quashed the order of the premature retirement.
In the present case also, the petitioner crossed his efficiency bar in the year 1988 and he was prematurely retired in the following year.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court again in Baidyanath Mahapatra v. State of Orissa, 1989(4) SLR 220 set aside the order of pre-mature retirement as the appellant in that case had been promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer and he had further been permitted to cross the efficiency bar in the year 1979 whereafter he was prematurely retired on the basis of adverse reports pertaining to the earlier years.
6.
Learned Counsel appearing for the respondents has brought to my notice a Division Bench judgment of this Court in State of Punjab v. Pirthi Singh, L.P.A. No. 1319 of 1990 to contend that all adverse entries prior to the date of the crossing of the efficiency bar do not get washed away particularly the entry of `doubtful integrity'.
This case is distinguishable and does not support the contention of the respondents.
The learned Judges constituting the Division Bench after examining the case law on the subject and on going through the entire service record of the respondent therein found that even if the adverse entry of `doubtful integrity' for the year 1983-84 was to be ignored, there was enough material on the record of that case for ordering premature retirement of the respondent therein and observed as under :-  "In the present case, however, we find that in a case of doubtful integrity, the entire service record of the official concerned has to be taken into account and if that be so (and even if the entry of the year 1983-84 is to be ignored), the other entries would be sufficient for ordering the pre-nature retirement of the respondent."
In the present cse, if the adverse entry for the year 1985-86 is to be ignored, there is no other material on the record to justify pre-mature retirement of the petitioner.
7.
For the reasons above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of pre-mature retirement dated October 12, 1989 is quashed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.