Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Aggrieved by the action of the Municipal Committee in not allowing him to work from May 30, 1981 the petitioner approached the Labour Court.
His claim was declined on the ground that the appointment of the petitioner, against the vacancy caused by the suspension of Suraj Mal did not vest in him any right for future service, because he was liable to be pushed out as and when Suraj Mal was reinstated.
Holding the action of the Committee to be just and fair, the learned Labour Court rejected the claim of the petitioner.
Aggrieved by the award and the fact that after the termination of his services the Committee has appointed nine persons vide Resolution dated April 16, 1982 the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few relevant facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed on December 22, 1979 against the vacancy caused by the suspension of Sh. Suraj Mal.
On January 10, 1981, the Municipal Committee decided to appoint the petitioner on regular basis and the order in this behalf was issued to him.
The Deputy Director Local Bodies vide his order, dated January 17, 1981, which was issued on February 19, 1981 (Annexure P.2) suspended the decision of the Committee.
On April 1, 1981 the Committee passed Resolution No. 151 observing that the restriction imposed by the Deputy Director was meaningless and without any basis.
It further resolved to accept the appointments of 15 persons, including the petitioner.
It was noticed that the persons appointed by the Committee are already working.
A copy of this resolution is at Annexure P.3.
In spite of this resolution, the petitioner was not allowed to work from May 30, 1981.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that the petitioner had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis against a leave vacancy for a specified period.
If is claimed that the petitioner has no right to the post and as such the order of termination is legal and valid.
It has been admitted that the Committee had made the appointments of nine persons after the services of the petitioner had been terminated vide resolution dated April 16, 1982.
4.
Mr. JR Mittal, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had been appointed on regular basis and decision of the Committee was carried out when the petitioner submitted his joining report on January 28, 1981.
Thereafter, the Committee had reiterated the decision vide its revolution of April 1, 1981.
He further submits that the vacancies existed and there was no ground at all for the termination of the services of the petitioner.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the observations of the Apex Court in Municipal Board, Kannauj v. State of UP and others, AIR 1971 SC 2147.
None has appeared on behalf of the respondent.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, I find that even though the appointment had been originally made against a vacancy which had arisen on account of the suspension of Mrs. Suraj Mal, the Committee had decided to appoint the petitioner on regular basis on January 10, 1981.
This decision was reiterated by the Committee in its resolution of April 1, 1981.
The appointment had been made against the post which was available with the Committee.
His services had been regularised.
Subsequently vide resolution No. 173 dated April 16, 1982, the Committee had appointed eleven more persons.
In this view of the matter, the award of the Labour Court suffers from an apparent infirmity and cannot be sustained.
6.
Mr. Mittal has also pointed out that the Committee had in fact passed no order of termination.
It has been categorically averred that "it is thus clear that no order of termination or removal of the petitioner was ever passed by respondent No. 1 as no such order was placed on the record nor any such order was served on the petitioner."
This specific averment occurs in para 14(i).
In reply it has been suggested that the petitioner had left the service suo-motu and that the Committee is "not responsible of passing any order of termination or removal of the petitioner from the service."
The sequence of events shows that even though no order of termination had been actually passed or conveyed to the petitioner, he had not been permitted to continue working.
Once a person is appointed in service, he continues to be an employee till an order of termination etc., is actually passed and duly conveyed.
No order of termination appears to have been at all conveyed to the petitioner.
7.
In view of the above, the award of the Labour Court (Annexure P.6) cannot be sustained.
It is consequently set aside.
It is declared that the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated into service.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.