NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants Regular Second Appeal against the judgment of the lower Appellate Court whereby appeal filed against the judgment and decree of the Sub-Judge Ist Class, Jullundur was dismissed.
2.
Briefly stated, Karam Chand filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated July 9, 1969 passed by the Deputy Inspector General Punjab (Armed Police) Jullundur Cantt whereby he was reverted to the rank of constable from that of Head Constable is illegal, void unconstitutional, ultra vires and against the rules of natural justice and even otherwise mala fide, arbitrary and discriminatory and the same is inoperative and the plaintiff continues to serve in the rank of Head Constable till this day and is, thus entitled to all the privileges attached to that rank.
The plaintiff further averred that he joined as a constable on December 1, 1955 and worked on various assignments on December 1, 1963, he was promoted as officiating Head Constable.
On July 9, 1969, he was reduced in rank on the pretext that there was lack of vacancies, which order is now being challenged on various grounds including that his juniors have been retained.
He has been ordered to be reduced in rank.
3.
The state put in appearance controverted various averments made in the plaint and contended that the plaintiff was reverted his substantive rank due to lack of vacancies as he was junior-most.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 9.7.1969 passed by the DIG PAP Jullundur Cantt reverting the plaintiff to the rank of constable is illegal and void, discriminatory, unlawful and inoperative ?
OPD.
2.
Relief.
4.
The trial Court decided issued No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff and against the contesting defendant and as a result thereof decreed the suit of the plaintiff with costs.
5.
The lower Appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as law and finding no merit in the appeal, dismissed the same.
6.
Before me, almost identical plea has been raised on behalf of the State as was urged before the trial Court as well as Appellate Court.
Though these are findings of fact and are not amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code; yet with a view to see that the main judgment does not suffer from any legal infirmity, I have perished the evidence on record as well.
7.
Exhibit P1 is the list of Head Constables, approved for reversion to the rank of constables w.e.f.
July 9, 1969 due to the lack of vacancies.
Exhibit P2 is the summary of the service particulars of the plaintiff and defendant Nos. 2 to 14.
As observed earlier also, plaintiff joined the service as constable on January 10, 1955 and was promoted as Head Constable on December 1, 1963.
Out of the respondents, Head Constables Gurcharan Singh, Charanjit Singh, Joginder Singh and Sardul Singh all joined the service of the department much after the date of joining the service by the plaintiff.
These persons were no probation as head constables on July 9, 1969.
There can be no distinction between persons working on probation and persons officiating in that job.
As is now well settled the Reversion of a senior officer while a junior officer is retained affects his rank, status and further chances of promotion and is thus punitive in character.
It is also well settled that the principle of last come first go has to be followed in the cases of reversion.
In the present case, the rule has not been followed.
The plaintiff though senior in service has been reverted while his juniors have been retained.
In this way, this order is punitive in character.
Both the courts have held it so.
8.
I find no merit in this appeal and dismiss the same.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.