GC Garg, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1694 and 20583 of 1992, the point involved being the same.
The facts hereinafter mentioned have been taken from Civil Writ Petition 1964 of 1992.
2.
The petitioner herein seeks migration in the 2nd Year of Bachelor of Dental Science from Dental College situated outside the State of Punjab to Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar affiliated to the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
3.
The petitioner who is undergoing her studies in Dental Course in Bapuji Dental College, Dawangiri (Karnataka), applies for migration to Punjab Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar, a college affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
Admission in Bapuji Dental College, Dewangiri is not regulated on the basis of entrance test as is the case in Punjab Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar.
Students, who had applied for migration to Dental Colleges in the State of Punjab before February 15, 1991 and were eligible, were being permitted to migrate irrespective of the fact, whether they got admission in the Dental/Medical Colleges on the basis of entrance test or otherwise.
The situation for migration in the Colleges affiliated to Punjabi University continues to be the same, but Guru Nanak Dev University amended its regulations to provide that in the Colleges where the students are admitted on the basis of entrance test, migration be allowed to other students in these colleges, if otherwise eligible, if the student was admitted to that college on the basis of an entrance test and had secured at least the percentage of marks in the entrance test equivalent to that secured by the last candidate admitted to the course.
4.
The petitioner applied for migration on October 19, 1991 and her request is not being considered because of change in the regulations of Guru Nanak Dev University though the Director, Research Medical Education, Punjab recommended to the Principal, Dental College, Amritsar vide letter, Annexure P-3, to approach Guru Nanak Dev University for allowing migration in relaxation of conditions before admitting the students.
Seven seats are, admittedly, lying vacant in the Dental College, Amritsar where the petitioner and others seek migration and can be accommodated.
5.
Challenge to the validity of the Regulation amended by Guru Nanak Dev University being on the ground that there was no rationale behind it and is hit by the provisions of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India is not sustainable.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that once a student is eligible to be admitted to a Dental College and has been so admitted, Regulations could not be made by the University so as to debar the students of other colleges to migrate to college affiliated to it on the ground that the admission to that college was not on the basis of entrance test.
6.
Guru Nanak Dev University is a statutory body incorporated under an Act of State Legislature.
It is free to regulate its own affairs and frame regulations.
Similarly, Punjabi University, Patiala is entitled to frame its own Regulations relating to admission and migration to Colleges affiliated to it.
Merely because the two Government Dental Medical Colleges situated in Amritsar and Patiala are governed by different set of Regulations, one of Punjabi University and the other of Guru Nanak Dev University is not enough to sustain the claim of the petitioner seeking annulment of the Regulations providing that only those students could be allowed to migrate who had been admitted in the other Colleges on the basis of entrance test.
Dental College at Patiala is affiliated to Punjabi University and Dental College at Amritsar is affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University though admissions to the two Colleges are controlled by the State Punjab.
It cannot be said as a matter of law that Regulations relating to admission and migration to a particular course should be same either throughout the country or at least in the Universities situated in a particular State.
Each University, as noticed earlier, is a statutory body and can have its own Regulations.
Admission to these Colleges is not made by the Universities but by the Government on the basis of entrance test which the Universities in rotation conduct on behalf of the State Government.
Thus, simply because the students are admitted on the basis of a joint entrance test, it cannot logically be concluded that Regulations for migration should be the same in the two Universities.
7.
Recognition granted by the All India Dental/Medical Council to Bapuji Dental College, Dewangiri again, in no way, helps the petitioner.
All India Medical Council operates in a different field whereas the University which is the examining body, governed by its Regulations, has a different function to discharge.
Mere grant of recognition to a Dental College by the All India Medical Council cannot clothe the students of one College with a right to seek migration to another College of their choice.
Its functions are advisory.
The contention of the learned counsel, if accepted, would mean that regulations of all the Universities in the country imparting medical education should be the same not only regarding migration but in other respects also.
8.
Again, relief cannot be granted to the petitioner only on the ground that Punjabi University is still allowing migration to students like the petitioner but Guru Nanak Dev University is not allowing migration because of the amended Regulation noticed above.
The two Universities are independent of each other and can frame their own Regulations depending upon their requirements.
Regulations thus, cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India, only on the ground that all three Universities in the State do not have a uniform criterion for migration to Colleges affiliated to them.
9.
The other challenge of learned counsel for the petitioner is about retrospective amendment of the Regulation.
The Regulation as amended is prospective in nature.
Simply because the petitioner got admission in the Dental College in the year 1990 and the amendment has been made by Guru Nanak Dev University in its Regulations in the year 1991, it cannot be said that it is retrospective.
The petitioner applied for migration in October, 1991 and the Regulation had already been amended in February, 1991.
10.
Migration is not a right, it is rather a concession to a student to migrate from one college to another or from one university to another, if his case is covered by the Regulations framed by the University.
Each University is entitled to maintain is own standard and frame its own Regulations in that behalf.
Though I have upheld the validity of the Regulation and that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief on that basis, yet there is another aspect of the matter.
In the case of Devinder Pal Singh, application for seeking migration was submitted on May 6, 1991, i.e. after February 15, 1991.
He was denied migration by the University.
He approached this Court by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 7999 of 1991 and Guru Nanak Dev University without waiting for the verdict of this Court, permitted him to migrate from a College affiliated to Mysore University, to Dental College, Amritsar affiliated to it.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not dispute this fact, but stated that migration was allowed to him by mistake and by wrongly construing the interim order of this Court.
11.
Medical education is imparted by spending huge public funds.
Should the available seats be permitted to go abegging.
It is not a case where the University is going to create extra seats for these students but it is a case where the seats are already in existence and are lying vacant.
No body would gain if these seats are allowed to remain vacant.
Out of the seven petitioners, in the two petitions, seeking migration, six are girl students from whom special provision has been made in Article 15 of the Constitution of India.
Keeping in view the fact that seats are lying vacant and Guru Nanak Dev University has already allowed such a migration earlier in the case of Devinder Pal Singh, a candidate similarly situated, a factor which has weighed with me in concluding that the petitioners are entitled to some relief in equity.
After effecting migrations under the Regulations, as amended, if some seats still remain vacant, then these should not be permitted to go waste.
Under these circumstances, it would be appropriate to direct the University to consider the cases of the petitioners and other similarly situated students for migration on their own merits against the available seats, as expeditiously as possible.
12.
In the matter of admission to Medical Colleges, the apex Court has also indicated on several occasions that the seats should not be permitted to remain vacant.
The same view was taken by this Court in Miss Sumedha Kalia v. State of Haryana, 1990(4) SLR 122.
13.
Dismissal of Civil Writ Petition No. 14543 of 1991 in limine by a Division Bench of this Court on January 15, 1992, in no way helps learned counsel for the respondents, as that was a case where application for migration was moved on February 12, 1991 and the only challenge was to the validity of Regulations.
14.
For the reasons aforesaid, I direct the respondent-University to consider the cases of the petitioners and other similarly situated students seeking migration to Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar on their own merits against the available seats, as expeditiously as possible.
The writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms and directions.
This order will, however, be not taken as a precedent as the direction has been issued in the peculiar facts of this case.
The parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.