Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9166 of 1990, 10572 and 11492 of 1990 involving common questions of law and facts.
For the purpose of judgment, facts have been from Civil Writ Petition No. 9166 of 1990.
2.
The petitioner, a PCMS-II Medical Officer, who belongs to a Scheduled Castes community, applied for admission to Post Graduate Course for the Session 1990.
His choice of subjects was as follows :-  i) MD Paediatrics ii) D.C.H.
iii) M.D.
Radio-diagnosis.
iv) D.T.C.D.
v) M.D.
Medicine.
He secured 1603 marks on calculation.
After taking into consideration his qualifications etc. and on the basis of calculated marks, he was admitted to Post Graduate Diploma (D.C.H.)
at Government Medical College, Patiala.
In the list of Schedule Caste candidates, the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 10.
Three candidates of said category were higher in merit than him.
Hence he was not admitted to MD Paediatrics.
The petitioner being not satisfied with his admission to D.C.H.
Course, filed the present writ petition for quashing the admission of respondent No. 4 to MD Paediatrics at Govt. Medical College, Patiala and for seeking direction to respondents to admit him in the said course on the basis of reservation in that speciality.
3.
The case of the petitionr, as put forward by his Counsel is, that in the category of Scheduled Caste candidates, there was only one candidate, who had secured more marks than the petitioner.
However, this candidate gave in writing giving up his claim for MD Paediatrics Course as he was not interested in the same.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted an application to respondent No. 3 requesting to admit him in MD Paediatrics against the seat meant of a Scheduled Caste candidate, but his request for that speciality was not acceded to.
The other plea raised by the learned Counsel is that as per Govt. instructions/policy guidelines contained in Annexure P-5 dealing with the subject of reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Backward classes regulating the admission to Post-Graduate Course, the reservation has to be provided speciality wise.
According to the formula laid down therein, one seat has to be given to a Scheduled Caste candidate in MD Paediatrics, but in the present case, there is total departure from the said policy guidelines.
The contention of the petitioner's counsel remains that if the formula laid therein was observed, the petitioner being higher in merit would have been admitted as per his first preference to MD Paediatrics.
4.
This Court vide its order dated July 31, 1990 had granted provisional admission to the petitioner to MD Paediatrics.
One Doctor Tek Chand has challenged the said provisional admission granted to the petitioner by filing writ petition No. 114942 of 1990 seeking direction to the respondents that he be admitted in MD Paediatrics since he is higher in merit than the petitioner.
This writ petition is also being disposed of with the present petition.
5.
The respondents have filed a detailed written statement controverting the pleas raised by the petitioner's Counsel.
6.
The learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab contends that the petitioner was lower in merit than Dr. Surjit Singh, Dr. Tek Chand and Dr. Mohanjit Singh, who too had given their first preferences to MD Paediatrics and were not selected as no seat was available at their merit point.
As such, the petitioner cannot stake claim for his admission to MD Paediatrics over and above the claims of the other Scheduled Caste candidates, who are higher in merit than him.
7.
I have perused the paper book and considered the arguments advanced the Bar.
8.
The perusal of the paper-book reveals that the petitioner had applied for admission to Post-Graduate Course and his first choice of subject was MD Paediatrics.
The petitioner, who had obtained 1603 marks and was placed at Sr. No. 10 of the Merit list, was admitted to D.C.H.
Course, which was his second choice.
In this context, it is relevant to mention that the merit of other Scheduled Caste candidates, who had also given their first preference to MD Paediatrics and were not selected as no seat was available in that speciality at their merit points.
Their merit is shown as under :  Sr. No. Name of the candidate Marks obtained.
1.
Dr. Surjit Singh S/o Sh. Bachan Singh 167851.
2.
Dr. Tek Chand S/o Daulat Ram 164141 3.
Dr. Mohanjit Singh S/o Sh. Bachan Singh 1610.64 4.
Dr. Amrik Singh (Petitioner) S/o Sadhu Singh 160300 This merit list clearly indicates that the petitioner in the category of Scheduled Castes was lower in merit being at Sr. No. 14.
The Punjab Government vide its letter dated 121982 had fixed reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes for the purpose of admission to Post-Graduate Medical Courses.
It was laid down therein that the procedure being adopted for recruitment in the Services is also to be followed for admission to the Post Graduate Courses in the following manner :- "i) After adjusting the Registrars/Demonstrators etc. remaining vacant seats be pooled and seats falling at Sr. No. 1, 5, 9 and so on be reserved for the candidates belonging to the Backward Classes, subject to the condition that the reservation in individual speciality for these categories should not exceed 30%.
In case eligible candidates of these categories are not forthcoming, such reserved seats be filled up from general category candidates.
ii) Units be allotted to the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste/Tribes and Backward Classes on the basis of the ranking of the students on the general selection list of the speciality concerned."
The State Government has taken a categoric stand in the written statement that by reaching the reserved point at Sr. No. 25, the petitioner's candidature was considered, all the two degree seats of speciality of MD Paediatrics had been filled up by then.
Hence petitioner could not be selected.
However, he was selected in Diploma Course of the same speciality.
Moreover there were Scheduled Caste candidates higher in merit than the petitioner who were also not selected for want of seats at their Merit Points in the speciality of MD Paediatrics.
Dr. Kuldip Rai having 1702 marks belonging to SC category has been selected in MD Paediatrics (40% quota).
Hence due quota of Scheduled Caste has been given.
9.
Thus I am of the considered view that petitioner was rightly given admission in D.C.H.
Course, which was his second preference and he has no right to claim admission in MD Paediatrics over and above the claims of the Scheduled Caste candidates who were higher in merit than him.
The seats in speciality-wise are in 100 point roster.
The total seats in each speciality were further divided in 60 :40% quota for the purpose of selection of candidates and to give the benefit to in-service PCMS II candidates.
As per Punjab govt. instructions contained in Annexure R-1, the reservation is to be given in each speciality institution-wise and not in separate quota.
By no stretch of imagination the petitioner can claim admission over and above one Dr. Anoop Modi, who was selected for MD Paediatrics out of 60% quota meant for in-service candidates, whose merit was higher than that of the petitioner.
The net result of the foregoing discussion is that the petitioner cannot claim admission in MD Paediatrics being lower in merit amongst this category of Scheduled Castes.
In this case, it is observed that the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste category have been given their due share as fixed by the Punjab Government.
In this case, I also find that the Government before filling up the seats for admission to Post-Graduate Courses, has taken a definite decision as to how and in what manner admissions are to be made to the reserved category and if the admissions are being made in accordance with that policy, then the petitioner cannot have any justifiable grouse entitling him to any relief from this Court in exercise of its extra-ordinary jurisdiction.
As observed earlier, since the seats have been filled up in accordance with the admission notice and strictly in accordance with merit, this writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
10.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit.
11.
Another aspect of the matter is that in this case the petitioner, as referred earlier, vide this Court's order dated July 31, 1990 was given provisional admission to MD Paediatrics to Govt. Medical College, Patiala, subject to the result of this writ petition.
The learned Counsel during arguments made a specific prayer that in the event the writ petition is dismissed, the petitioner's provisional admission be not distributed as he has completed one year of his course.
I have given a thoughtful consideration to this aspect of the matter.
I am of the view that neither equity nor the law is in favour of the petitioner as he got provisional admission from a Court of equity by misrepresentation of facts and the material facts had not been brought to the notice of the Court at the time of admission of the writ petition.
Now it has become quite a common practice to get provisional admission on one pretext or the other and then to plead that the same be not upset on the ground of mercy.
This practice being uncalled for needs to be deprecated.
In this view of the matter, it will be open to the respondents to proceed further as they think proper and appropriate.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.