Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is a aggrieved by the order dated August 1, 1989 by which he has been informed that in pursuance to the result of Selection Board held on July 25, 1989, he has not been placed in an acceptable grade for promotion.
This consideration was based on the petitioner's record upto the year 1979-80.
The petitioner's representation dated November 16, 1989.
Copies of these two orders are attached Annexure P 8 and P. 9 to the writ petition.
2.
The petitioner had originally challenged his supersession through CWP No. 1022, of 1988.
The two fold grievance made in this petition was that his confidential reports did not correctly represent the overall career profile of the petitioner and had been written with some extraneous consideration.
Secondly, the petitioner had claimed that under Regulation 69, the claim for promotion had to be considered in order of seniority and the cases of officers, who were superseded for promotion had to be kept under review.
As a consequence, the petitioner had submitted that the regulation did not lay down that the claim to be considered only on three occasions and thereafter, the officer was not considered for promotion.
On the basis of the above he had inter alia prayed as under :-  "a) issue a writ, order or direction quashing the orders superseding the petitioner and directing the respondents to promote him having regard to his above average record of service as reflected in the ACRS; b) direct the respondents to keep the name of the petitioner under review for promotion in terms of para 69 of the Regulations for the Army and in the tune with the system prevalent in the Air Force and to expunge ACRS for 1975 to 1977; c) direct the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioner for promotion having target to the change in Qualitative requirement and also having regard to the rule position on the subject;  d) dispense with service of advice notice on respondent; e) exempt filing of certified copies of annexures; f) award cost of the petition in favour of the petitioner."
3.
In spite of numerous opportunities having been given to the respondents, no written statement was filed.
The writ petition was on Consequently allowed by the Division Beach on May 3 1989 with the following order :-  "Nobody appears for the respondents.
However before Lunch, Mr. PS Saini, Advocate, appeared for Mr. Chahar and requested for more time to file the written statement.
But we were not agreeable to adjourn the case because we found that inspite of repeated adjournments granted since November, no written statement has been filed by the respondents, and the very purpose of issuing the notice of motion stands frustrated.
Thereupon, Mr. Saini promised to send Mr. Chahar, the learned counsel who had been appearing for the respondents on the earlier dates, for putting in appearance after lunch.
It is already 230 pm Mr. Chahar is not available.
In the circumstances, we see no justification in adjourning the case for the filing of the written statement.
The matter is fully covered by 08, R. 10, Code of Civil Procedure, read with rule 32 of the Writ (Jurisdiction) Rules, and, therefore, we strike off the defence of the respondents.
As a necessary consequence, the averments made in this petition are taken to be correct for the purpose of this order.
Relying on the same, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to reconsider the claim of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law.
It is further directed that this process of consideration should be completed within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
The petitioner is also held entitled to the costs of this litigation which we determine at Rs. 500/-.
This petition stands disposed of as indicated above."
It is in pursuance to the above order that the respondents have passed the two orders.
Which have been impugned in this petition.
The petitioner's grievance now is two fold.
Firstly, it is contended that his claim with regard to the annual confidential reports having been sustained, the reconsideration of his case for promotion on the basis of the old reports is wholly contrary to the directions of this Court.
It is further submitted that the view of the authorities that an officer is entitled to be considered for promotion only on three occasions and not thereafter is contrary to Regulation 69 as also the directions of this Court.
4.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
It is pleaded on their behalf that the petitioner has been considered in accordance with law and that Army officers, are considered only three times for promotion to the next higher rank by selection and those who do not make the grade for promotion in three chances are finally superseded.
It is further maintained that this policy is universally applicable and no exception can be claimed.
5.
I have heard Mr. RS Randhawa learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Ashutosh Mohanta learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
A perusal of the record shows that while deciding CWP No. 10232 of 1988, the Division Bench had clearly struck off the defence of the respondents.
As a consequence the averments made in the petition were taken to be correct for the purposes of the order.
It followed that the contentions raised by the petitioner with regard to the validity of his Confidential reports as also with regard to his right to be considered for promotion ever after he had been considered thrice were upheld.
Once these contentions were upheld and the writ petition allowed with the direction that the petitioner's claim shall be reconsidered, it was not open to the respondents to mechanically reject his claim on the basis of the record of service as it existed prior to the order of this Court.
In fact, they had to review his confidential reports and then reconsider his claim for further promotion.
Furthermore, even the restriction of three chances was not applicable in his case.
This has not been done.
7.
Mr. Ashutosh Mohanta learned counsel for the respondents contends that there is no specific direction by this Court in pursuance to which his confidential reports may have to be reviewed or his claim may be required to be considered after the three chances had been exhausted.
I cannot uphold this contention.
8.
As observed above, the defence which could have been raised on behalf of the respondents at the relevant time, was raised.
The Court had proceeded on the assumption that all the averments made in the petition were correct.
It has consequently allowed the writ petition.
In this situation it is implicit that the claim of the petitioner had been sustained by this Court.
All the prayers made by the petitioner are deemed to have been accepted.
Once this was so, the orders passed by the respondents are clearly untenable in law.
In fact, it appears anomalous that on one hand the petitioner has been declared as unsuitable for promotion and on the other he has actually been granted rank of Lt.
Colonel at a subsequent date.
9.
Accordingly the orders at Annexures P9 and P10 are quashed.
It is held that the respondents shall review the confidential reports of the petitioner in accordance with the averments made in the writ petition No 10222 of 1988.
After finalising the reports, his claim for promotion on every such occasion when persons junior to him were considered shall be considered.
The petitioner shall be granted promotion w.e.f.
the date he is found suitable.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Order accordingly.