Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner served the Army from 1963 to 1970 and was discharged on compassionate grounds.
After this discharge from the Army, he joined Punjab Local Audit Department in the year 1974 on purely temporary basis.
Subsequently, he left the job and joined the State Bank of Patiala in 1976.
The appointment offered to him there was also temporary.
In both the appointments, no benefit of military service was granted to him.
In the meantime, the petitioner was appointed as Manager Grade-I in the Warehousing Corporation, Punjab, Chandigarh on regular basis w.e.f.
1.4.1978 and since then he is continuing there.
The petitioner made repeated representations to the respondent-Corporation to grant him the benefit of military service, but the same were rejected.
The petitioner in this writ petition is seeking a direction to the respondent to grant the benefit of military service.
2.
In order to claim the benefit of military service, the learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that in accordance with Rule 4 of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules 1965, the military service be counted for the purposes of increment, seniority and pension.
The benefit of military service has been denied to the petitioner on the plea that prior to joining the Corporation, he had served two other departments.
As per 1965 Rules, the benefit of military service was admissible on first appointment after the release from the Army.
Since in the Corporation, it is not his first appointment, as such, he is not entitled to the benefit of military service.
3.
I have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper-book.
In order to claim the benefit of military service, the Counsel has relied upon this Court's decision rendered in Krishan Lal, ASI v. State of Haryana & others, 1991(4) S.L.R.
456.
Earlier, the question whether after seeking voluntary retirement, a Government employee is entitled to the benefit of military service, came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in Raj Pal Sharma AIR 1983 SC 1263 and earlier to it in the case of KC Arora and another v. State of Haryana 1983(3) S.C.C.
281.
The relevant instructions dealing with the point in issue were held to be bad in law.
Resultantly accepting those writ petitions, the petitioners were held to be entitled to the benefit of military service.
The Government's very instructions which disentitle a Govt. employee the benefit of military service and lay down that it is admissible only on first appointment, were struck down by this Court in Raj Kumar v. State of Haryana & others, 1981(3) SLR 436.
In view of the above settled proposition of law, it cannot be said that the benefit of military service is available only on first appointment and not on subsequent appointment.
Since the State has not filed any written statement, as such, the averments made in the writ petition remain uncontroverted.
From the perusal of the paper book, it is revealed that the appointments held by the petitioner in the Audit Department inasmuch as in the State Bank of Patiala were purely on temporary basis and were for short duration.
The benefit of military service was never granted to him as he did not make any request in this regard to his employers earlier.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 88 of 1988, the question for consideration before this Court was whether an ex-serviceman, who had been discharged on compassionate grounds, was entitled to this concession.
This Court following the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Raj Pal's case (supra) accepted the writ petition and the petitioner therein was held to be entitled to the benefit of military service.
4.
In view of the well settled proposition of law, this writ petition is allowed and the impunged letters, Annexure P-1 and P-2 vide which the benefit of military service was denied to the petitioner, are quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of military service with all consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.
Petition accepted.