RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner has joined service in the State of Punjab in the Department of Food and Supplies as Sub Inspector in January, 1959.
He was promoted as Inspector and then as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
A charge-sheet was served on the petitioner by the Director, Food and Supplies on 30111986 (Annexure P-1) alleging that he had made wrong recommendations for issuance of a wholesale licence of coal to a particular party.
The petitioner had given a reply to the said charge-sheet and the same having not been found satisfactory, an enquiry officer was appointed to go into the charge.
The enquiry was concluded on 20121988.
Enquiry report has been annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P-3.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on the basis of the enquiry report as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
After considering the reply, respondent No. 1, Secretary to the Government, Food and Supplies Deptt.
passed an order on 251991 (Annexure P-5) dismissing the petitioner from service.
It is this order which has been challenged in the present writ petition.
Before adverting to the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner, it may be observed that during the course of enquiry, petitioner was promoted as District Food and Supplies Officer on 261988.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following points to challenge the impugned order (Annexure P-5) :  1.
The impugned order is violative of rules of natural justice as well as Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 inasmuch as :  (a) Copy of the preliminary enquiry report, which was relied upon by the prosecution was not supplied to the petitioner.
(b) The witnesses who were not cited in the list of witnesses were examined by the enquiry officer.
(c) The statements of the witnesses which were recorded during the course of preliminary enquiry have been relied upon by the enquiry officer without giving copies of the statements of those witnesses.
(d) There is violation of Rule 8(8) of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, as the petitioner was not given the assistance of any other Government employee to represent the case on his behalf.
(e) After the submission of the enquiry report by the enquiry officer, petitioner was not heard by the Disciplinary Authority i.e. Secretary to the Government, Food and Supplies but was only given hearing by the Director, Food and Supplies 2.
That the enquiry was held the finding of guilt was already.
3.
In any case the punishment of dismissal was wholly incommensurate with a charge even if it is said to be proved.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to the list of reliance of documents and the list of witnesses which was attached to the charge-sheet.
In the list of reliance of documents, only one document is mentioned i.e. enquiry report of Mr. Charanjit Singh Bawa, Deputy Director, Food and Supplies.
This is the preliminary enquiry report.
In the fist of witnesses, only one witness is mentioned i.e. Mr. Charanpal Singh Bawa, Deputy Director who had held the preliminary enquiry.
Learned counsel submitted that it was incumbent upon the respondents to have supplied the petitioner with a copy of the preliminary enquiry report inasmuch as not only it was relied upon by the prosecution but in fact it was the only document, which was being relied upon and was produced before the enquiry officer and the enquiry officer has also placed reliance on the same while holding the petitioner guilty of the charge.
In support of the contention, learned counsel cited a judgment of this Court in Prem Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1989(3) SLJ 127, which was upheld in LPA No. 1808 of 1989 decided on 3171990.
Even SLP against the said LPA was dismissed by the Supreme Court.
Learned Single Judge in Prem Kumar's case (supra) held that the non-supply of copy of preliminary enquiry report to delinquent obviously prejudices him in arranging his defence in the course of enquiry.
The dismissal order was quaashed.
While upholding the conclusion of the Learned Single Judge in the case (supra), L.P.A.
Bench observed as under :  "Mr. SK Sayal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, has not been able to persuade us to take a different view from the one which had been taken by the learned Single Judge.
We were taken through the enquiry report with the help of the learned counsel for the parties and we find that not only that the preliminary enquiry reports have been exhibited, but the Enquiry Officer even relied on these reports for coming to the conclusions against the writ-petitioners.
In these circumstances, the non-supply of the documents had obviously prejudiced the defence of the writ-petitioners.
Since the enquiry was vitiated as being against the principles of natural justice as no proper opportunity was given to the delinquent officials to defend themselves, we find no fault with the order of the learned Single Judge."
4.
In the enquiry report, the preliminary enquiry report has been relied upon for recording the finding of guilt against the petitioner.
The stand of the respondents in the written statement is that there was no need of supplying the preliminary enquiry report inasmuch as the sum and substance of the preliminary enquiry report was contained in the charge-sheet itself.
5.
After hearing the counsel for the parties on the point, I find considerable force in the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner.
The preliminary enquiry report which was the basis of the finding of guilt against the petitioner had to be supplied to the petitioner so that he could properly defend himself.
It has certainly prejudiced his defence and the whole enquiry proceedings are liable to be set aside on this point alone.
If the sum and substance had been given in the charge-sheet itself, there was no need on the part of the respondents to rely upon the preliminary enquiry report.
Once a document was being relied upon it was incumbent upon the respondents to supply a copy of the same to comply with the rules or natural justice.
It was precisely under these circumstances that in the above noted case, the order of punishment was set aside.
6.
Coming to the next point of violation of rules of natural justice, learned counsel took me through the enquiry report.
As observed earlier, only Charanpal Singh Bawa was cited as a witness in the list of witnesses.
Bhag Singh and Kishan Gopal, two officials of the Food and Supplies Department were also examined by the enquiry officer.
Rules 8 (3) and (4) of the Punishment and Appeal Rules require that the list of witnesses and the list of reliance of documents is to be supplied to the delinquent officer.
The purpose of this Rule is that the delinquent officer should not be taken by surprise and he should know as to who are the witnesses who are to appear against him and what documents will be produced to prove a particular charge.
It is not clear from the record as to whether any previous statements of these two witnesses were ever recorded.
None of the previous statements, if any, which may have been recorded earlier were supplied to the petitioner.
Examining of witnesses beyond the list of witnesses certainly prejudiced the petitioner.
Even if it is assumed that there was no previous statement of Charanpal Singh Bawa, who had held the preliminary enquiry, the preliminary enquiry itself should be treated to be the previous statement of Charanpal Singh Bawa and it ought to have been supplied to the petitioner so that he should effectively cross-examine the said witness.
As observed above, the report of the preliminary enquiry was not supplied to the petitioner.
That being so, enquiry on this point also stands vitiated.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner while referring to the enquiry report pointed out that Charanpal Singh Bawa, who had held the preliminary enquiry had deputed Bhag Singh to do the investigations and he had recorded the statements of witnesses like Brij Lal, Subhash Chander, Hari Singh etc.
The said persons never appeared as witnesses.
However I find from the enquiry report that the statements, which were recorded by Bhag Singh of the persons mentioned above, have been relied upon by the Enquiry Officer to record the findings against the petitioner.
This is certainly in violation of rules of natural justice.
Apart from the fact that any previous statement of Bhag Singh, who appeared as a witness was not supplied to the petitioner, the other persons mentioned above were neither cited as witnesses nor they were produced in the enquiry, yet their statements recorded by Bhag Singh witness, have been relied upon by the Enquiry Officer.
Without giving copy of statement of those persons to the petitioner and offering the petitioner an opportunity to cross-examine those persons, the statements of the said witnesses could not be relied upon by the Enquiry Officer.
The finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer against the petitioner is liable to be set aside on this point alone.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that at no stage of the enquiry, the petitioner was told that he could have the assistance of any Govt. employee during the course of the enquiry.
Rule 8(8) of Punishment and Appeal Rules is reproduced below in this context :  "8(8) The Government employee may take the assistance of any other Government employee to present the case on his behalf but may not engage a legal practitioner for the purpose unless the Presenting Officer appointed by the punishing authority is a legal practitioner or the punishing authority having regard to the circumstances of the case, so permits."
According to the learned counsel it was mandatory on the respondents to have asked the petitioner if he wanted to have the assistance of his next friend as envisaged by Rule 8(8) supra.
In support of this contention, learned counsel cited a judgment in case Shri Bhagat Rant v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 1983 (1)SLR 626.
In this case, the Supreme Court was interpreting an identical rule as Rule 8(8) supra and held that it was mandatory duty of the prosecution to ask the delinquent officer if he wanted the help of his next friend.
No meaningful argument was addressed on behalf of the respondents on this point.
I find force in this argument as well and hold that there has been violation of Rules 8(8) of the Punishment and Appeal Rules and consequently proper opportunity to defend the petitioner was denied thereby violating rules of natural justice also.
9.
It is not disputed before me that the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner is the Secretary to the Government, Punjab, Food and Supplies Department.
After the enquiry report was submitted by the Enquiry Officer, a personal hearing was granted to the petitioner by the Director, Food and Supplies and not by the Secretary to the Government Punjab, Food and Supplies Department.
This is even apparent from the impugned order Annexure P/5.
Learned counsel submitted that after the submission of the enquiry report, hearing by the Disciplinary Authority is not a mere farce or just a routine formality.
Before the Disciplinary Authority, a delinquent officer can always show that the enquiry report should not be accepted on various grounds which may be urged in that regard.
Hearing by an authority other than disciplinary authority is not a substitute for the hearing which is provided in the Punishment and Appeal Rules as well as under the Rules of natural justice.
The petitioner in the present case had to convince the disciplinary authority and not the Director Food and Supplies that the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer could not be sustained.
I find that the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is well merited.
The petitioner should have been heard by the disciplinary authority after the enquiry report was submitted and he was not to be personally heard by the Director, Food and Supplies.
In Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
111, Supreme Court has held that under the rules of natural justice copy of the enquiry report which is submitted to the disciplinary authority must be supplied to the delinquent officer for the reason that it is before the disciplinary authority that the delinquent officer is to show that the enquiry report should not be accepted.
Consequently, I find that the rules of natural justice have been violated by the disciplinary authority by not affording a personal hearing to the petitioner.
10.
Now coming to the second point that the enquiry was a mere farce inasmuch as the issue had already been pre-judged and no open mind was kept.
In this regard, learned counsel drew my attention to the charge-sheet, Annexure P-1 in which after detailing the allegations, it has been mentioned as under :  "By doing go, you as a Supervisory officer, proved as a careless and irresponsible officer."
In the statement of allegations issued alongwith the charge-sheet, it has been mentioned as under :-  "Thus, it is proved that while you recommended for issuance of licence of coal after site inspection, that act on your part was wrong."
"From the above, it is proved that he is careless, irresponsible and not trustworthy officer."
From the above expressions in the charge-sheet, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that once it is mentioned in the charge-sheet itself that the charge stood proved what could the poor Enquiry Officer do under the circumstances, but to hold that the petitioner was guilty of the charge.
The guilt of the petitioner had been pre-judged and under the circumstances the enquiry officer could not keep an open mind.
According to the petitioner's counsel the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer under the circumstances are wholly arbitrary and the enquiry is vitiated and the same cannot be said to be fair and impartial.
In support of this contention, learned counsel cited the following authorities :-  Khem Chand v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 300, Gouri Pr.
Ghosh v. State of West Bengal, 1968 SLR 625, and Keshri Mal v. State of Rajasthan, 1979(3) SLR 1.
The above authorities do support the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In Khem Chand's case (supra), Supreme Court observed at page 308 as under :-  "This Procedure also has the merit of giving some assurance to the officer concerned that the competent authority maintains an open mind with regard to him.
If the competent authority were to determine, before the charges were proved, that a particular punishment would be meted out to the government servant concerned, the latter may well feel that the competent authority had formed an opinion against him, generally on the subject-matter of the charge or, at any rate, as regards the punishment itself.
Considered from this aspect also the construction adopted by us appears to be consonant with the fundamental principle of jurisprudence that justice must not only be done but must also be seen to have been done."
11.
Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that only a prima facie view of the disciplinary authority had been disclosed and the mere use of the words as indicated above in the charge-sheet would not go to show that the disciplinary authority had already pre-judged the issue.
According to him, it was only after appreciation of evidence by the Enquiry officer that the finding was recorded against the petitioner which was upheld by the Disciplinary Authority.
12.
After hearing counsel for the parties on this point, I find merit in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner.
The use of the words in the charge-sheet as indicated above indicates as if the petitioner had already been found guilty and on the basis of some evidence which was in the possession of the disciplinary authority it already stood proved that the petitioner was guilty of the charge.
As has been observed by the Supreme Court in Khem Chand's case (supra) that justice must not only be done but must also be seen to have been done aptly applies to the facts of the present case.
On this ground also, the whole enquiry proceedings are vitiated and the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
13.
It is not necessary for me to go into the question of quantum of punishment on account of the view I have taken on other points raised by the petitioner's counsel.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and order dated 251991 Annexure P-5 dismissing the petitioner from service is hereby quashed resultantly the petitioner would be reinstated forthwith in service from the date of dismissal order with all consequential benefits.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.