NK Sodhi, J - This judgment will dispose of a bunch of eleven writ petitions Nos. 16753 of 1990, 2746, 3043, 3238, 3505, 3916, 3920, 3988, 4205, 5122 and 5197 of 1991 as the learned counsel for the parties are agreed that common questions of law and fact arise in them.
2.
The petitioners in these writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India are working as lecturers in various Government Colleges in the State of Punjab Part-time basis and have approached this Court for an appropriate writ or direction to the State Government not to terminate their services which termination they are apprehending.
They are being paid by the hour subject to a maximum of Rs. 2000/- per month.
It is stated that respondent - state has been changing its criteria in the matter of appointment of college lecturers from time to time.
Admittedly, there are permanent posts of lecturers existing in the State of Punjab but no regular appointments are being made since the year 1987.
The respondent - State has been making appointments of lecturers on ad hoc basis for short durations and it was only after this Court and the Supreme Court granted in some cases stay orders to the ad hoc employees against their termination that the State changed the mode of their appointments.
The lecturers were then appointed on 89 days basis with notional breaks.
Some of the lecturers are continuing in service on the basis of interim orders passed by this court or the Supreme Court in several writ petitions filed in these Courts challenging the mode of such appointments.
The Supreme Court in the case of Ratten Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 478 depricated the policy of 'ad hocism' adopted by the State Government whereby the teachers were denied the salaries and allowances for the period of summer vacation by resorting to the notional breaks which were being given in their service.
The State has now started appointing lecturers on part-time basis and they are being paid Rs. 40/- per hour for theory periods and Rs. 15/- for practical periods, subject to a maximum of Rs. 2000/- which ever is less.
In other words, the petitioners are being paid for the work actually done and denied any honorarium for the summer vacation nor are they being paid for the holidays and nor for the days when there is no work either because the students are on strike or institutions are otherwise closed.
By this novel method devised by the State the lecturers like the petitioners are not only at the mercy of the State, but also at the mercy of the students and they have become daily wagers.
The appointment of petitioners as part-time lecturers was made either by advertising posts in the newspapers and inviting applications or by sending requisitions to the concerned Employment Exchanges which sponsored the names of eligible candidates.
The selection was made after they ere interviewed by a committee consisting of the principal of the college and two others including the subject expert.
Some of the Petitioners have been working since the year 1988.
The petitioners who are described as part-time lecturers are actually delivering 4 to 5 lectures a day whereas teachers appointed on regular basis are required to deliver only 3 to 4 lectures.
Their grievance is that it is a misnomer to call them as part-time lecturers since the work they are doing is not of part-time nature but the one which a regular teacher would have done had the Government made regular appointments in accordance with the Rules.
The fact that the petitioners have been appointed against the regular vacancies and are delivering the same number of lectures as the regular teachers if not more, is not denied.
They have obviously been appointed on daily wages only to be deprived of their security of service and regular pay scale which is being given to the regular lecturers.
It is urged that even the experience which the petitioners are gaming would of no avail to them and no credit would be given for that at any stage in their life.
The petitioners, therefore, claim a regular pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000/- which is being paid to the regular lecturers on the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'.
3.
The respondents - State has not disputed the material averments made by the petitioners and their stand is that part - time lecturers like the petitioners were appointed only for teaching work on contract basis and that they accepted the terms and conditions of their appointment with their eyes wide open.
The petitioners, according to the written statement, are not entitled to be treated as full time lecturers and the following three distinctions between the petitioners and the regular lecturers have been pointed out in para 8 of the return :  Lecturer appointed on regular basis Lecturer appoined on contrct basis 1.
The regular lecturers are appointed by Govt. on the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The Punjab Public Service Commission advertised the posts, and after wide publication, hold interviews of canididates.
The candidates selected by the Commissions are most qualified and talented.
The part-time lecturers are selected from amongst the candidates sponsored by the employment Exchange.
The petitioner was selected from amongst the six candidates.
The principal of the respective colleges are competent to appoint the part-time lecturers on contract basis.
2.
A regular lecturer set question papers and check the answer of the students.
He also supervise the examinations.
2.
The Part-time lecturers are not assigned all such duties.
3.
The regular lecturers are permanent employees of Government for 24 hours.
3.
The lecturers on contract basis are appointed keeping in view the studies of students for a specific period.
4.
It is true that the regular lecturers are appointed on the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission after advertising posts but the grievance of the petitioners precisely is that this is not being done since the year 1987 and they are being deprived of a chance to compete for the same.
The fact that the regular lecturers are made to set question papers and check answer sheets can be no ground to hold that they are in any way different from the so called part-timers like the petitioners.
The petitioners have placed material on the record to show that even the part time lecturers are being given examination duties.
At any rate, those who are made to do this additional work are also paid extra whether they be whole timers or part timers.
The third distinction pointed out by the State regarding the permanent employment of the regular lecturers is again the precise grievance of the petitioners who also want to be whole time Government employees.
5.
I see no justification for the stand taken by State that the petitioners had joined as part-time lecturers knowing fully well the terms and conditions of their employment.
It is peculiar on the part of the State to urge that these persons took up the employment knowing fully well that they will be paid only daily wages and therefore, they cannot claim more.
It does not lie in the mouth of the State Government to take up such a stand being a welfare State Committee to a socialistic pattern of society.
There is so much of unemployment in our country even amongst the educated and the choice for the majority of the people is either to starve or to take up employment on whatever terms that may be offered by the employer no matter even if they are exploitative."
I am also inclined to agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the work performed by the part-time lecturers is almost the same which the regular teachers would have done, had they been appointed in their place through regular selection and the distinctions pointed out between the two classes of the employees are not of much significance.
There is, indeed, no qualitative or quantitative difference in the nature of duties performed by them.
No doubt, the petitioners accepted the employment on the condition that they will be paid by the hour subject to a maximum of Rs. 2000/- per month, but it must be due to their helplessness because of unemployment, which in a social welfare state like ours is not permissible and it cannot, thus, provide an escape to the Government to avoid the mandate of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
The regular posts of lecturers fall in the category of Punjab Education Service Class II and governed by its Rules which do not provide for any part-time employment.
The petitioners were appointed part-timers only with a view to make it look that the work to be performed by them was different and less from regularly selected teachers which, if fact, is not.
I was inclined to direct the State Government to pay to the petitioners pay scale of a regular teacher but in view of the fact that the learned Assistant Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State inform me that requisition has already been made to the Punjab Public Service Commission for recommending the names of as many as 179 persons for appointment as regular lecuturers in several colleges throughout the State and one can reasonably expect that appointments will be made soon, I refrain from issuing such a direction.
6.
Having heard the counsel for the parties on all the aspects, the writ petitions stand disposed of with the following directions :-  i) The state Government shall not, terminate or dispense with the services of the petitioners till such time the vacancies are filled up on regular basis in accordance with the Rules; ii) The State Government shall pay to the part-time lecturers like the petitioners a consolidated honorarium of Rs. 2000/- per month with effect from the date these petitions were filed, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in their letters of appointment.
It is made clear that the petitioners shall be entitled to this honorarium even during the summer vacation.
iii) Since the regular recruitment is to be made through Punjab Public Service Commission, the respondent State is directed to expedite the matter and fill up the vacant posts on regular basis as soon as possible and, at any rate, before the end of this year.
Any of the petitioners who may choose to apply for the appointment on regular basis shall also be considered if he is otherwise eligible.
iv) All those lecturers who are working against leave vacancies shall make way on the return of those who proceeded on leave but their services shall not be terminated before that.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.