AL Bahri, J - Apprehending that instructions issued by the State Government Annexure P4 would also be applicable to the petitioners and they would be deprived to take entrance test for MDS Course, the petitioners who had passed B.D.S.
Course without doing House Job have approached this Court for issuing directions to quash the aforesaid instructions Annexure P4 and allowing admission to the petitioner, in 1991-92 session, who are otherwise eligible as per instructions prevalent.
The matter was earlier considered by the Supreme Court in Dr. Dinesh Kumar and others v. Moti Lal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad (1987) 4 Supreme Court Cases 459.
Noticing that in different States different courses were being conducted for post-graduate course, a direction was given for admission beginning from 1993 that there would be only one pattern, namely, a three-year course without any housemanship.
All Universities and institutions were required to take timely steps to bring about such amendments as may be necessary before the end of 1991.
It was in compliance to the aforesaid directions of the Supreme Court that instructions were issued on November 23, 1990 Annexure P3 providing three years MDS Course.
The clause relating to eligibility with respect of in-service PCDS doctors is as under :-  "Eligibility for examination.
All in-service PCOS doctors and fresh Graduates will be eligible to take the said test irrespective of their extra attempts in under-graduate career".
Entrance test in accordance with these instructions was held sometime in 1991 and the petitioners passed the test.
Instead of allowing admission the State Government issued instructions Annexure P4 on September 19, 1991.
These instructions provided for three years course.
However, the eligibility clause was modified as under :  (b) All in-service PCDS doctors and fresh Graduates who have passed B.D.S.
and done one year House Job/paid Rotatory Internship will be eligible to take the said test irrespective of their extra attempts in under-graduate career."
2.
The contention of petitioners is that the instructions contained in Annexure P4 should not be made applicable as the examination under instructions Annexure P3 has already been held and persons like the petitioners who had passed B.D.S Course without House Job would be eligible to take the fresh test conducted under the instructions Annexure P4.
3.
The stand of the State of Punjab in the written statement is contradictory.
While admitting the contents of para 3 of the writ petition, it was stated that the petitioners would not be eligible for admission to MDS Course as they do not fulfil the requisite qualifications i.e. one year House Job which was absolutely necessary for admission to the Course as laid down in the prospectus of the Punjabi University, Patiala in 1991.
In subsequent sub-para (iv) of para 4 the stand taken is that the instructions now issued (Annexure P4) in accordance with the decision of the Supreme Court are applicable to admission of 1993.
Any admission before that has to be in accordance with the Rules framed by the State Government.
This indicates that the instructions Annexure P4 are to apply to the admissions to be made in 1993 and not for the session of 1991-92.
The prospectus which was issued by the Punjabi University, Patiala who was entrusted with the task of holding entrance test provides eligibility clause (b) in Annexure R1 which is in the same words as clause (b) in Annexure P4 instructions which are impugned.
4.
After hearing the counsel for the parties and particularly considering the stand taken in the written statement that fresh instructions issued which are contained in Annexure P4 are to apply to the admissions to be made in 1993, it is taken that for the admissions to be made in 1991-92, the eligibility clause as it existed before the issuance of instructions Annexure P4 would be applicable and that is contained in Annexure P3 which makes the persons like the petitioners who have passed MDS Course without doing any House Job as eligible candidates for taking the examination.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this Writ Petition is allowed with the direction to the respondents to finalise the admission to 1991-92 course on the basis of result of examination already conducted by Punjabi University, Patiala for three years course.
Let it be done within a period of 15 days.
The petitioners would get costs which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/  Petition allowed.