Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - This judgment shall dispose of two civil writ petition Nos. 4705 of 1989 and 8617 of 1988 as common question of law and fact is involved in both the cases.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Director Physical Education (for short D.P.E.)
in Kamla Memorial College, Narwana, on 22.7.1966 in the grade of Rs. 150-300.
This grade was revised to Rs. 300-600 with effect from 1111966, and thereafter on 17121972 the Management of the said College granted the Senior Lecturers' scale of Rs. 400-800 w.e.f.
111974 to the petitioner.
On 18-5.1979 grades were further revised.
Grade of Rs. 400-800 was revised to Rs. 700-1100 in case of D.P.Es and in the case of Senior Lecturers in other subjects to Rs. 700-1600.
The grade of Rs. 300-600 which was meant for Lecturers was revised to Rs. 660-900 and grade of Rs. 250-500 was revised to Rs. 425-700.
3.
In the month of January, 1979, State of Haryana took over 12 Colleges in Haryana one of which was Kamla Memorial College, Narwana.
Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Education Department, vide his letter dated 21111978 coveyed to the Director of Public Instructions the requisite sanction of Governor of Haryana on the terms and conditions mentioned in that letter around which the whole controversy revolves.
The relevant portion of that letter is reporduced below :-  "(ii) Such members of the Staff on (of) this college as are considered suitable for absorption in Government service by the Haryana Public Service Commission/Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board shall be treated as new entrants.
Only Government scales (of) pay of respective categories shall be allowed to them and there shall be no personal grade for any one.
Their pay in the Government scales will be fixed on the basis of length of service in equivalent/identical or higher time scales.
There shall be no guarantee in regard to protecting their existing salaries."
4.
Vide order dated 3171979, petitioner's pay was fixed at Rs. 980/- taking him to be a Lecturer in the grade of Rs. 300-600 whereas the petitioner claimed that his pay should have been fixed at Rs. 1258/- treating him to be a Senior Lecturer in the grade of Rs. 400-800.
Plea taken by the petitioner was that at the time of taking over the College by the Govt., it was made clear that the entire staff shall be adjusted in the equivalent/identical or higher time scale.
Coonsequently, the Principals were adjusted as Principals, Lecturers as Lecturers, Demonstrators as Demonstrators and so on and so forth and since the petitioner was already working as Senior Lecturer, he was entitled to be adjusted as such.
5.
Petitioner filed a representation that his pay has been wrongly fixed and the same should be revised treating him to be Senior Lecturer.
This re-presentation of the petitioner was not acceded to by the State of Haryana.
Hence the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
6.
Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner is entitled to be adjusted as Senior Lecturer as he was Senior Lecturer on the day the College was taken over by the State of Haryana; he has further stated that the petitioner may be treated as a new entrant and that he would not be entitled to claim seniority over other Senior Lecturers who were previously working as such.
He was relied upon a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in State of Haryana and another v. Bant Rai Gupta and another, R.S.A.
No. 2455 of 1987 decided on 29111988, wherein under similar circumstances same relief was granted to Bant Rai Gupta and RK Jain, Senior Lecturers of National College, Sirsa.
Government National College, Sirsa, taken over by the State of Haryana is one of the 12 Colleges which were taken over by the State of Haryana in January, 1979.
In the Regular Second Appeal this Court affirmed the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge, Sirsa.
Additional District Judge, Sirsa gave the following directions in the concluding paragraph of his judgment :-  "In sequel to whatever has been stated above, this appeal merits acceptance.
Resultantly, I accept the same and after setting aside the impugned judgment and decree of the court below, hereby pass a decree for declaration in favour of plaintiff-appellants and against the defendant-respondents to the effect that the plaintiffs are entitled to be adjusted as 'Senior Lecturer' though in that category they may be treated as new entrants which means that they shall not be entitled to claim seniority over other Senior Lecurers who are previosly working as such, of course, keeping in view the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs of the same, all throughout.
Decreesheet be prepared accordingly and the record be consigned to the Record Room in due course of time."
7.
This court while upholding the judgment and decree of Additional District Judge in R.S.A.
No. 2455 of 1987 observed as follows :-  "Having screened the evidence on record in the light of the above noted pleas of the parties, we find that though there are certain documents on record lending support to their respective stands, yet we are of the opinion that condition (ii) Exhibit P1, as reproduced above, is the basic provision which governs the rate of the plaintiffs' claim.
As is apparent from a bare reading of this clause, it applies to all the members of the staff or the college, i.e. officials/officers irrespective of their rank or status.
Though the absorption of these members of the staff in Government service was subject to the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission or Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (there is no dispute that the plaintiffs have duly been approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission) as the case may be, yet the implication of this clause is that these members of the staff were to be integrated in the corresponding categories of their service and the pay scales meant for their respective categories were to be allowed to them.
Further their pays were to be fixed on the basis of their length of service in equivalent/identical or higher time scale.
No doubt after January 27, 1976 nobody has been or could be appointed as a senior lecturer in view of the emerger of the pay scales of lecturer and senior lecturers - even plaintiffs are not wanting their appointments as senior lecturers - yet the fact that in the gradation lists and various other documents to which a reference has been made in the judgment under appeal, a sub-cadre of senior lecturers continues to exist though as per the stand of the defendant authorities that was only qua the persons who were appointed as senior lecturers prior to January 27, 1976.
Even the plaintiffs were so appointed as senior lecturers prior to that date.
It is beyond dispute that like a cadre which is no more that a specification of the strength of a service or a part of it sanctioned as a separate unit according to administrative convenience and experience, the Government is well entitled to have classification, categories or compartments within a cadre, if the circumstances so justify.
We, therefore, see no reason as to why the plaintiffs have not been treated in same manner as the persons who were appointed as senior lecturers in Government College prior to January 27, 1976.
This is more so when such a category of employees, as per the admission of the defendant authorities, continues to exist in the Government records and particularly the gradation lists.
We thus find no infirmity in the judgment of the lower Court and unhesitatingly affirm the process of reasoning and the conclusions recorded therein."
8.
I am in respectful agreement and bound by the dictum of the Division Bench judgment of this Court reproduced above.
The writ petitions are allowed.
Consequently, it is directed that the petitioners (in both the writ petition) be adjusted as Senior Lecturers and dues paid accordingly, though in that category they may be treated as new entrants which means that they shall not be entitled to claim seniority over other Senior Lecturers who were previously working as such.
All consequential reliefs flowing from this order be given to the petitioners within a period of four months.
No costs.
Petition allowed.