GC Garg, J - This order of mine will dispose of Regular Second Appeal Nos. 1102, 1103, 1104 and 1105 of 1988.
2.
The facts giving rise to these appeals have been picked up from R.S.A.
No. 1105 of 1988.
3.
The plaintiff-appellant joined as Fireman with the Punjab State Electricity Board on 671977 against a permanent post reserved for ex-servicemen.
He filed a suit for declaration that he was entitled to military service benefit for the period from 26.10.1962 to 8.1.1968 for the purposes of seniority, increments, etc. for having rendered military service during this period and the said benefit had been wrongly denied to him.
On notice, the defendants contested the suit.
Preliminary objections were taken, namely, (i) the suit in the present form was not maintainable; (ii) the plaintiff has no cause of action; and (iii) the suit was barred by time.
On merits it was admitted that the defendant was an ex-serviceman but was pleaded that he was not entitled to the benefit of military service rendered during the period of emergency.
On the pleadings of the parties material issue framed was whether the plaintiff was entitled to the benefit of military service rendered by him during the emergency period w.e.f.
16101962 to 8.1.1968 towards increments and seniority, etc.
The other period for which the benefit of military service was claimed in the suit is not in dispute as it was rightly and fairly conceded that the plaintiff was not entitled thereto.
The benefit of military service was sought under the rules known as the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 2 defined the military service as under :-  "2.
Definition - For the purposes of these rules, the expression 'military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a warrant officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962 or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be rockoned as military service."
4.
The trial Court dismissed the suit by judgment and decree dated 2871986.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff was also dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge by Judgment and decree dated 23.11.1987.
It is against this judgment and decree of the courts below that the present appeal has been filed.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the appeal deserves to succeed as the subject-matter of the appeal is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in Hem Raj Gupta and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board & others, in C.W.P.
No. 5184 of 1985 decided on July 10, 1990 by GR Majithia, J the learned counsel for the appellant is perfectly justified in so contending and it was rightly conceded that the contention of the learned counsel was unassailable but for the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others reported as 1991(1) SCT 137 : 1990(4) JT 735.
The learned counsel for respondents vehemently contended that in view of the judgment in Dhan Singh and ors. (supra) the appellant is not entitled to succeed in this appeal, as according to the learned counsel the benefit of military service was not available to such persons who had joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency and that the benefits had been under the rules only to such persons who had joined the Indian Army during the period of National Emergency.
In para 7 of the report it has been stated that the persons who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of emergency and who were released on compassionate grounds, would be entitled to the benefits provided under Rule 4 of the Rules.
Proviso to Rule 4(ii) is not applicable to the case in hand as the said proviso had been added by the State of Haryana.
In Dhan Singh's case (supra) the Supreme Court considered the matter thread bare and rejected the contention of the learned counsel for appellants that the concession would be available to all persons whether they had joined the military service before the rules or not.
While dealing with this contention it was held as under :-  "On account of the external aggression by the Chinese forces in the Indian Territory, the emergency was imposed by the President of India in 1962.
In order to attract young men to join military service at that critical juncture, the Central Government and the State Governments issued different circulars and advertisements on the radio and in the press promising certain benefits to be given to those young men who join the military service.
The young persons who have joined the military service during the National.
Emergency and those who were already in service and due to exigencies of service had been compelled to serve during the emergency form two distinct classes.
The appellants and the petitioners who joined the army before the proclamation of emergency, had chosen the career voluntarily and their service during emergency was as a matter of course.
They had no option or intention of joining the Government service during the period of emergency as they were already serving in the army.
The persons who enrolled or commissioned during the emergency, on the other hand, had on account of the call of the nation joined the army at that critical juncture of national emergency to save the motherland by taking greater risk where danger to the lie of a member of the armed forces was higher.
They include persons who would have pursued their studies, acquired higher qualifications and joined a higher post and those who could have joined the Government service before attaining the maximum age prescribed and thereby gained seniority in the service.
Foregoing all these benefits and avenues, they joined the army keeping in view the needs of the country and assurances contained in conditions of service in executive instructions.
The latter form a class by themselves and they cannot be equated to those who joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency.
Benefits had been promised to such persons who heeded to the call of the nation at that critical juncture.
Older man by joining the military service lost chance of joining other government service and when he joins such service on release from the army younger man had already occupied the post.
To remove the hardship, the benefit of military service was sought to be given to those young person who were enrolled/commissioned during the period of emergency foregoing their job opportunities.
The differentia, is, therefore, intelligible and has a direct nexus to the objects sought to be achieved.
The petitioners, cannot, therefore, challenge that rule as discriminatory or arbitrary.
Such of those appellants and the petitioners who have joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency are not, therefore, entitled to the benefit of military service as per the Emergency Concessions Rules."
6.
In view of the later judgment of the Supreme Court in Dhan Singh's case (supra), I find myself unable to agree with the decision rendered in Hem Raj Gupta's case (supra) by my learned brother GR Majithia, J and am rather bound by the later judgment of the Apex Court.
A reading of this judgment clearly leads to the conclusion that the concessions available under the rules are only for the period of emergency to those who joined the Indian Army during the period of emergency and served the country during that period.
The appellant is, admittedly, not one of such employees.
He joined the Indian Army on 2nd August, 1957 and was discharged on 16th August, 1974 and thereafter joined the Punjab State Electricity Board on 671977 as Fireman.
The appellant having joined the military service much prior to the promulgation of rules, in my view, is not entitled to the benefit of military service.
I find no infirmity in the judgment and decree of the courts below.
Consequently, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
RSA Nos. 1102, 1103 and 1104 of 1988 are also dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.