VK Jhanji, J - This is plaintiff's second appeal.
2.
Plaintiff is working in the Government of Haryana, Transport Department.
Being a Government employee of the Haryana Roadways, he was issued a family Pass from Rohtak to Katra as per rules in September, 1979.
On 29.9.1979, Bus No. HRO 4901 which was on its schedule from Rohtak to Katra was checked by Traffic Manager, Haryana Roadways, Rohtak with the assistance of Chief Inspector.
In the course of checking, one Rajinder Singh Rana was found travelling on the family pass issued in the name of the plaintiff.
For the misuse of the family pass, the plaintiff was placed under suspension vide letter dated 17.10.1979 but later on was reinstated vide letter dated 2111970.
He was transferred to Haryana Roadways, Sirsa pending departmental enquiry.
The plaintiff was served with a Memo No. 9021/EA-2EI dated 1101980 vide which the plaintiff was directed to show cause as to why any of the minor punishments contained in Rule 4 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, 1952 be not imposed upon him.
In reply to this show cause notice, the plaintiff, on 5101983 submitted that the family pass was lost by him and he came to know about this at the eleventh hour.
He also submitted that he reported the matter to the police on 29.9.1979.
He further stated that he has not misused the pass nor transferred the same to any one else.
He prayed that the memo served upon him be filed and the suspension period be treated as duty period.
In the meantime, the plaintiff was served with another show cause notice dated 1181981 in which the plaintiff was informed that the suspension period - was considered justified and he was called upon to show cause as to why pay and allowances during the suspension period should not be restricted to the subsistence allowance already paid to him and also to show cause as to why he should not be debarred from the facility of free travelling for a period of three years.
The plaintiff also submitted reply to this show cause notice on 1181981 an again requested to file the same.
3.
Vide letter dated 241982 the plaintiff was informed that his reply to the show cause notice was found unsatisfactory and the following punishments were inflicted :-  i) Annual increment stopped with cumulative effect; ii) the plaintiff was debarred from the facility of free travelling pass for a period of three years; and iii) his pay and allowances for the period he remained under suspension should be restricted to the subsistence allowance already paid to him.
4.
The plaintiff filed appeal before the Secretary, Transport Department, Haryana Government, Chandigarh.
The said appeal was rejected vide order dated 1521984.
The plaintiff thereupon served notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code.
Thereafter the plaintiff filed the suit out of which the present appeal has arisen, challenging the orders dated 241982 and 15-2.1984 being illegal; irregular, inoperative, unjust, and void ab initio.
5.
The suit was resisted by the defendants and orders dated 241982 passed by the State Transport Controller as also 1521984 passed by the Secretary, Transport Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh, were stated to be legal and constitutional.
Apart, from this, all the allegations of the plaintiff levelled in his plaint, were denied.
6.
The learned trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
Feeling aggrieved with the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff filed appeal before the first appellate Court.
The appeal was dismissed as the first appellate Court was of the view that stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is not a major punishment.
The plaintiff has now come up in second appeal challenging in the judgment and decree of the Courts below.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the finding of the learned first appellate Court that stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is not a major punishment, cannot be sustained in view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court reported in 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 413 (Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab) wherein it has been held that stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is a major punishment and can be inflicted only after conducting a regular enquiry.
Admittedly, in the present case, no regular enquiry was held against the plaintiff before inflicting the punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
8.
In the show cause notice dated 1181981, the proposed penalties were :-  i) Why he be not debarred from the facility of free travelling for a period of three years; and ii) Why his pay and allowances should not be restricted to the subsistence allowance already paid to him.
9.
The plaintiff replied to the show cause notice and after considering the reply, the punishing authority imposed three penalties; one was stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect and the other two were the ones proposed in the show cause notice.
It is not in dispute that additional punishment was not proposed in the show cause notice.
The plaintiff, therefore, had to be given a fresh notice before this penalty could be imposed.
He could not be condemned unheard and it was incumbent upon the punishing authority to issue a fresh notice to the plaintiff.
The order is both in contravention of Article 311(2) of the Constitution and against the principles of natural justice.
For this, I am supported by Division Bench judgment in Brundaband v. State, AIR 1970 Orissa 81.
10.
Consequently, the appeal of the plaintiff is partly allowed, the judgment and decree of the Courts below are modified and suit of the plaintiff is decreed to the effect that the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect is clearly illegal and unconstitutional, against the rules of the Service and shall have no effect on the rights of the plaintiff.
However, suit of the plaintiff with regard to the imposition of other two penalties i.e. (i) debarring the plaintiff from the facility free travelling for a period of three years; and (ii) restricting his pay and allowances to the subsistence allowance already paid to him, is dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal partly allowed.