Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J. (Oral) - Sheri-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Soura (hereinafter for short "Institute"), issued an advertisement notice on September, 4, 1995, inviting applications from eligible candidates inter alia for faculty position of Assistant Professor in General Surgery.
Among other things besides qualification of Post Graduation/Post Doctoral Degree (as prescribed by Medical Council of India), the candidate was required to have three years teaching experience in the subject as Lecturer.
Among others, Dr. Khurshid Ahmad Sheikh and Dr. Nissar Ahmad Choudhry applied.
Dr. Umar Javed Shah also applied under directions of the High Court in SWP No. 518/90, which petition stands disposed of.
The Institute issued the notification on Feb 16, 1995 and laid down criteria for selection to various faculty posts including that of Assistant Professor of Surgery.
The candidates were to appear before the Apical Selection Committee for the purpose.
The candidates were to be assessed and selected on following criteria :-  (a) Basic score  = 30 marks (b) Research work produced by the candidate in the past.
= 20 marks (c) Interview performance as assessed by the experts.
= 30 marks (d) Marks to be allotted by the Apical Selection Committee.
= 20 marks Selection Committee finalised the merit list and recommended the appointment in the order as :-  1.
Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh 85% 2.
Dr. Nissar Ahmad Chowdhry 79% 3.
Dr. Umar Javed Shah 73% The Competent Authority (Director of the Institute-cum-Ex-Officio Secretary to Government) appointed Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh as Assistant Professor, General Surgery, in the Institute against the only available post in terms of Government Order No. 19-IMS/95 dated November 29, 95.
2.
Dr. Umar Javeed Shah, the un-successful candidate, challenged the consideration and empanelment of Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh and Dr. Nissar Ahmad Choudhry and the subsequent appointment of Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh to the faculty position of Assistant Professor, General Surgery in the Institute, in Writ Petition No. 689/96.
In main, the challenge was thrown to the consideration and empanelment of the two doctors and appointment of Dr. Khurshid Ahmed Sheikh on the ground of ineligibility, in so far as the two were alleged to have shortfall/lacked in experience in General Surgery, as Lecturers.
3.
Dr. Nissar Ahmad Choudhry, in another Writ Petition No. 177/97, challenged the selection and appointment of Dr. Khurshid Ahmad Sheikh to the faculty position of Assistant Professor in Surgery in the Institute on the ground that the he was more meritorious than Dr. Khursheed.
The Apical Selection Committee, unfairly and without merit put the selected candidate above him in the matter of assigning marks in publication in national and other medical journals.
Petitioner's publications were assessed for award of marks, whereas, the publications of selected candidate were over rated and excessively marked.
Dr. Khurshid Ahmed Sheikh is wrongly selected at his cost.
4.
The learned Single Judge after hearing the counsel for the Writ petitioners and respondents dismissed both the petitions by a common judgment on April 3, 1998.
5.
This LPA is filed by Dr. Nissar Chaudhary, petitioner of SWP 177/97 alone.
Against Dr. Umar Javed Shah, writ petitioner of SWP No. 689/96, the judgment has become final.
6.
The appellants counsel Mr. Qureshi, submits that the pleadings were not complete in his writ petition and the case was not ripe for hearing.
Even, the case was not linked to the other Writ Petition SWP 689/96 disposed of by the common judgment in question.
It has worked out to his prejudice.
7.
The counsel for the respondents contends that the pleadings were complete.
Case was ripe and linked to the other writ petition as the subject matter was identical.
No prejudice has been caused to the petitioner.
All the issues raised in the petition have been dealt with and decided by the writ court.
8.
We find from record that the objections on behalf of respondents-Institute, have been filed with affidavit of Director Institute-respondent to the Writ, wherein, each and every allegation has been met and countered.
9.
The writ court in term of its order dated May 22, 1997, has clubbed both the Writ Petitions (177/97 and 689/96), as the subject matter in both "is identical".
In terms of the orders including this one, the respondents and the petitioners have been given full opportunity to file counter affidavits/rejoinders and time to complete the pleadings.
The counsel for the parties were heard.
At no stage the counsel for any of the two writ petitioners and respondents questioned the linking and clubbing of the cases together for hearing, so much so, even when the counsel were heard finally, they, or any one of them, did not raise any such objection.
10.
In these circumstances, the question of prejudice as alleged by the counsel, who has taken the brief only in Appeal, appears mis-placed with no factual or legal foundation.
11.
The counsel contends next that the Apical Selection Committee, assessed Dr. Khurshid Ahmad Sheikh wrongly and the high merit of the appellant has been unfairly assessed.
The appellant obtained more marks than the above selected Dr. Khursheed Ahmed Sheikh in interview.
But, he was assigned only 16 marks, while as Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh was given 20 marks for their respective publications.
The Apical Selection Committee assessed Dr. Khurshid for 27 publications in absence of the details like No. of volumes, year of publication, name of journal, etc, when the Selection Committee had proof of only 17 publications.
Assessing the petitioner for 20 marks for 27 publications is arbitrary.
12.
The counsel for the respondents submit, that the Apical Selection Committee has assessed Dr. Khursheed Ahmad Sheikh for 27 publications, for which proof was available with the Committee.
The committee has assessed Dr. Khursheed and the petitioner on this count, as also on other counts objectively after taking into accounts the proofs and other available material thereto.
The appellant has been assessed for 12 published papers.
Besides, the Apical Selection Committee is comprised of persons of reputed experts who are men of high integrity and acclaimed experts in their respective fields.
Their assessment cannot be questioned so long the procedure followed by the Selection Committee is fair.
13.
The merit of the Appellant alongwith the selected candidates has been determined/assessed on the basis of marks obtained by these candidates under different heads namely basics, research work and interview performance, in accordance with the policy and the rules of the Institute governing the subject.
14.
The two candidates relevant for the present appeal have been assessed out of 100.
Dr. Khursid Ahmad secured 85%, whereas, Dr. Nissar Ahmed Choudhry got 79%.
The allotment of marks shows that the above contestant have been fairly and objectively assessed.
Procedural fairness has been observed.
The Selection Committee is of experts of acclaimed repute in their respective fields with high status.
The appellant has been treated fairly and placed second in panel.
15.
Contextually it would be apt and of benefit to cite the case of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences v. Dr. K Kalyana Raman and others, (AIR 1992 SC 1806 : 1992(3) SCT 488 (SC)).
In this case, the appellant, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences at Banglore (NIMHANS) established by the State of Karnataka, and Central Government for Higher Studies and Research in Neuro Sciences and allied subjects, besides serving as an Institute for diagnostics and treatment of disorders of the mind and Neuro system, invited applications inter alia for the post of Professor Neurology, at their Institute.
Dr. Gauri Devi, an Assistant Professor at `NIMHANS' and Dr. Kalyana Raman, Associate Professor of Neurology at Peoria School of Medicine, University of Illinois, USA, were among other candidates for the post.
The Selection Committee comprised of men of high status and unquestioned impartiality.
The Selection Committee after interview and assessment of relative merit of candidates recommended empanelment of the names of doctors for selection in the order as Dr. Gauri Devi, Dr. Kalyana Raman, etc. Dr. Gauri Devi was appointed as Professor by the competent authority.
Dr. Kalyana Raman challenged her appointment before the High Court of Karnataka.
The High Court allowed the writ petition and quashed the appointment of Dr. Gauri Devi to the post of Professor Neurology.
NIMHANS filed the appeal by Special leave against this judgment of the Karnataka High Court.
While allowing the Appeal and setting aside the judgment of the Karnataka High Court, the Hon'ble Justice K Jagannatha Shetty, speaking for the Court observed :-  "...The Selection Committee takes interview of the candidates, makes assessment of their relative merits and recommends a panel of names for appointment...function of the Selection Committee is neither judicial nor adjudicatory.
It is purely administrative.
....There is no rule or regulation which require the Selection Committee to record reasons.
In the absence of any such legal requirement the Selection made without recording reasons cannot be found fault with....
The procedural fairness is the main requirement in the administrative action.
The `fairness' or `fair procedure' in the administrative action ought to be observed.
The Selection Committee cannot be an exception to this principle.
It must take a decision reasonably without being guided by extraneous or irrelevant consideration...." We have not been shown any thing on record to suggest that appellant has not been treated fairly by Apical Selection Committee.
The appellant was considered objectively and treated fairly.
The record indicates fair and reasonable consideration of Appellant's case.
16.
In result, for the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any merit in this Appeal.
The appeal is dismissed.
We make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.