Amarjeet Chaudhary, J.- The petitioner, who is retired Deputy Supdt.
of Police, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing enquiry proceedings initiated vide Memorandum dated 231987 under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rule'), copy of which is Annexure P-5/1 to the writ petition and also for quashing order dated 10101988 passed by Respondent No. 2 copy of which is Annexure P-4 vide which 1/3rd cut in petitioner's pension was imposed.
2.
Briefly, the case of the petitioner is that he joined Police Department of the State of Punjab as Constable on 7.10.1947.
He rose to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police on 11.5.1982 and retired as such on 3061987 on attaining the age of superannuation.
During his service tenure, he served in the Vigilance Bureau as Deputy Superintendent of Police for about 12 years from 1972 to January 31, 1985.
During his service career he was awarded the President's Police Medal for his meritorious service.
3.
As per letter dated 10101988, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, 1/3rd cut in pension of the petitioner was imposed.
The said fact of cut was conveyed by the Accounts Officer to the Treasury Officer on the basis of communication dated 1781988 wherein decision for imposing the aforesaid cut in petitioner's pension was taken by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jalandhar and necessary recoveries were also ordered to be effected.
Even the retiral benefit like Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity and Leave Encashment were not released despite the fact that a legal notice under Section 80 CPC dated 16121988 was served upon respondent Nos. 1 and 2, a copy of which is Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
4.
The petitioner has sought the quashing of the charge-sheet and the enquiry proceedings on the plea that the charges levelled against him relate to the year 1976, whereas the charge-sheet has been issued on 231987, which is contrary to the Service Rules.
The second plea of the petitioner is that 1/3 cut in his pension has been imposed in an arbitrary manner without affording him of any opportunity of being heard and there was no material whatsoever for imposing the same.
5.
On the other hand, the case of the respondents as per their written statement is that rule 22 (b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol. II, the Government has the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it whether permanently or for a specific period, if in departmental or judicial proceedings, a delinquent employee is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence.
It is further stated in the written statement that the petitioner has been charge-sheeted under rule 8 of the Rules by the competent authority and there is no illegality or infirmity in the same.
6.
In order to arrive at a conclusion, it will be desirable to narrate the facts and circumstances of the case which led to the issuance of the impugned charge-sheet to the petitioner.
The petitioner while working as Inspector Vigilance Bureau, Amritsar received a complaint from one Darbara Singh son of Makhan Singh, resident of village Lambian, against S/Shri Gurbaksh Rai Dhawan, Headmaster and Malkiat Singh, Teacher, who were appointed as Superintendent and Deputy Superintendent, respectively, of an Examination Centre.
The investigation into the said complaint was conducted by the petitioner.
The aforesaid persons were found guilty in the investigation carried out by him and accordingly FIR No. 127/1976 under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against them.
The said criminal case was subsequently withdrawn from the court in the year 1977.
The petitioner just before his retirement was served with a charge-sheet under rule 8 of the Rules vide Memorandum dated 231987, Annexure P-5/1.
The main charge against the petitioner is that he got implicated Sarv Shri Gurbaksh Rai Dhawan and Malkiat Singh falsely in a corruption case at the instance of Manjit Singh S/o Paramjit Singh, D.S.P.
Vigilance Bureau, Amritsar.
7.
I have considered the submissions made by the Counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper-book.
A perusal of the paper-book clearly indicates that the lapse/irregularities alleged to have been committed by the petitioner relate to the year 1976.
As per charge-sheet issued vide Memorandum dated 231987, the main allegation against the petitioner is that he got a false criminal case registered against S/Shri Gurbaksh Rai Dhawan and Malkiat Singh under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 161 of the Indian Panel Code.
The same was subsequently withdrawn from the Court for the reasons best known to the respondent-Department.
Thus, in the absence of any finding by a Court of law, I am not inclined to accept the respondents contention that the petitioner falsely implicated the accused.
Since prima-facie case was made out against the accused, a criminal case registered against them and the challan was put in the court after obtaining requisite sanction from the competent authority.
I am of the considered view that sanction for prosecution is accorded only if the competent authority comes to conclusion that a prima facie was made out.
In the instant case, thorough verification of the complaint made by one Darbara Singh against the aforesaid accused, whereupon investigation was done by the petitioner, was made by Shri Gurjaipal Singh, Superintendent of Police, who after examing the witness of the complainant and the accused, had submitted a detailed report into the matter and did not doubt the investigation carried out by the petitioner and involvement of the aforesaid accused case registered against the accused.
Even the challan against the accused persons.
Thus by no stretch of imagination, it can be held that the petitioner got a false case registered against the accused.
Even the challan against the accused was presented in the Court of Special Judge, Amritsar after observing all the formalities.
I also find force in the argument of the petitioner that the charge-sheet was served upon him with mala fide intention at the instance of some influential persons.
This argument has not been repelled by the respondent in any manner.
There is no plausible explanation for initiating departmental proceedings against the petitioner at such a belated stage for the lapses alleged to have been committed a decade back.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the petitioner had implicated the accused falsely, as alleged in the charge-sheet, why action was not taken against him at the earliest and why he was promoted to the rank of D.S.P.
and awarded President Police Medal for meritorious services.
I have no hesitation in holding that the act ion of the respondents in initiating departmental proceedings after elapses of 12 years is not justified being against the Service Rule.
Under Rule 22 (b)(2)(ii) no departmental proceedings can be initiated in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
8.
The Supreme Court in the State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and another, JT 1990 (2) SC 54, upheld the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal Madhya Pradesh Bench which had quashed the charge-sheet dated 2241987 issued after the elapse of about 12 years on the ground of delay and laches.
Similarly in BS Sandhu v. Punjab State, 1989(1) NR 213, it was held that there is no justification with the authorities to take up the above noted issue of embezzlement after about 14 years of the petitioner's serving in the department during which period he concededly earned a number of promotions and held positions of considerable authority.
9.
Another aspect of the matter is that respondents had imposed a 1/3rd cut in the petitioner's pension by punishing him without affording of any opportunity of being heard.
I am of the considered view that cut in pension can be imposed only if, in departmental or judicial proceedings, a delinquent employee is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence.
In the present case, the petitioner has not been found guilty of any grave misconduct or negligence.
Hence the action of the respondents in imposing 1/3rd cut in petitioner's pension and withholding of retiral benefits to which he was legitimately entitled after his retirement like Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity, was not justified and against the well accepted principles of law.
Therefore, the impugned order, Annexure P-4 whereby 1/3rd cut in petitioner's pension was imposed and the recoveries were ordered, is liable to be quashed.
10.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the petition is allowed, the impugned charge-sheet (Annexure P-5) and the communication (Annexure P-4) intimating 1/3rd cut in petitioner's pension are quashed.
The respondents are directed to release all the retiral benefits to the petitioner within two months with 12% interest from the date of filing of the writ petition till realisation.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this writ petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.