Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, on the recommendation made by Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, Chandigarh, vide office order issued on 2641963.
His services were regularised w.e.f.
1.7.1963.
While the petitioner was posted as Registration Clerk in Tehsil Office, Barnala, order dated 14-6-1988 was issued to him giving three months notice under Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, indicating that he shall stand retired from Government service after expiry of three months from the date of service of this notice on him.
The petitioner has impugned the said order, Annexure P-1 through this writ petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he has been performing his duties to the best of his ability and has been earning increments on the due dates.
He also crossed efficiency bar on 1-1-1988.
The order of premature retirement, according to the petitioner, has been passed by respondent No. 2 in an arbitrary manner.
3.
The stand of the State on the other hand is that service record of the petitioner was not at all good and there were number of adverse entries to his credit right upto 1978-79.
Which were duly conveyed to him- Consequently, the impugned order of premature retirement was rightly passed against the petitioner.
4.
I have considered the respective submissions made at the Bar and have also perused the paper book.
A perusal of order Annexure P-4 reveals that the petitioner was allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
1-1-1988.
The impugned order dated 1461988 was passed by the same authority who had passed the order of crossing of efficiency bar.
It is well settled principle that an official is allowed to cross efficiency bar only if his service record is good.
The respondent has quoted some instances.
In the annual confidential report for the year 1964- 65, petitioner's honesty was doubted, in the report for the year 1971-72, the petitioner was graded as below average, in the year 1976-77 his integrity was doubtful and in the annual confidential report for the year 1978-79 the petitioner was termed as an average worker.
Despite the abovesaid adverse reports the petitioner was allowed to cross efficiency bar w.e.f.
1-11988.
This Court in Dr. Om Parkash Gupta, HCMS I (Haryana) v. The State of Haryana and another, 1988(1) SLR 370, while quashing the impugned order of retirement therein, held that, "what will be justified is that adverse entry prior to promotion, crossing of efficiency bar etc. should not be taken into consideration while forming opinion to retire an employee pre-maturely because of the reason that adverse entries lose their significance after promotion of an employee for this purpose.
There is always scope for improvement the consideration is to be given to the record of last five years."
In Brij Mohan Chopra v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) SLR 54 (SC) it was observed by the Supreme Court as under :-  "It appears that the State of Punjab realised that rematare retirement of an employee on the basis of entire service record, which may include stale entry, would be unreasonable and it, therefore, issued Govt. order on June 22, 1981 directing that under the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 it would not be desirable to scrutinise the entire service record of an employee and premature retirement should not be ordered if during the last five years the work and conduct of the employee have been good.
This direction was no doubt issued after the appellant was retired but none the less it is apparent that the Govt. had changed its policy in accordance with the decisions of this Court and it had taken a decision not to retire a Govt. servant if his service record for the last five years did not contai any adverse remarks."
In view of the abovesaid Supreme Court judgment there is nothing on the record to suggest that the petitioner's record of service during the past 5 years have been bad.
In Baldev Raj Chadha v. Union of India, 1980(3) SLR 1 the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "One wonders how an officer whose continuous service for 14 years crossing the efficiency bar and reaching the maximum salary in the scale and with no adverse entries at least for five years immediate before the compulsory retirement could be cashiered on the score that long years ago, his performance had been poor, although his superiors had allowed him to cross the efficiency bar without qualms."
5.
In view of the foregoing reasons and the law laid down by the Supreme Court this petition is allowed and impugned order dated 14-6-1988, Annexure P-1 vide which the petitioner had been prematurely retired is quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Petition allowed.