BN Kirpal, J (Oral) - The short question involved in this writ petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to be promoted as Lt. General on or before 31st May, 1991.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that the petitioner was commissioned in the Army in the year 1954.
Over a period of time, he was promoted till he became a Brigadier.
3.
The petitioner was considered for promotion to the rank of Major General in the year 1983 but was not promoted.
He was once again considered for promotion in the year 1984 but was again not selected.
In the Army, three opportunities are given to an officer for being considered for promotion.
The first opportunity is called "fresh cases", the second opportunity is called "first review cases" and the third opportunity is called the "final review cases".
The petitioner's case for final review for promotion to the rank of Major General came up in 1985 and he was selected for promotion.
4.
In 1985, alongwith the petitioner, other officers who were promoted included the first review cases of 1955 batch as well as the fresh cases of 1956.
According to the Army Rules and Procedures because the petitioner had been promoted in 1986 (seniority being counted from October, 1985) as a Major General alongwith fresh cases of those officers who belonged to the 1956 batch, therefore, the petitioner, as a Major General, was designated as belonging to the 1956 batch.
In other words, though he was commissioned in 1954 as a Second Lieutenant, on his promotion as a Major General, he was categorised as belonging to 1956 batch.
5.
Sometime in 1986, the respondents formulated a policy for further promotion to the next higher rank of Lt. General.
This policy envisaged that there would be two streams, one stream of officers who would belong to "Command and Staff" and the other stream would be of those officers who would be approved for promotion in the "Staff' stream only.
6.
The petitioner's case for promotion as a Lt. General first came up for consideration, as a fresh case, in the year 1989.
According to the averment in the petition, the Selection Committee selected the petitioner and forwarded its recommendation to the Government of India.
The Government, however, did not agree and the petitioner was not promoted.
In 1990, the petitioner's case was once again considered for promotion as a first review case.
Alongwith the petitioner, other cases for promotion were also considered.
On 26th October, 1990, pursuant to the selection made by the Special Selection Board which had held its meeting on 20th July, 1990, a penal of officers approved for promotion to the acting rank of Lt. General and General cadre was released.
According to this letter, 10 officers, including the petitioner were selected.
By this document, 9 officers belonging to the "Command and Staff" stream and which were fresh cases of 1957 batch, were placed above the petitioner who was approved for promotion in the "Staff" stream only as a first review case of 1956 batch.
7.
As a Major General the petitioner would superannuate on 31st May, 1991.
It appears that there are not sufficient number of vacancies which came into existence after 26th October, 1990 in the "Staff" stream against which the petitioner could have been promoted so far.
It is only if 10 vacancies had occurred that the petitioner could possibly have been promoted.
8.
The petitioner has filed this writ petition because as per the letter dated 26th October, 1990, he has no chance of promotion till after he superannuates on 31st May, 1991.
9.
Two contentions have been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, firstly there is a challenge to the scheme of the Government whereby promotions are now made either on the "Command and Staff" stream or on the "Staff" stream only.
In our opinion it is a policy decision taken by the Government and it is not open to a court to interfere in the same specially when on the face of it, it does not appear to be arbitrary.
It is well known that in the General cadre, there are two types of posts as Lt. General; some are those which are regarded as "Staff" posts and the other are "Command" posts where the two have to be common persons who are selected for "Command" and "Staff" streams and promotion can be possible to either of the two types of posts.
The persons like the petitioner who have been selected for promotion in the "Staff Only" stream can, obviously, be promoted only against a Staff post.
We find no patent illegality or infirmity in making promotions on this basis.
10.
In second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner is entitled to be promoted earlier than the officers belonging to the 1957 batch.
In other words what we are now concerned with is as to what is to be the sequence of promotion.
11.
In order to decide as to what is to be the sequence of selection, it is relevant to refer to some of the documents which have been placed on the record.
12.
Before the two stream concept was introduced, a letter dated 29th May, 1984 had been issued which pertained to the sequence of selection for selective ranks.
This shows that the sequence of selection for promotion to the rank of acting Colonel and above was different than the sequence which was being followed upto the rank of Lt. Col.
Prior to 1980, the different sequences which were being followed were illustrated by the following example contained in the said letter of 29th May, 1984 :  "(a) for promotion to the rank of A/Lt.
Col. (i) Fresh selectees - (say) 1959 Batch (ii) Final review - 1957 Batch (iii) First review - 1958 Batch (b) for promotion to the rank of A/Col.
and above (i) Final review - 1954 Batch (ii) First review - 1955 Batch (iii) Fresh selectees - 1956 Batch" By this letter of 29th May, 1984, it was decided that the sequence of selection upto the rank of Lt. General would also be the same as was being followed up to the rank of colonel and above.
The result of this was that for all promotions to be made in the Army, atleast after February, 1980, the sequence of promotion was as per the example given at (b) above.
13.
The next document which is of relevance is an extract which has been filed based on the letter of the Government dated 22nd August, 1986.
Paragraph 170 of this pertains to fixation of seniority between officers who belong to different batches but are selected at one and the same time.
According to this document, the seniority is to be fixed as follows :  "170.
Officers who are not approved are given First and Final Reviews as required and if approved, their seniority is re-adjusted with one/two batches junior to their own batch, but they remain senior to officers of the fresh batch.
Officers are considered with a cut off report as applicable to their batch and review cases are considered with an additional report over and above those with which they had already been considered and not placed in an acceptable, grade."
After the promulgation of the two stream concept, a letter dated 9th September, 1986 was issued by the Military Secretary's branch to various Command Headquarters.
This letter purported to explain the two stream concept.
Paragraph 9 dealt with inter se seniority and the same reads as under :  "Inter se seniority  9.
Officers selected for the 'Command and Staff' stream, will be promoted first, be it on a command or Staff appointment.
Thereafter, officers of the same batch who are selected for the 'Staff Only' stream will be promoted.
Therefore, for the purpose of seniority, officers of the 'Staff Only' stream will be junior to officers of the 'Command and Staff' stream.
After placing the officers of the 'Staff Only' stream in suitable appointments, review selectees of the 'Command and Staff' stream of the next batch will be promoted.
14.
Alongwith the writ petition, the last document which has been placed on the record, and which is relevant, is the letter dated Ist June, 1987 issued by the Military Secretary's branch.
This letter was, as per paragraph 1, issued in furtherance of the earlier letter dated 9th September, 1986 and was issued with a view to clear certain doubts which had arisen as a result of the two stream concept The doubts with regard to inter se seniority were sought to be cleared vide paragraphs 7 to 10 of this letter, which are as follows :  "7.
The 'Two Stream' concept envisages that officers of the General Cadre of a particular batch seniority approved in the 'Command and Staff' Stream will be en bloc senior to those officers of the same batch approved on the 'Staff Only' stream.
8.
In so far as non-General Cadre officers are concerned, the order of passing out is the determining factor to decide the inter se seniority amongst them subject to readjustment based on the sequence of selection.
9.
Doubts have also been raised regarding the inter se seniority between the officers of other Arms and services approved on the General Cadre approved in the 'Command and Staff' stream as well as 'Staff Only' stream.
It is clarified that as regards the seniority within the same batch is concerned, officers approved on the 'Command and Staff' stream continue to be senior to officers approved in the 'Staff Only' stream.
However, an officer of an earlier batch approved on the 'Staff Only' stream will be senior to an officer of subsequent batch approved on the 'Command and Staff' stream.
10.
It will, therefore, be noticed from the above that while promoting officers in either the 'Command and Staff' stream or 'Staff Only' stream, concept of batch seniority as hithertofore applicable has in all cases been maintained."
As we read the aforesaid documents and letters, it appears to us that the promotion is made in sequence and that sequence is sought to be maintained for the purpose of fixing seniority.
However, within the batch, persons who are approved for promotion to the 'Command and Staff' stream are regarded as being senior to the officers selected in the 'Staff Only' stream.
15.
Before dealing with this aspect in greater detail, it is necessary, at this stage, to refer to the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, dated the 24th April, 1991.
In this affidavit, it is stated that the Central Government while approving the two stream concept of promotion, directed the Chief of the Army Staff to work out the modalities for implementing the concept and it further directed that these modalities should be forwarded to the Central Government for information.
Reliance in this behalf is made to the note dated 31st May, 1986, which has been placed on the record.
It is further averred that consequent to the aforesaid note of 31st May, 1986, a detailed policy letter was issued on 9th September, 1986.
Thereafter another note was prepared which has been annexed as Annexure R-2.
The contention of Mr. Vazey, learned counsel for the respondents is that according to this note, the sequence of promotion was sought to be laid down.
In the note dated 22nd September, 1986, the Military Secretary referred to the two options which were available for fixing the sequence of promotion.
These two options, as contained in his note, were as follows :  "(a) Option A.
To follow the existing sequence of promotion :-  (i) Final review Command and Staff stream 1956 batch.
(ii) Final review Staff Only stream - 1956 batch.
(iii) First review Command and Staff stream - 1957 batch.
(iv) First review Staff Only stream - 1957 batch.
(v) Fresh Command and Staff stream - 1958 batch.
(vi) Fresh Staff Only stream - 1958 batch.
(b) Option B.
The sequence of promotion to be :-  (i) Final review Command and Staff stream - 1956 batch.
(ii) First review Command and Staff stream - 1957 batch.
(iii) Fresh Command and Staff stream - 1958 batch.
(iv) Final review Staff Only stream - 1956 batch.
(v) First review Staff Only stream - 1957 batch.
(vi) Fresh Staff Only stream - 1958 batch.
(The officers of 1959 batch approved even in the Command and Staff stream will be promoted after absorbing the Fresh 'Staff Only' stream of 1958 batch.)"
It will be observed that what the petitioner is canvassing for is adoption of option "A" while Mr. Vazey is pleading for adoption of option "B".
This note was sent for approval by the Military Secretary to the Chief of Army Staff through the Vice Chief of Army Staff.
16.
In the note dated 24th September, 1986, the Vice Chief of Army Staff, inter alia, gave the following opinion on the Military Secretary's note dated 22nd September, 1986 :  "2.
In the light of the above, the proposal put forward by the MS cannot be a long term proposal.
However, we have perhaps no option but to adopt this for the short term, as the ages at which the officers are currently being approved for higher promotions are comparatively higher and there would be imbalance if we increase the differential suddenly.
MS proposal must, therefore, be seen as a valid one for the transitionary phase only.
To that extent, I am in agreement with his recommendation."
The file then went to the Chief of Army Staff and on 8th October, 1986, he wrote that  "I agree with the VCOAS" 17.
From the aforesaid note of 22nd September, 1986 of the Military Secretary, it is clear that the existing sequence for promotion which was being followed was as per option "A."
: Applying this sequence to the case of the petitioner, the position would be that the petitioner, who belonged to the 1956 batch, has to be placed above the persons who were selected for promotion to the 'Command and Staff' stream, who belonged to the 1957 batch.
The petitioner belonged to the 1956 batch and his case, in 1990, had come up for the first review.
If it be assumed that some cases of final review had also come up for consideration and if it is further assumed that persons belonging to the 1955 batch and also to 1956 batch were also selected for 'Command and Staff' posts, then the hypothetical panel would have been as follows :  (i) Final review, Command and Staff stream - 1955 batch.
(ii) Final review, Staff Only stream - 1955 batch.
(iii) First review, Command and Staff stream - 1956 batch.
(iv) First review, Staff Only stream - 1956 batch.
(v) Fresh case Command and Staff stream - 1957 batch.
(vi) Fresh case Staff Only stream - 1957 batch.
As is evident from the aforesaid letter dated 26th October, 1990, no cases were selected which fell under Sl.
Nos. (i), (ii) and (iii) of the example given above.
This being so, as per option "A" of the Military Secretary's note dated 22nd September, 1986, the petitioner was entitled to be placed above the fresh Command and Staff stream cases belonging to 1957 batch.
18.
To our opinion it is the sequence which is referred to in the option "A" which has to be followed for making promotion to the next higher rank of Lt. General.
The reason for this is obvious.
It is true that the Military Secretary had recommended in the note dated 22nd September, 1986 that option "B" (supra) should be adopted.
The Vice Chief of Army Staff, however, has stated that the proposal of the Military Secretary, cannot be a long term proposal.
He further recommended that the proposal of accepting option "B" could be adopted for a short term only :  "as the ages at which the officers are currently being approved for higher promotions are comparatively higher."
(emphasis added) The Vice Chief of Army Staff then recommended that option "B" should be regarded as being followed "for a transitionary phase only".
19.
It is clear from the aforesaid note of the VCOAS that option "B" was recommended for being approved only by way of a temporary measure and with regard to those officers who were being considered for promotion at that time.
The use of the expression "currently being approved" must lead to only one conclusion that it referred to those officers who were being considered for promotion on or about September, 1986.
What is of greater importance is that the VCOAS was emphatic in observing that option "B" could not be favoured as a long term proposal.
The Chief of Army Staff agreed with the recommendation of the Vice Chief of Army Staff.
The effect of this must be that the recommendation of the Military Secretary to adopt option "B" as a sequence of promotion was not accepted.
The existing sequence of promotion which was being followed was recommended to be continued.
It is pertinent to note that notwithstanding the note dated 22nd September, 1986 and the subsequent opinion of the Vice Chief of Army Staff and the Chief of Army Staff, no letter of the type which was issued on 9th September, 1986, was ever issued by the Military Secretary's branch.
Whereas the letter of 9th September, 1986 was issued to all the Command Headquarters, there is no formal document which was issued or made known to the officers, purporting to give effect to option "B" suggested by the Military Secretary vide his note dated 22nd September, 1986.
On the contrary, the letter dated 1st June, 1987 issued by the Military Secretary's branch, referred to hereinabove, is clearly at variance with the suggestion of the Military Secretary contained in his note of 22nd September, 1986.
If option "B" had been accepted, then that would have been mentioned in the letter of 1st June, 1987.
20.
Reverting to the letter of 1st June, 1987, we find that towards the end of paragraph 9, it has been categorically stated that :  "However, an officer of an earlier batch approved on the 'Staff Only' stream will be senior to an officer of subsequent batch approved on the 'Command and Staff' stream."
This is then emphasised by the contents of paragraph 10 of that very letter which reiterates that :  "The concept of batch seniority as hithertofore applicable has in all cases been maintained."
21.
The anxiety of the Military Secretary's branch apparently was that the batch seniority had to be maintained.
If the argument of Mr. Vazey is accepted, the batch seniority cannot be maintained.
If the fresh cases of 1957 batch are to be promoted earlier than the petitioner, which is a first review case of 1956 batch, then the effect would be that officers belonging to the 1957 batch would be senior to the petitioner who belongs to the 1956 batch.
Notwithstanding the note dated 22nd September, 1986 of the Military Secretary, the letter dated 1st June, 1987 of the Military Secretary's branch makes it clear that the batch seniority shall always be maintained.
Notwithstanding the fact that the fresh cases of 1957 batch have been approved for Command and Staff stream, they would, nevertheless, come in sequence after the petitioner who belongs to the 1956 batch though selected in the 'Staff Only' stream.
It may happen that notwithstanding that the petitioner is placed at the head of the panel, no Staff vacancy may occur and a vacancy may occur only for a Command post to which the petitioner has not been selected but we are not concerned with such a case here.
It is the admitted case before us that out of the panel of officers who were selected as per the letter dated 26th October, 1990, Major Genl.
S.A. Singh and S Roy Choudhary have been, on promotion, posted to posts which are non-Command posts.
22.
Another fact which is relevant is that in the counter-affidavit which was filed by the respondents, it has been stated that the modalities for implementing the two stream policy were worked out and a consolidated letter dated 9th September, 1986 (supra) was issued by the Military Secretary's branch.
It is further stated that the said letter was given wide publicity.
This averment is then reiterated when it is stated that :  "Para 16 of the writ petition is admitted to the extent that two stream policy was approved in 1986 at the level of the then Prime Minister and consequently policy letter No. 04476/MS 9B, dated 9th September, 1986 (P7) was issued and given wide publicity."
We take it that this affidavit has been filed with a sense of responsibility.
There is no mention in this affidavit to any modalities having been laid down apart from what is contained in the letter of 9th September, 1986.
If Mr. Vazey's argument is to be accepted, then the implication would be that either these averments in the counter-affidavit are false or the deponent has been guilty of suppressing material facts.
In our opinion this cannot be so.
As is evident from what we have mentioned earlier, the modalities were really laid down by the letter of 9th September, 1986, which as per the averment in the counter-affidavit, even appear to have been approved by the then Prime Minister.
This averment in the affidavit is in consonance with the letter of 1st June, 1987 which, importantly enough, makes a reference in paragraph 1 to the Headquarter's earlier letter of 9th September, 1986.
In this letter of 1st June, 1987, there is no reference either to the note of 22nd September, 1986 of the Military Secretary or the opinions of the Vice Chief of Army Staff and the Chief of Army Staff thereupon.
It is clear, therefore, that it has been correctly averred by Col. Rawat in the reply affidavit that the modalities were laid down only in the policy letter of 9th September, 1986 any in it is this policy letter which was given wide publicity.
23.
We fail to understand that if the policy letter of 9th September, 1986 was required to be given wide publicity, then why no publicity at all was given to the alleged policy contained in the Military Secretary's note of 22nd September, 1986.
We have not been shown any document on the record, despite vehement arguments of Mr. Vazey to that effect that the Government has approved the Military Secretary's note of 22nd September, 1986.
Neither in the affidavit on behalf of the respondents nor in the letter of the Military Secretary's branch dated 1st June, 1987 is there any reference to any policy or modalities other than those contained in the aforesaid letter of 9th September, 1986.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is, therefore, clearly without any basis.
24.
In our opinion, if the petitioner had been correctly shown as being senior or it had been shown that he was entitled to promotion earlier than the 1957 batch, then he would have been entitled for promotion and posting to a non-Command post.
25.
Before concluding, we would like to observe that this is not a case where the court is interfering in the method or manner of selection.
In fact the courts should, as far as possible, avoid acting as a selection committee.
The court does not sit in appeal over the candidates who are selected.
Therefore, we have refrained from going into the correctness of the decision of the Government in not selecting the petitioner in 1989.
This is a case where the petitioner had been selected in 1989 and the controversy involved is not whether he should or should not be selected but is limited to the question as to whether he should be placed above the 1957 batch or not.
This is a pure question of law and in our opinion, the correct answer is that the petitioner is entitled to be placed above the 1957 batch.
26.
For the aforesaid reasons, we issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to regard and treat the petitioner, who belongs to the 1956 batch, as being senior to 1957 batch and entitled to be selected above the 1957 batch 'Fresh cases'.
To this extent the order of 26th October, 1990 of the respondents will stand modified.
We further issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to expeditiously promote the petitioner ahead of officers of 1957 batch to a 'Staff' post which has occurred or would occur between 26th October, 1990; 31st May, 1991, keeping in view the existing policy of the Government and in the fight of the observations made hereinabove.