RS Mongia, J - The petitioner joined the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board), as Sub-Divisional Officer on 15th June, 1968, by direct recruitment.
In due course, he was promoted as Executive Engineer with effect from 5th May, 1982.
In July, 1983, the petitioner had been assigned certain duties at Udhampur (J and K), from Amritsar where he was posted.
On the basis of some pseudonymous complaint regarding the misuse of the official vehicle during the abovesaid assignment, the petitioner was charge-sheeted by the Board on 24th September, 1984, for the following lapses:-  "That he (Er.
RK Gupta) while posted and functioning as Executive Engineer in ME Division, PSEB, Amritsar during the year 1983 submitted wrong report regarding his tour programme.
His official assignment was completed on 1171983 at Udhampur and thereafter he went to Srinagar and Pehalgam alongwith his family members in Board's vehicle No. PBA-632 although he was not authorised to do so.
In order to camouflage his visit to Srinagar and Pehalgam he concealed and distorted the material facts and gave a wrong explanation that the vehicle developed some mechanical defects at Udhampur and that he had returned to Jammu where he availed two days casual leave i.e. 13th and 14th July, 1983 and returned to Amritsar on 1571983.
In this manner, he misused the Board's vehicle No. PBA-632 for his personal use and submitted wrong TA Bills and also manipulated overwritings on the relevant entries.
In fact, the circumstances revealed that he returned to his headquarters only on 1971983 instead of 1571983."
The petitioner submitted a reply to the above-mentioned charge-sheet, which was considered by the competent authority and after holding a regular departmental enquiry, an order was passed on 10th April, 1987, imposing the following punishments :-  1) He should be reverted as Assistant Executive Engineer (AEE) for two years.
2) No increments.
3) Future increments will get deferred accordingly.
The above-said order was challenged by the petitioner by way of C.W.P.
No. 2155 of 1987 in this Court, on various grounds, and the following order was passed by the Motion Bench:-  "Present : Mr. SS Nijjar, Bar-at-law for the petitioner.
Contends that the punishment awarded is disproportionate to the alleged act of omission committed by the petitioner.
Notice of motion for 14th May, 1987.
Operation of the impugned order, Annexure P.9 is stayed till further orders.
Sd/- (S.S. Kang), Sd/- (GC Mital), Judges."
April 17, 1987.
2.
In the written statement filed by the Board, a preliminary objection was taken that against the impugned order, the petitioner had a remedy to file an appeal.
The writ petition was dismissed as premature by upholding the preliminary objection and the following order was passed on 30th July, 1987 :-  "It is stated by the learned counsel for the Respondents that an appeal is competent against the impugned order dated 1041987 (Annexure P.9) to the whole time members of the P.S.E.B.
It is also stated that if the petitioner filed the appeal within two weeks from today, the Respondents shall not raise any objection of limitation and the appeal shall be decided on merits.
It is also stated that a copy of the enquiry report shall also be supplied to the petitioner.
In this situation, the writ petition is premature and is dismissed as such.
The stay order dated April 17, 1987 shall remain operative uptill 1581987.
In the meantime, the petitioner can make a prayer for extension of stay before the appellate authority 30.7.1987."
Though the appeal filed by the petitioner was to be decided by the Board within the period of stay granted by this Court the Board sought to revert the petitioner vide order dated 23rd September, 1987, on the ground that the period for which the stay order was to remain in force, had already expired.
The order dated 23rd September, 1987, reverting the petitioner was again challenged by way of a writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 6811 of 1987 and on 28th September, 1987 and the petitioner's reversion was stayed till further orders.
The writ petition was ultimately disposed on the undertaking given by the Board that the petitioner would not be reverted till the appeal filed by him was decided by the Board.
3.
Ultimately, the Board dismissed the appeal vide order dated 7th July, 1988 (Annexure P-2) and upheld the order of reversion of the petitioner to the rank of A.E.E.
It is this order which had been challenged by the petitioner by way of the present writ petition.
It may be noticed that the Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion on 14th July, 1988 passed the following order :-  "Contends that the order in appeal has not been passed in accordance with Regulation 26.
Even it has not been considered that the penalty was excessive or not.
Moreover, apart from the reversion even his increment was stopped indefinitely.
Notice of motion for July 28, 1988.
Operation of the impugned order, Annexure P-2, is stayed meanwhile Dasti only."
The writ petition was then admitted on 11th November, 1988 and the stay order was ordered to be continued.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the Inquiry Officer was biased against him and he was bent upon to hold the petitioner guilty.
the petitioner had been requesting the Authorities to change the Inquiry Officer, but no heed was paid to his request.
He further submitted that no proper opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend himself before the Inquiry Officer.
He also submitted that the Appellate Authority had not properly considered the appeal of the petitioner in accordance with Regulation No. 26 of the Regulations, governing the conditions of service of the petitioner, especially Regulation No. 26(2)(c) where the Appellate Authority is required to see whether the punishment awarded is excessive, adequate, inadequate or severe.
5.
As far as the first contention of the petitioner is concerned, I find no merit in the same.
I was taken through the enquiry report, which is a very detailed one.
The main allegation against the petitioner was that he had misused the Government vehicle when he took it unauthorisedly to Srinagar and Pahalgam and had charged wrong T.A.
The finding that the vehicle had gone to Srinagar and Pahalgam is mainly based on documentary evidence and partially on oral evidence.
The documentary evidence is in the shape of a certificate given by the Excise and Taxation Officer, Banihal Check Post that the vehicle in question had crossed the check post towards Srinagar side on 11th July, 1983 and had paid the toll tax vide impost permit No. 35188 dated 11th July, 1983.
Further is a letter No. 733 dated 21st March, 1984, from the Excise and Taxation Officer, Banihal Toll Post to the address of an Officer of the Board, which indicates that the vehicle in question had crossed the Toll Post towards Srinagar vide impost permit No. 35188 dated 11/12th July, 1983, though the entry appeared to have been tampered with by writing wrong vehicle No. 6321 RBA, and the vehicle in question is Van PBA 632.
Likewise letter No. 1237/NAC/PHL dated 23rd March, 1984, from the Executive Officer, NAC, Pahalgam to an Officer of the Board also shows that vehicle No. PBA 632 had entered within the limits of NAC Pahalgam on 13th July, 1983, and had paid toll tax amounting to Rs. 10/- vide GR No. 13795.
In view of this documentary evidence, it cannot be said that the findings of the Inquiry Officer are in any way biased.
The findings of the Inquiry Officer are based on legal evidence, which have been upheld by the Appellate Authority.
No fault can be found with the same.
6.
As far as the question that the petitioner was not afforded proper opportunity, suffice it to reproduce the observations of the Inquiry Officer in this regard :-  "After the PO had closed his prosecution evidence, the respondent was directed to file his defence statement and list of defence witnesses/documents within one week vide my orders dated 10101986.
The respondent did not do so.
He contended that he had filed transfer application for transfer of enquiry case to some other officer.. As the proceedings were not stayed by the competent authority, therefore, the undersigned continued with the proceedings in the present enquiry case and the respondent was repeatedly given opportunities kin his case.
In the interest of justice, one more opportunity was given to the respondent to file defence statement and list of witnesses/documents within one week vide my order dated 25101986.
The respondent did not do so with the result that the defence evidence was closed vide order dated 18.11.1980, and the case was fixed for arguments at Amritsar on 4121986.
On 4121986, a telegram from the respondent was received expressing his inability to appear, with the result that the case was adjourned for 19121986, at Amritsar.
Again on the said date, i.e. 19121986, neither the respondent appeared nor his representative, which shows that the respondent was not interested to pursue his enquiry case, with the result that the arguments advanced by the PO were heard at Amritsar on 19121986.
Before that the transfer application given by the respondent had been rejected by the competent authority on 2121986."
In view of what has been stated above, the contention that no proper opportunity was given to the petitioner, is hereby negatived.
7.
There is force in the third contention of the petitioner's counsel that the Appellate Authority had not applied its mind whether the punishment imposed was excessive or adequate.
He drew my attention to Regulation 26(2) of the Regulations of the Board, which are reproduced below :-  "26.
(2) - In the case of an appeal against an order imposing any of the penalties specified in Regulation 5 or enhancing any penalty imposed under the said Regulation, the appellate authority shall consider - (a) whether the procedure laid down in these regulations has been complied with, and if not whether such non-compliance has resulted in the violation of any provision of the Constitution of India or in the failure of justice : (b) Whether the findings of the punishing authority are warranted by the evidence on the record; and (c) Whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is excessive, adequate, inadequate or severe; (d) Whether the facts on which the order was based, have been established; (e) Whether the facts established afford sufficient ground for taking action; and pass orders :- (i) confirming, enhancing, reducing or setting aside the penalty; or  (ii) remitting the case to the authority which imposed or enhanced the penalty or to any other authority with such direction as it may deem fit in the circumstances of the case."
From the appellate order, Annexure P2, it is clear that the appellate authority had not adverted to the provisions of Regulation 26(2)(c), quoted above, whether the quantum of punishment was excessive or not.
Though normally this Court would not interfere in the quantum of punishment and would remand the case to the Authority concerned to consider the question of quantum of punishment, but in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, where the petitioner had to approach this Court third time, I consider it appropriate that the punishment should be reduced taking into consideration the nature of the charge proved against the petitioner.
Nothing has been brought in the record that apart from the findings in the enquiry, there was anything adverse against the petitioner during his past service.
Moreover, by virtue of the stay order granted by this Court, the order of reduction in rank could not be implemented.
Further, when the notice of motion was issued by this Court on 14th July, 1988, the point which seems to have weighed with the Bench was the quantum of punishment as the Appellate authority had not adverted to Regulation 26 at all.
8.
Taking all the above facts into consideration, I am of the opinion that ends of justice would be met if the punishment imposed on the petitioner of reduction in rank by the Authority is converted into one that of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
9.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the order Annexure P2 imposing punishment is modified to the extent indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.