JV Gupta, CJ.
- The petitioner under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is directed against the order of the Employees Insurance Court, Chandigarh, declining ad interim injunction in favour of the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner has filed a petition under section 75 of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, to the effect that the impugned orders dated 13/16111987 declaring the petitioner's factory to be covered under the purview of section 2(12) 1(5) of the Act, w.e.f.
26101985 etc. are illegal, null and void and without jurisdiction, whereby, the amount of Rs. 22079/- is being recovered from him.
Along with the petition he also moved an application for ad interim injunction, which has been declined by the Employees Insurance Court, vide its order dated 29th November, 1989, on the ground that there was no force in the application wherein a temporary stays for the realisation of the amount in question has been sought.
3.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that it is the requirement of the statute that unless fifty per cent of the amount claimed is not deposited, the petition as such is not maintainable.
The relevant provision of section (2B) inserted by Act No. 29 of 1989 read as under :  "(2B).
No matter which is in dispute between a principle employer and the Corporation in respect of any contribution or any other dues shall be raised by the principal employer in the employees' Insurance Court unless he has deposited with the Court fifty per cent of the amount due from him as claimed by the Corporation : Provided that the Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, waive or reduce the amount to be deposited under this sub-section."
4.
That being so, the petitioner will deposit 50 per cent of the amount due from him within one month, failing which this petition shall stand dismissed.
As regards the balance amount the petitioner will furnish adequate security to the satisfaction of the Court which will be accepted after notice to the respondents.
He will also file an under taking along with security that in case the petitioner fails, the balance amount will be paid with 12 per cent interest from the date it fell due till it is paid.
5.
The petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Ordered accordingly.