AL Bahri, J (Oral) - This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of the District Judge, Rohtak, dated 1321990, whereby the trial Court's judgment and decree were set aside and the plaintiffs suit was dismissed.
2.
Dharambir Singh plaintiff joined as a student of Master of Business Administration (for short 'MBA') in Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (hereinafter called 'the University') in 1986.
He appeared and passed first semester examination held in December 1986.
When he appeared in the second semester examination conducted by the University in May 1987, he was caught using unfair means and ultimately debarred from appearing in any examination of the University upto May 1989.
It was after expiry for the aforesaid disqualification that he approached the University or appearing in the second semester examination but his request was declined and he challenged the same by filing the suit.
The suit was contested.
The trial Court decreed the suit whereas the lower appellate Court dismissed the same.
3.
The question for consideration relates to interpretation of Clause 121 of the Ordinance relating to the MBA examination of the University and Clause 17 of the Ordinance pertaining to punishment for use of unfair means.
These clauses arc reproduced as under :-  "12.
1) A candidate who has completed the prescribed course of instruction in the department for any Semester Examination but does not appear/reappear in the concerned paper(s) or having appeared fails, may be allowed, on the recommendation of the Head of the Department to appear/reappear in the concerned paper(s) as the case may be, at the next Supplementary special examination as specified in clause 1 and the next regular examination when such examination is held, without attending the classes.
While reappearing in the examination, the candidate shall be exempted from re-appearing in the paper(s), Project Report, viva voce in which he has obtained at least 50% marks including the marks for Internal Assessment, where prescribed.
Such a candidate, in the meantime, may persecute his studies for the next higher Semester(s) and appear in the examination(s) for the same alongwith the examination for lower Semester(s).
If a candidate fails to pass in any semester, examination even in the 3rd chance as mentioned above, he may be allowed one additional chance on valid reasons to appear in the examination, when held.
If the candidate still fails to pass, he will have to repeat the paper(s) concerned as a regular student in the Dept.
whenever the relevant paper(s) are offered in future.
Such repetition shall be allowed only once in the concerned paper(s)."
"Clause 17 : The disqualification under this Ordinance will be treated as a failure in the examination and consequences of failure will follow.
If a candidate is also disqualified from appearing at the next one or more examinations he shall not be admitted to any course of study, or allowed to appear at any examination of this University, during the period of such disqualification."
4.
The aforesaid two provisions are to be harmoniously construed.
Clause 17 aforesaid is in two parts.
The first part relates to disqualification of failure in the examination in which the candidate was found using unfair means.
The second part of this clause relates to disqualification in future.
It can be for one examination or more.
In the present case in future the disqualification was to be for the examination upto May 1989.
In the examination to follow after May 1989 the plaintiff was to be allowed to appear and to take all the chances which were permissible to him under Clause 121 mentioned above.
If the interpretation, as has been put by the District Judge, is accepted, not only that it would result in great hardship to the present plaintiff, it would also affect other candidates.
Rather the aforesaid interpretation is not contemplated by reading the two provisions.
Under Clause 121 of the Ordinance reproduced above a failed candidate required to take up 2-3 more chances on failure to pass the relevant examination.
The final chance is to be allowed under permission.
Otherwise he has to rejoin the classes for the course and thus make himself eligible for taking the said examination.
The phraseology used under Clause 121 indicating next regular examination or next supplementary examination is to be so interpreted that such examinations which a candidate can take; not literally the following examination.
That being the position after the disqualification the plaintiff was entitled to take second semester examination joining the course again.
5.
It is stated that during pendency of the suit the plaintiff was allowed under orders of the Court to take up second and third semester examination.
However, the result has not been declared so far.
6.
For the reasons stated above, this appeal is allowed with costs.
The judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court arc set aside and that of the trial Court arc restored.
Since the plaintiff has already taken examination the University will declare the result of 2nd and 3rd semester examinations.
Appeal allowed.