RS Mongia, J - The appellant-Company M/s Goodyear India Ltd, Ballabgarh, had filed the present appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, by which its writ petition challenging the award the Labour Court, was dismissed.
2.
The facts of the case are that respondent No. 2, Shri Satish Kumar, was appointed as a Trainee Production Worker, with effect from 1st January 1975, as an absentee replacement at the rate of Rs. 050 per hour, plus allowances as admissible under the Rules and was confirmed as such with effect from 8th October, 1975.
He was frequently remaining absent on the ground of illness and was obtaining medical leave.
Consequently on 26th June, 1978, the services of Shri Satish Kumar were terminated in the purported exercise of the powers under Clause XV(A) of the Certified Standing Orders applicable to the employees of the Company.
The respondent-workman raised an industrial dispute and the Industrial Tribunal Faridabad (Haryana) gave an award on 29th September, 1981 (Annexure P. 2) setting aside the order of termination and held that the workman was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages and other benefits of service.
The appellant, as stated above, challenged the award by way of writ petition, but the same was dismissed by the learned Single Judge.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant-Company, as stated above, filed the present appeal.
3.
The order terminating the services of the petitioner, dated 26th June, 1978 (Annexure P.1) reads as under :  "During the year 1976, you were absent on grounds of sickness for about 57 days.
In the year 1977, you were absent on grounds of sickness for about 139 days.
During the current year, from January 1, 1978 to June 23, 1978 you have been absent on grounds of sickness for about 66 days.
In the circumstances it has been decided to terminate your services in accordance with clause XV(A) of the Certified Standing Orders applicable to you.
2.
A money order for Rs. 70250 (Rupees Seven hundred two and paise fifty only) being one month's wages in lieu of notice has been sent to you already.
If there is any mistake in calculation the same may be pointed out within a week and will be rectified if necessary.
Please note that if this is not done within the stipulated period, we will consider that the payment made for one month's notice is correct.
3.
You may collect your other dues from the Factory Payroll Department on any working day between 10 A.M.  CC: Gate House  Sd/-  G.H.
Probin  Factory Accounting Manager - Div.
'A'  PRODUCTION DIRECTOR  Sd/-  for Production Manager.
June 26, 1978."
The learned Tribunal held - (i) that the workman's services had been terminated by way of victimisation on legitimate Trade Union activities and it was a colorable exercise of power under Clause XV(A) of the Standing Orders; and (ii) The factum of continued ill health' of the workman was not established.
4.
The learned Single Judge upheld the first finding.
The submission of the learned counsel for the writ petitioner on the second point before the learned Single Judge was that the long spells of illness which the workman suffered (which have been specified in the termination order, quoted above) established that the workman was not in a fit state of health to carry on his duties and this established the factum of his continued ill health.
This submission of the learned counsel was repelled by the learned Single Judge by holding that the ill-health should continue upto the date of termination and the ill-health should be such that would make the workman unfit for the job.
The learned Single Judge further held that the provisions of Clause XV(A) of the Standing Orders were contrary to the provisions contained in Section 2(oo)(c) the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and in violation of Section 25J of the Act, and as such the provisions of the Standing Orders could not be relied upon.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted before us that the impugned order of termination (which has already been quoted above) shows that the workman was absenting himself frequently for long periods in the last 2-3 years before the termination was ordered and since it was continued ill- health, therefore, under Section 2(oo)(c) of the Act, such termination would not amount to retrenchment.
He further submitted that the words used in Section 2(oo)(c) of the Act, are 'continued ill-health' and not 'continuing' or 'continuous' ill-health, therefore, it was not necessary that on the date the termination order was issued, the ill health should continue.
Further, he argued that it was for the Management to see whether in such circumstances, the person concerned should be allowed to work or not.
The learned counsel further argued that even if the termination was held to be illegal, it was not a case for ordering reinstatement with full back wages.
According to him, at the most reasonable compensation could be given to the workman.
To support the last argument, he highlighted four circumstances namely :  i) On the date the order of termination was passed, no Court/Tribunal had held that a Standing Order (clause XV-A) was contrary to Section 2(oo)(c) and, therefore, could not be acted upon in view of Section 25-J of the Act.
The exercise of the power of termination on that date under the said clause of the Standing Order was bona fide and justified; ii) The Bench which admitted the appeal had stayed the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, but the Hon'ble Supreme Court on appeal by the workman, had vacated the stay on 2nd March, 1984 and directed that the workman should be reinstated in the service and all the back wages be paid to the appellant.
It was further observed that the workman would be entitled to his regular monthly wages along with all allowances from month to month along with other workmen and it would be open to the Company to take work from the workman, which he was performing at the time of termination of his services, if it so desired.
The learned counsel submitted that though the Company was paying to the workman all his pay and allowances right from the day of the order of the Supreme Court, and had also paid the back wages, yet the Company had not taken any work from the workman, as according to the Company, his presence would have created problems and disturbance in the industrial peace in the Company; iii) That during the pendency of the present appeal, the workman had filed a false criminal complaint under Sections 420, 385, 465, 511, 506/34 as also under Sections 342 and 506, IPC against Mr. Wilkinson, Production Director of the Company-, Mr. VK Sharma, Ex-Personnel Manager, Mr. KL Khurana, Labour Manager and Mr. S Agha, Manager, Factory Accounting.
These persons were summoned by the Addl.
Chief Judicial Magistrate under Sections 465/342, 506/34, IPC, but on revision having been filed by the persons mentioned above, the Additional Sessions Judge, Faridabad, accepted the same and it was found that no prima facie case was even made out against the accused, and iv) That the workman is earning by editing and publishing a newspaper called "Dainik Janmorcha" which is a daily local newspaper and had wide circulation in the industrial belt of Faridabad and in the said newspaper the workman gets numerous advertisements published.
6.
The learned counsel for the assailants submitted that the above- mentioned facts, including the subsequent events be taken into consideration and even if it is held that the termination is not valid, the relief of reinstatement be converted into one of compensation and the Company was ready to pay over one lac of rupees as compensation.
7.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the workman submitted that there was no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant and once it is held that the termination is illegal, it fortiori followed that the workman was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages.
8.
Without going into the merits of the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant, whether the termination of the services of the workman was legal or not we are of the view that even if the termination was illegal, it is not a case of reinstatement on peculiar facts and circumstances (some of which have come into existence during the pendency of the appeal).
For the industrial peace and harmony, it would be in the interest of justice that reasonable compensation be awarded to the workman instead of reinstatement.
The circumstances that till date, the workman has got his pay, allowances and back wages the Company has been paying the workman without getting any work from him; the criminal complaint by the workman against some officers of the Company and the offer of the Company to pay compensation of over a lac of rupees to keep the industrial peace and tranquilty have led us to convert the relief of reinstatement into one of awarding compensation.
Considering all the aspects of the matter, we are of the view that a compensation of Rs. 150 lacs would meet the ends of justice.
With this amount the workman can start any other avocation afresh and would not be just on the road.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeal is partly accepted and the relief granted by the Tribunal and upheld by the learned Single judge regarding reinstatement into service of the workman is altered by award of compensation, as indicated above.
The Company shall pay the amount of compensation to the workman within a fortnight from the date of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal partly accepted.