GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to direct the respondents to absorb the petitioner in government service on the post of Art and Craft Teacher w.e.f.
the date of take over of the Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehandipur.
2.
The facts which are borne out from the averments made in the writ petition, the reply, the replication and the additional affidavits filed by the parties are that the petitioner who possesses diploma in Art and Craft awarded by the Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab was appointed on 19.8.1988 as Art and Craft Teacher in the Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehandipur against a vacant post.
3.
In the year 1991, the Government of Punjab, Department of Education decided to take over the school.
For this purpose, a gift deed was executed between the government and the management of the school.
Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the gift deed read as under :-  "3.
The Government is not bound to take over the establishment of the school.
The Government has right if it so wants to take over the staff who fulfil the requisite qualifications among them.
4.
Members of the staff, whose services will be taken over in accordance with above conditions, will be considered as new recruits in Govt. service.
They will not get any benefit of their previous service in this school and the seniority will be placed at the last of the old employees under the rules."
4.
Vide memo No. 17/7/82-2.Edu.111/1124 dated May 21, 1991 issued by the Department of Education (Education-1 Branch), Government of Punjab to the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, sanction of the President of India was conveyed for taking over of the school and to the creation of the posts of teachers, ministerial staff and class-IV staff.
Soon thereafter, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab issued memo dated 1981991 to the District Education Officer (Schools), Hoshiarpur laying down the detailed guidelines for taking over of the school.
5.
The services of the petitioner and three other teachers working as Social Studies Master, Science Master and JB.T.
Teacher were not taken over along with other staff of the school.
They made representations dated 1511992, 19.8.1992 and 221993 to the departmental authorities and the Chief Minister for absorption of their services.
6.
One of them, namely, Avtar Singh instituted C.W.P.
No. 6839 of 1993 which was allowed by a Division Bench on July 23, 1994.
While accepting his prayer for directing the respondents to absorb him in the government service, the Court passed the following order :-  "After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner is squarely covered in his favour by a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 4321 of 1986 decided on 6121989.
For the reasons mentioned in that order, this petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to absorb over the services of the petitioner as a Science Master with effect from the date of the taking over of the school by the State Government and his seniority will be accordingly fixed.
He will, however, not be entitled to any arrears of salary from the date of take over till the date of his absorption.
The respondents are further directed to let the petitioner join duty within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by them."
The petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 506 of 1995 filed by the State of Punjab and others against the judgment of the Division Bench was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 2011995.
7.
Smt. Jaswinder Kaur who was serving as Hindi Teacher in Baba Makhan Shah Khalsa High School, Tanda Ramsahai, District Hoshiarpur had filed C.W.P.
No. 4321 of 1986 for directing the respondents to absorb her in the government service.
That petition was accepted on 6121989 and the following direction was given by the High Court :-  "Keeping the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case into consideration, the petitioner is declared to have been continuing in Government service with effect from the taking over the school by the Government or from the date from which her services were dispensed with, whichever date is earlier, and the respondents are directed to treat her as such for all purposes including the payment of arrears of her salary etc., as well as for regularisation.
It is, however, made clear that the respondent authorities are not debarred from considering the case of the petitioner for retention in Government service in the light of the Clause (sic) of Agreement entered into between the Government and the Management of the School.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms."
8.
Smt. Sandhya Devi who was also denied the benefit of absorption like the petitioner, filed C.W.P.
No. 12980 of 1991.
A Division Bench consisting of RP Sethi, J, as he then was and RL Anand, J accepted the writ petition and directed the respondents to absorb Smt. Sandhya Devi as JB.T.
Teacher, as would appear from the following direction given by the Division Bench on 2421996 :-  "Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed with direction to the respondents to absorb the petitioner as a JBT Teacher in the Government High School, Mehandipur, Tehsil Balachaur, District Hoshiarpur, with effect from the date of taking over the said school by the State Government and fix her seniority accordingly.
She shall, however, not be entitled to any arrears of salary from the date of taking over of the School till the date of her appointment.
The respondents shall pass appropriate orders, allowing the petitioner to join her duties within a period of one month from the date, a copy of this order is served upon the competent authority.
Sd/- RP Sethi Sd/- RL Anand 2421996, Judges"  9.
The petitioner's prayer for issuance of a mandamus to absorb her in the government service has been opposed by the respondents on the ground that she was not appointed against the aided post by the management of Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehandipur.
In the written statement filed by them on 1011997 through the District Education Officer (Schools), Hoshiarpur, the respondents have alleged that the petitioner was appointed by the management with the view to secure back-door appointment in the government service because the management knew that the school was being taken over by the government.
The respondents have distinguished the cases of Avtar Singh and Sandhya Devi by stating that they had been appointed against the aided posts after being approved by the competent authority.
10.
In the replication filed by her, the petitioner has stated that Shri Avtar Singh was appointed as Science Master on 2871989 i.e. after almost one year of her appointment in the service of the school and, therefore, the respondents cannot plead that her appointment was actuated by malice or was a device to secure her entry in the government service.
In para 3 of the replication, the petitioner has also stated that Sukhbir Kaur (Maths.
Teacher), Mohinderpal Kaur (SS Mistress), Balwant Singh (SS Master), Sulakhan Singh (PTI) and Darshan Kaur (Librarian) who were appointed against unaided posts have been absorbed in the government services after the take over and, therefore, the decision of the respondents not to absorb the petitioner in government service is discriminatory and arbitrary.
The petitioner has also alleged that in the written statement filed by the respondents a false statement has been made that no teacher appointed against an unaided post has been absorbed in the government service.
For reference purposes, the averments made in paras 3 and 7 of the replication filed by the petitioner are reproduced below :-  "3.
Para 3 of the preliminary objections is wrong and denied.
It is wrong and denied that the appointment of the petitioner was made with the motive of getting back-door appointment because the school was being taken over by the Government.
The petitioner was appointed as Art and Craft Teacher against a vacant post on 19.8.1988.
The name of the petitioner is entered in the Staff Statement prepared by the District Education Officer on 2871989.
Shri Avtar Singh, Science Master, who joined service on 1891989 i.e. more than one year after joining of the service by the petitioner has been absorbed in the service of the State Government on taking over of the school under the orders of this Hon'ble Court (Annexures P6 and P7).
The services of Sukhbir Kaur, Math.
Teacher, Mohinderpal Kaur, SS Mistress, Balwant Singh, SS Master, Sulakhan Singh, PTI and Darshan Kaur Librarian who all were working on unaided posts, have been taken over by the State Government at the time of taking over of the school.
The services of the petitioner are also liable to be taken over from the date of taking over of the school.
7.
Para 7 of the written statement is wrong and denied and the averments made in corresponding para of the writ petition are reiterated.
The petitioner was appointed against a vacant post.
It is wrong and denied that the petitioner secured her appointment with connivance of erstwhile Managing Committee of the school.
The petitioner has been in service of the school for three years at the time of taking over of the school.
Shri Avtar Singh Science Master has joined service on 1891989 i.e. more than one year after joining of the service by the petitioner and the writ petition filed by him has been allowed by this Hon'ble Court.
The name was duly recorded in Staff Statement prepared by the District Education Officer on 28789 though Sh. Avtar Singh Science Master was not even in service at that time and his name is not mentioned in the Staff Statement of the school.
The respondents have intentionally made following false averments in this para of the petition:-  `It is pertinent to mention here that no teacher working against an unaided post has been taken over by the Government.'
The Government has taken over the services of Sukhbir Kaur, Math.
Teacher, Mohinderpal Kaur, SS Mistress, Balwant Singh, SS Master, Sulakhan Singh PTI, Darshan Kaur Librarian, who all were working on unaided posts and no approval of the department has been taken for their appointments as they all were working on unaided posts."
11.
To the replication filed by the petitioner, the respondents have filed a reply.
In para 2 of the preliminary objections of this reply, the respondents have made the following statement :-  "2.
Denied.
It is wrong that the petitioner was appointed against a vacant post.
There was neither any vacant post of Art and Craft teacher nor there was any work load for another art and craft teacher as per time table of the school (Copy enclosed R-1).
There was work load for only one art and craft teacher and one Sh. Mani Singh ACT was working against an aided post who has been taken over by the Govt.
The services of Sh. Avtar Singh, Science Master have been taken over because he was working against a resultant vacant aided post and his appointment was duly approved by the Deptt.
According to time table of the school, there was justification due to extra work load of the subjects of Social Studies, Math.
and Physical Education.
Therefore, the taking over of the services of Smt. Sukhbir Kaur, Math Mistress, Mohinder Pal Kaur, SS Mistress, Balwant Singh SS Master and Sulakhan Singh PTI are justified as per work load.
The services of a Librarian and a clerk are also a must for a High School and there were no aided posts of these categories.
Therefore, the services of Smt. Darshan Kaur Librarian and Sh. Jujhar Singh clerk were taken over by the Govt.
But there was no work load for second art craft teacher.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were not taken over."
From the pleadings of the parties, it is clearly revealed that although the respondents had initially justified the non-absorption of the petitioner in the government service on the ground that she was appointed in the service of the school against an unaided post, in the reply to the replication filed by them, the respondents have tried to create a new ground, namely, non- availability of work load to support their plea of non-absorption of the petitioner.
This the respondents have done in the light of the averments made in the replication filed by the petitioner showing therein that four teachers, one librarian and one clerk have been absorbed in view of the extra work-load in the subjects etc.
Therefore, we shall have to decide the claim of the petitioner on the premise that the respondents have absorbed in the government service the persons who were employed in Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehandipur irrespective of the fact that they were appointed against aided or unaided posts.
After having absorbed six persons who were employed against unaided posts, the respondents cannot plead that the petitioner is not entitled to be absorbed because she had been appointed in the school against an unaided post.
We also do not find any merit in the plea of the respondents that the petitioner's appointment in the year 1988 was manipulated with the object of securing her appointment in the government service by back-door method because it is an admitted fact that Avtar Singh was appointed as Science Master after eleven months of her appointment as Art and Craft Teacher.
12.
On the question of workload, we may refer to the inspection report prepared by the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur before the government took over the school.
Inspection report dated 1681989 submitted by the District Education Officer was forwarded to the departmental authorities well before the take over.
In this report (Annexure P12), the District Education Officer has clearly indicated the requirement of two posts of teachers for drawing/needle work.
In the chart enclosed with the report, it has been indicated that the total periods required for drawing/needle work plus SUPW come to 64 and two members of the staff are required to teach the students studying in the school.
This is clearly borne out from the following extracts of the inspection report and the statement enclosed with it:-  Extract of the Report.
"As per students strength the following posts are required in the school as per norms.
Category of Staff Staff required as per norms.
Staff working at present Addl.
requ- irement 1 to 4 xx xx xx 5.
Drawing/Needle work.
2 2 - 6 to 10 xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Smt. Gurmit Kaur, Drawing Teacher at serial No. 5, has been appointed by the School Managing Committee vide resolution dated 19888 w.e.f.
19888.
It is stated in the resolution that there is a need of two Drawing Teachers in the school (copy of resolution enclosed).
Name of this employee was not there in the staff statement sent with earlier inspection report.
Now it has been included and its justification is stated to be introduction of new subject of Needle Work in the school.
xx, xx, xx, xx Extract of the Statement.
Staff required as per norms (Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehndipur.
Staff required on the basis of periods as per norms.
Staff as per norms.
Staff working under Grant-in-Aid Scheme.
Staff appointed by Committee.
Addl.
staff required.
1) xx xx xx xx 2) xx xx xx xx 3) xx xx xx xx 4) Drawing/ Needle  Work + SUPW 20 + 20 +24  2 1 1 - = 64 5) to 9) xx xx xx xx xx 13.
Although Shri Rupinder Khosla tried to argue that the report prepared by the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur is factually incorrect, we are unable to agree with him.
At no point of time, the government had rejected the report of the District Education Officer nor has it been pleaded before the Court that the report was prepared by the officer concerned with an oblique motive.
It is, therefore, not possible to ignore the report made by the competent departmental authority.
Rather, it is reasonable to take cognizance of this report for the purpose of holding that the work load justified the employment of at least two Art and Craft Teachers.
14.
In view of the above, we hold that the reasons given by the respondents for not absorbing the petitioner in the government service are irrelevant and extraneous and their decision is vitiated being contrary to Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
15.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to absorb the petitioner in the government service in the same manner in which other teachers have been absorbed after adjudging her suitability for the post.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits at par with other teachers of the erstwhile Lt. Gen. Bikram Singh Khalsa High School, Mehndipur, who were absorbed in the government service after taking over of the school.
Petition allowed.