AS Nehra, J - This appeal is by the plaintiff Subhash Chander against the judgment and decree dated 7.12.1988 of the Additional District Judge, Sirsa, whereby the appeal filed by the defendant-State of Haryana and others was allowed and the suit filed by Subhash Chander was dismissed.
The trial Court on 18.1.1988 had decreed the suit.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Subhash Chander was appointed as a clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of Executive Engineer, Sirsa Division on six months basis on 611982.
He continued working there and vide order dated 1481984, his services were terminated in order to appoint Hoshiar Singh whose father Bhale Ram was also working in the Rori Sub Division and who died while on duty.
The plaintiff challenged his termination by filing the present suit.
In the plaint it was averred that he was an ex-serviceman and the post to which he was employed was reserved for ex-servicemen and his services could only be terminated to accommodate some other ex-servicemen selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and since Hoshiar Singh was not an ex-serviceman, therefore, the order dated 1481984 was illegal, null and void and not binding on him.
Consequently relief for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from relieving the plaintiff from the post of Clerk was also sought.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants and it was submitted that the plaintiff was appointed on ad hoc basis and his services could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason or without giving any notice.
It was also submitted that, under executive instructions, some posts had been reserved for ex-servicemen; however, later on by executive instructions, it was decided that 10 per cent posts should be reduced and no fresh appointment be made as a measure of economy.
It was also directed that if any person was to be appointed on the ground of ward of a deceased employee, then he should be appointed against a post held by an ad hoc employee and no fresh appointment against the existing vacancy be made.
It was submitted that since Bhale Ram who was an employee in the office of Irrigation Department died while in service, therefore, his son Hoshiar Singh was appointed in view of the policy decision of the Government and since Hoshiar Singh could only be appointed against a post of an ad hoc employee, therefore, the services of the plaintiff has been terminated rightly.
After filing the suit by the plaintiff, a reference was made by the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Department, to the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana, and the latter vide memo No. 35/16/85-3GSII dated 391985 (Exhibit D.2) clarified that the instructions contained vide letter dated 30.4.1975 related to Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and those were not applicable to Ex-servicemen.
It was also pointed out that the services of Subhash Chander were rightly terminated in order of accommodate Hoshiar Singh.
4.
On pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to continue in service on the post of Clerk in the office of Rori Division, Sirsa as having completed the continuous period of service for more than 2 years and also being appointed against the reserved quota of ESM ?
2.
Whether the letter bearing No. 10717/18-E dated 1481984 issued by the S.E.
defendant No. 2 is illegal, against the principles of Natural Justice and void qua the direction of termination of services of the plaintiff ?
3.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit ?
4.
Whether the suit is bad for not serving notice under Section 80, Code of Civil Procedure ?
5.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of proper and necessary parties ?
6.
Relief.
5.
The trial Court decided all the issues in favour of the plaintiff and decreed the suit.
The defendants were restrained from terminating the services of the plaintiff in response to order dated 1481984.
As already stated above, the appeal filed by the defendants before the Additional District Judge, Sirsa, succeeded.
6.
The contention of Shri HS Gill, learned counsel for the appellant, is that the instructions issued by the State on the subject of appointment of ad hoc employees were not properly interpreted by the lower appellate Court.
When the appellant was appointed on ad hoc basis against a vacancy reserved for ex-serviceman as per instructions of the Government, services of such an employee could be terminated only on the appointment of a regular incumbent and if the latter instructions of the Government are read, as is urged, providing for accommodating a ward of an employee of the department who had died during his service tenure, the earlier instructions of imposing cut in the services to effect economy were to be ignored.
There is force in this contention.
The instructions of the Government dated October 15, 1971, provide that the posts reserved for ex-servicemen be filled in the following manner :-  (i) by ex-servicemen recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board (such appointments will be made on regular basis).
(ii) failing (i), by ex-servicemen who are already working on an ad hoc basis, that is, they will be allowed to continue on their existing posts.
(iii) failing (i) and (ii), by other ex-servicemen who will be appointed on ad hoc basis.
(iv) failing (i), (ii) and (iii), by non ex-servicemen who will be appointed on ad hoc basis.
The aforesaid instructions contemplated filling of posts reserved for ex-servicemen by ex-servicemen recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission/Subordinate Service Selection Board on regular basis and till it was done, ex-servicemen to continue to work on those posts on ad hoc basis.
In 1977 instructions were issued which are contained in the letter dated June 16, 1977, drawing attention of the departments to the earlier instructions issued in 1971 and giving directions that those ad hoc employees appointed against posts reserved for ex-servicemen should only be removed when regular ex-servicemen, as approved by the Subordinate Services Selection Board are to be appointed and not otherwise.
The plaintiff rests his case on these instructions and contended that his services could not be terminated in order to accommodate a ward of an ex-employee.
On the other hand, the defendants relied upon the instructions issued on May 26, 1983 vide which the Government imposed a cut of 10% on the existing strength of the staff belonging to each category in all the departments of the State Government.
At this stage, it may be mentioned that on account of applying the requisite cut of 10% the appellant's services were not terminated.
The instructions of the Government dated September 3, 1985, making reference to earlier instructions of April 30, 1975 on the subject "Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes" were not to be applied to ex-servicemen.
I fail to understand how the clarification given by the Chief Secretary in his letter dated 391985 (Exhibit D.2) is helpful to the State.
No reference is made to the previous instructions relating to the posts reserved for the ex-servicemen.
The plaintiff-appellant whose services were not terminated on account of imposing 10 per cent cut, as aforesaid, was not to be affected in any manner by the Government instructions relating to appointment of wards of ex-employees dying during service tenure.
In spite of the cut imposed by the instruction, ward of an ex-employee dying in service could be appointed in service, may be for him another post is created or by replacement of another ad hoc employee.
7.
There is another aspect of the matter which needs consideration.
The plaintiff-appellant has served the department for a period of 2 years and 3 months.
He joined the service on 351982 and his services were terminated on 1481984.
In view of the rule of law laid down by this Court by the Division Bench in Piara Singh and another v. State of Haryana and others, (1989-1) P.L.R.
396 : 1988(4) SLR 739, the State was to regulate the services of such employees who had put in at least two years service in the State of Haryana and not to terminate their services.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed with costs.
The judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court are set aside and that of the trial Court are restored.
Appeal allowed.