Nirmal Singh, J - Through the medium of the present petition, the petitioner seeks direction in the nature of certiorari quashing Order No. Estt/Resign/126 BN/2001/285-91 dated 19th January 2001, whereby the resignation of the petitioner has been accepted without pensionary benefits.
Further direction is also sought in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to allow the petitioner to resume duty against the post on which he was working as also to pay him salary by treating the petitioner in service.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner came to be appointed as constable in Border Security Force on 20th July 1986.
After undergoing the basic training, the petitioner was posted in 78th Bn BSF and served various parts of the country.
The petitioner was promoted as Lance Naik and posted as such in 126th Bn BSF.
While the petitioner was posted in aforesaid Battalion, a case under sections 19-A, 22-E and 26 of BSF Act came to be registered against him on the grounds that the petitioner absented himself without prior permission from Bn.
Headquarters on 8th October 2000, brought liquor in the Unit on 9th October 2000 as also found in drunken state on 5th December 2000.
Charge-sheet was framed against the petitioner vide No. Estt/ROE/SL/126BN/2000/11741-45 dated 6th December 2000 but no proceedings were initiated against him even after framing the charge-sheet.
According to the petitioner, the respondents through coercive method got his signatures on the papers and vide impugned Order No. Estt/Resign/126 BN/2001/285-91 dated 10th January 2001, accepted the resignation of the petitioner without pensionary benefits.
Further the respondents vide another Order No. Estt/126BN/Resign/2001/58 dated 15th January 2001 struck the petitioner from the roll of BSF and turned him out from the unit where he was posted.
The petitioner approached the respondents for allowing him to continue in service, requested them not to give effect to his resignation as also order dated 10th January 2001.
Further case of the petitioner is that order dated 10th January 2001 was required to be withdrawn as the petitioner signed the documents without any knowledge what was stated therein.
The petitioner preferred representation under Rules 167 and 168 of the BSF Rules for allowing him to resume duty and also treat him on duty but till date they have not considered the representation.
3.
On being put to notice, counter has been filed on behalf of the respondents stating therein that the petitioner was enrolled in Border Security Force on 2171986 as constable.
After completion of basic training, the petitioner was posted to 126 Bn.
The petitioner was found absent without proper permission from the aforementioned Unit without proper permission on 8102000 and reported on 9102000.
The petitioner was medically examined and found in the state of intoxication.
The petitioner was advised by the respondent- authorities to improve himself otherwise he will be dealt under BSF Act and Rules.
It is further stated that on 3122000, when the troops were fallen at Bn.
HQ for Arms cleaning, the petitioner was again found absent from the unit line.
On searching, he was found in a civilian house in an intoxicated condition in the nearby village.
The petitioner was medically examined from PHC 82 Mile Dist Dhalai.
The Second Command of 126 Bn.
BSF was directed to record the evidence against the petitioner for offence under BSF Act.
The petitioner also earned 4 bad entries during his service and he was habitually absentee.
While the recording of Evidence was in progress, the petitioner approached respondent No. 5 as also Staff Officer of Unit and requested for early acceptance of his resignation as the petitioner was unable to serve in BSF due to domestic problems.
The petitioner was advised by the respondent- authorities to continue in service but he insisted upon the respondents to accept his resignation.
Keeping in view his previous record of the petitioner as also to maintain discipline in the force, the resignation of the petitioner was accepted by Unit Commander on 10th January 2001.
After acceptance of the resignation of the petitioner, the recording of evidence was withdrawn.
4.
Grievance of the petitioner is that order dated 10th January 2001 impugned in the present petition is against law and rules because the respondents could not struck the petitioner from the roll of BSF as there was disciplinary proceedings pending against him.
According to BSF Regulations, once a disciplinary proceedings are set against a BSF personnel it must be brought to its finality.
The respondents through coercive steps got his signatures on papers and thereafter issued order dated 19th January 2001 whereby resignation of the petitioner without pensionary benefits has been accepted.
Further grievance of the petitioner is that without initiating the proper proceedings, the respondents could not be struck the petitioner from the roll of BSF.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that this petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner was booked under Sections 19(a), 22E and 26 of BSF Act for the offence committed by him.
According to Section 19(2) of BSF Act if a member of the force absents without leave, he on conviction by a Security Force Court, shall be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is mentioned in said section.
In terms of Section 22(e) of the said Act, if a member of the force neglects to obey any general, local or other order, on conviction by a Security Force Act he shall be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the case of the offences specified in clauses (d) and (e) to two years and in the case of the offences specified in the other, clauses to ten years or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
In terms of Section 26 of the said Act, any person of the force who is found in a state of intoxication, whether on duty or not, on conviction by a Security Force Court, shall be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extended to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Earlier the petitioner was advised by the respondents to improve himself and the petitioner also earned four bad entries during service.
7.
Perusal of the record reveals that when the petitioner was being tried under the aforementioned sections and the recording of evidence was in progress, the petitioner was apprehending that he will be convicted and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment, he at once tendered his resignation on the ground of domestic problem before the respondents.
Thereafter, the petitioner also appeared in person before the Commandant as well as Staff of the Unit where he was posted and made a verbal request for acceptance of his resignation as he was unable to serve the Border Security Force due to domestic problem.
On the request of the petitioner, the Commandant of the Unit accepted the resignation tendered by the petitioner vide order impugned dated 10th January 2001 and accordingly, he was struck from the strength of the Border Security Force with effect from 15012001 in accordance with BSF Rule 1969.
After acceptance of the resignation of the petitioner, the respondents in their wisdom thought it fit to withdraw the proceedings pending before the Summary Security Force Court against the petitioner.
Accordingly, proceedings were withdrawn.
The competent authority had no motive to get the signatures of the petitioner on the blank paper for converting into the same as resignation of the petitioner.
It is the petitioner, who on his own tendered his resignation before the respondents due to domestic problems.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that when the signatures of the petitioner have been obtained under coercion, same cannot be used against him.
In the present case there is no iota of evidence that the respondents got signatures of the petitioner on the blank paper through coercive method.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner had tendered resignation due to fear of the conviction under BSF Act.
The plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner that through coercive steps the respondents got the signatures of the petitioner on the blank paper with an motive to use the same against him, cannot be accepted.
8.
In order to strengthen the case of the petitioner, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has placed reliance on various judgments of the Apex Court reported as Punjab National Bank v. PK Mittal, (AIR 1989 SC 1083), Nand Keshwar Prasad v. Indian Farmers Fertilizers, 1999(1) SCT 276 : (1998)5 SCC 461), Shambhu Murari Sinha v. Project and Development India Ltd & another, 2002(2) SCT 400 : (AIR 2002 SC 1341), Raj Kumar & Ors v. Union of India & Anr, 2006(1) SCT 456 : (2006(1) Supreme 159).
Plain reading of the aforementioned judgments of the Apex Court does not help the case of the petitioner because issues involved in all these aforementioned cases are different in nature and does not relate to the issue involved in the present petition of the petitioner.
9.
Before accepting the resignation of the petitioner, the petitioner was time and again briefed and advised by the respondents to continue in service but the petitioner insisted them for acceptance of his resignation due to domestic problem.
Keeping in view the previous record of the petitioner as also repeated requests made by him, the resignation tendered by the petitioner was accepted by the Unit Commandant vide impugned order and accordingly the petitioner was discharged from the roll of the BSF.
Therefore, the impugned order passed by the respondents is legal and justifiable in the eye of law.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition and as such same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.