Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on July 6, 1968.
On April 1, 1991, he was promoted as a Subedar.
On July 31, 1996, he was ``discharged.... On completion of prescribed limit......" He complains that he was arbitrarily overlooked for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major in 1995 when Subedar P Ambedkar was actually selected and promoted.
The petitioner had an excellent record of service.
If he had been promoted, he would have continued in service for a further period of four years.
The action in ignoring him for promotion was illegal.
Consequently, he prays that the order of his discharge passed on July 31, 1996, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, be quashed.
He further prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him as Subedar Major and to reinstate him with all consequential benefits.
2.
The respondents have contested the petitioners' claim and point out that the departmental promotion committee which had been constituted to screen the Subedars for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major, had met in 1995.
A `select panel' had been drawn up.
The petitioner "though at Serial No. 61 of the Seniority list of Subedars ....was very low in merit and did not find a place in the select panel.
The petitioner secured 665 points whereas the cut off points of select panel were every high i.e. 77 points.
Other JCO referred in the petition at Serial No. 62 (JC-187513X Sub.
P Ambedkar) secured 87 points...and got his promotion to the rank of Subedar Major."
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner has "not earned any outstanding ACRs as alleged in the writ petition."
During the last five years (1991 to 1995), the petitioner had been assessed as `Above Average' on four occasions and as ` High Average' on the fifth.
The points secured by the petitioner under different heads have also been indicated.
It has been pointed out that in accordance with the promotion policy circulated in January 1993 which was to be effective from January 1, 1995, the petitioner's case was duly considered but he was not found suitable.
He was discharged on completion of the prescribed period of service.
On these premises, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
The petitioner has filed Civil Misc. application No. 9617 of 1997 for permission to file a replication.
It is allowed.
The replication is taken on record.
In this replication, he has reiterated the averments made in the writ petition.
It has been further averred that the ``respondents have wrongly applied the policy" issued in the year 1993, to the petitioner.
It has also been alleged that the petitioner was made to serve on extra regimental establishment in the interest of service and that a special report was rightly called for.
Instead, the request for the special report was withdrawn and the petitioner's claim was illegally ignored.
A copy of the letter dated January 15, 1993 issued by the respondents by which criteria for promotion was laid down has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the replication.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been urged that the criterion for promotion had been laid down by the Government vide letter dated February 27, 1992.
It has been provided that "out of five reports, three must be above average and two high average.
One above average report must be on regimental duties except PAs and GD(SD)...." A person who fulfils this condition, has a right to be promoted to the rank of Subedar Major.
The action of the respondents in ignoring the petitioner was illegal.
Still, further, even in accordance with the criterion laid down vide instructions dated January 15, 1993, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the replication, the petitioner was entitled to be promoted.
Counsel urged that the respondents had erred in ignoring him for promotion.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents had pointed out that the petitioner's case had been duly considered in accordance with the criterion laid down by the competent authority.
Since he was not selected, the person who was more meritorious had been promoted.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Did the respondents act illegally in superseding the petitioner ?
6.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the policy for promotion had been laid down vide letter dated February 27, 1992.
A copy of this letter has not been produced.
Only Clause (a) has been quoted in paragraph 8.
This only provides that out of five reports, three must be "above average" and two `` high average."
One of the above average reports must be on regimental duties.
This provision appears to lay down a minimum condition of eligibility.
That cannot, without anything more, be interpreted to mean that any one who has earned three above average reports and two high average reports has a right to be promoted.
Still further, a perusal of the instructions issued vide letter dated January 15, 1993 which have been produced by the petitioner with his replication shows that this condition of eligibility has not been altered.
Still further, the detailed procedure for making the selection has been laid down.
It was also provided that the revised criterion for promotion shall come into force w.e.f.
January 1, 1995.
The validity of the criterion has not been challenged.
It has not even been remotely suggested that this criterion is arbitrary or unfair.
In fact, on a perusal of the criterion, we find that proper guidelines have been laid down so that the claims of all eligible persons are considered on a uniform basis and selection of the best person is made.
The criterion is just and reasonable.
It takes into account relevant factors like the annual confidential reports, the courses attended by a member of the Service as also the honours and awards earned by him.
Definite marks have been allocated to relevant matters to enable the departmental promotion committee to consider the claims of eligible persons.
The criterion is just and reasonable.
It ensures the equality of opportunity.
It does not violate any law.
Even if it is assumed that the instructions issued vide letter dated January 15, 1993 varied the criterion which had been laid down in the year 1992, it cannot be said that the action is illegal.
The power to prescribe the criterion would include the power to change it.
It has not been shown that the criterion was changed by an authority which may not be competent to do so.
It may also be mentioned that the criterion had been issued in the year 1993.
It was enforced from January 1, 1995.
Consequently, the departmental promotion committee which had met in the year 1995 was entitled to follow this criterion.
It acted rightly in doing so.
7.
The petitioner was at Sr. No. 61 in the seniority list.
He was within the zone of consideration.
His claim was admittedly considered.
He had secured 665 points.
Subedar Ambedkar had secured 87 points.
He, even though junior to the petitioner, was found to be more meritorious.
Thus, he was promoted.
The selection and promotion of a person who is more meritorious than the petitioner was in conformity with the prescribed criterion.
It suffers from no illegality so as to call for any interference.
The petitioner's claim that he had an excellent record, is belied by the fact that he secured only 665 marks.
He has grossly exaggerated notion of his merit.
The departmental promotion committee having found that a person junior to him was more meritorious, it was entitled to select him.
There was no infirmity in the action.
8.
It was suggested on behalf of the petitioner that he had been given a negative point.
This was not in conformity with the instructions issued on January 15, 1993.
Even this contention has no merit.
A perusal of the instructions shows that a candidate could be penalised for a `red ink entry'.
It was not suggested on behalf of the petitioner that he had not earned any adverse entry.
9.
The counsel had also submitted that the promotion had to be made solely on the basis of seniority from amongst the persons who fulfilled the condition of eligibility.
There is nothing to support this submission.
In fact, the instructions clearly provided to the contrary.
10.
Still further, it also deserves mention that the petitioner has not impleaded Subedar Major P Ambedkar as a party.
In his absence, any challenge to his selection on promotion would be misconceived.
No other point was urged.
In view of the above, the question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the respondents did not act illegally in superseding the petitioner.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
Since the petitioner has already retired from service, there will be no order as to costs.