TS Doabia, J - This judgment shall dispose of two appeals i.e.
Letters Patent Appeal No. 182/96 (Anoop Saxena and others v. Madhav Institute of Technology and Science and others) and L.P.A. No. 184/96 (Sudhir Kumar Sharma v. MP Electricity Board and another).
2.
First facts in LPS No. 182 of 1996 :  Madhav Institute of Technology and Science, Gwalior (hereinafter called as the Institute) conducted a written test and found that six appellants of this appeal are eligible and within the merit list for admission to the discipline of BE (Part-time) course.
They in fact deposited the fees which were accepted by the Institute Later on vide annexure P/6, the Institute wanted the appellants to produce 'no objection certificate' from its employer - the respondent-Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board).
The Board, however, on the basis of a policy decision taken by it has come to the conclusion that only 2 of its officers can join the discipline referred to above.
The Board, has thus refused to grant no objection certificate to the appellants.
The appellants who were undergoing their course of study have been made to walk out of the course leaving the Institute to fill the vacancy from those candidates who would naturally be less meritorious than the appellants.
It is this conflict between the policy decision of the Board and merit determined by the Institute which is being highlighted by the appellants in this appeal preferred against the judgment of the learned single Judge of this Court whereby he found that there is no merit in the writ petition and Board has rightly declined to issue the no objection certificate.
These writ petitions were accordingly dismissed leaving the petitioners to seek refund of the fees deposited by them for their admission in the institute.
3.
Before examining the various contentions which have been put cross by the appellants and the respondents, facts in brief be noticed :  4.
The appellants are junior engineers.
They are employees of the respondent-Board.
They wanted to join the discipline of Bachelor of Engineering.
This is part time course.
Classes begin at 6 PM They applied for permission to appear in the examination.
This permission is contained in annexure P.1.
This reads as under :  "You are provisionally permitted to appear in the written test/interview for admission in part time degree course of MITS Gwalior for the years 1995-96.
The final permission for part time degree course will be accorded on the basis of the performance in the written test/interview."
(Emphasis supplied) Further fact is that they took part in the written test conducted by the Institute They also appeared for counselling.
Merit list was prepared by the Institute This has been placed on record as Annexure P/4.
The names of the appellants figures at serial Nos. 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10.
This is the merit determined in the general category.
In the Backward Classes, the appellant No. 6, Dal Chand Rathore was placed at serial No. 1.
The Institute is said to have given admission to the appellants.
It was said to be provisional in nature.
No objection certificate was required from the employer-Board.
The Board has not given the certificate.
As the appellants' admission was likely to be jeopardised, they preferred the writ petition out of which this appeal has arisen.
This came up for hearing before the Motion Bench on 26th of March, 1996.
The respondents were directed to maintain status quo.
The petitioners continued to attend the classes.
The writ petitions as noticed above was dismissed on 15th of May, 1996.
Hence, this Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
The stand of the respondent-Board be now noticed.
6.
It is the case of the respondent-Board that there exist a policy governing the grant of permission to the officers of the Board in the matter of joining part-time degree course in Engineering Colleges in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
This policy has been placed on record as Annexure P/1.
It is said to have been prepared in pursuance of the powers conferred on the Board under section 79 of the Electricity Act, 1948.
As per this, permission is to be granted to the extent of 15% of the sanctioned strength of the junior engineers at the headquarter where Engineering College is situated.
The figure so arrived at is to be divided by 4.
It is contended that the sanctioned strength of the junior engineers at Gwalior headquarter is 43.
By applying the formula referred to above, number of persons who can be permitted to join the course come to 2 only.
It was for this reason, only two officers were permitted to join the course.
The present appellants were outside the limit prescribed in annexure R/1 and as per the Board they were rightly not granted no objection certificate.
The earlier permission which was granted was only with a view to enable them to appear in the written test and counselling.
It is the case of the Board that it was after merit was determined by the Institute, the question as to whether which of the officer is to be given no objection certificate was to be considered.
The first two candidates who were on the top were Ravindra Kumar Gupta and Bhawnesh Bhushan Pandey.
They were not granted permission.
The names of the next two candidates are, Topre Kiran Ram Babu and Smt. Anita Sharma.
They were favourably considered.
Their names were at serial Nos. 3 and 4.
They were granted no objection certificate.
Thus, the case of the Board is that merely because the appellants are high in merit list, they are not entitled to seek admission.
They must get no objection certificate in terms of annexure R/1.
As they were outside the quota fixed by it they were rightly denied the no objection certificate.
It is contended that there was due application of mind.
For this, reliance is being placed on annexure R/4.
It is the decision taken by the Board to not to grant permission to the junior engineers to join the part-time degree course in the Institute in question which was challenged in the writ petition.
7.
So far as the Institute is concerned, it has taken a stand that they have no objection to the appellants continuing their course of study but they must furnish the no objection certificate from their employer - the Board.
8.
At this stage, it would be apt to note the policy decision, annexure R/1.
Para 4 is relevant and it be noticed :  "4.
The Regional Chief Engineers/Chief Engineers incharge of power stations/Additional Secretary will scrutinise the applications and grant permission to the deserving Junior Engineers after going through their academic record, past performance and service record etc. on satisfying following terms and conditions :- (i) The permission shall be granted to the extent of 15% of the sanctioned strength of the Junior Engineers at the headquarters where Engineering College is situated divided by 4.
(ii) Junior Engineers working in the places other than where Engineering College is situated, will be considered only if it is possible to post them at the place where Engineering College is situated and to the extent of quota mentioned in item 4(i) above.
(iii) Permission shall be granted to those Junior Engineers who have at least put in 2 years of service and will be subject to their performance being satisfactory."
9.
It may again be seen that this is a part-time course.
The classes are held in evening after office hours.
As long as the candidates are stationed at Gwalior, their joining the course would not hamper the duties which they perform with the Board.
10.
In the light of the above factual position, the arguments which have been raised by the learned counsel for the appellants be noticed.
These are :  (i) that, the appellants were allowed to join the course by the Board as also by the Institute; (ii) that, the recital in annexure P1 is that "The final permission for part-time degree course on the basis of performance in the written test."
It is accordingly argued that condition fixed in annexure R/1 has no relevance; (iii) that, they have undergone their course of study for about 4 months.
One semester has almost been compeleted and throwing out the appellants at this stage would serve no public purpose; (iv) that, no third person has raised any objection to the admission of the appellants to the course in question; (v) that, in case the appellants are thrown out then the candidates who are lower in merit would get admission.
It is argued that to this extent the policy decision of the Board would come in conflict with the merit determined by the Institute It would lead to less meritorious candidates getting the admission.
It would result in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; (vi) that, the circular in question should be so interpreted that it is saved from the vice of unconstitutionality.
The principle of interpretation "reading down the statutes" has been involved; (vii) that, for determining the ratio as per annexure R/1 the criteria that candidates at headquarters would be taken is arbitrary.
There are candidates who are available at places around Gwalior.
These places are Banmore, Malanpur .
etc.
It is contended that candidates from theses places can conuvently attend the course which starts at 6 PM in the evening; it is accordingly argued that the fixation of quota by taking into consideration the strength of the employees at Gwalior headquarters is totally unrealistic; (viii) that, if number of employees at other places is counted than even as per the circular adopted by the Board the appellants should come within the quota; (ix) that, non-counting the candidates located at places other than headquarters is unconstitutional.
This issue arises pointedly in connection with appeal bearing No. 184 of 1996; (x) that, the appellants have since been permitted to attend the course and they should be permitted to continue.
This would not in any way affect the working of the Board.
In any case, the Board would have six more qualified persons to man various projects undertaken by the Board; and (xi) that, the plea of equity has also been invoked.
It is suggested that when admission was given to them, the appellants had not concealed any material fact and once they have been admitted they should be allowed to continue with the course.
11.
Facts in L.P.A. No. 184 of 1996 be now noticed.
12.
Sole appellant, Sudhir Kumar Sharma is also seeking admission to BE Part-time course started by the Institute Process and procedure for admission has been indicated while dealing with the facts of LPA No. 182 of 1996.
Additional pleas in this appeal are as under :  13.
The appellant joined the course earlier in 1988.
He was so permitted vide order dated 29th of December, 1988.
Copy of this is annexure P/2.
This course could not be completed as this course was discontinued by the Institute When this course was again started, the appellant sought re-admission.
This has been declined on the grounds;  (i) that, appellant is posted at a place other than Gwalior i.e., headquarter and his case could not be considered in terms of policy annexure R/1 on the record of LPA No. 182 of 1996; and (ii) that, the appellant was punished vide order dated 1831996.
14.
The additional arguments which have been raised in the above appeal are as under :  (i) that, the appellant was at serial No. 1 in the merit.
Reference has been made to annexure P/3.
This is dated 19th/24th February, 1996.
The appellant has been shown at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list.
The category is "General".
Plea regarding this has been taken in para 7-A of the petition.
This has not been specifically denied.
Existence of P-3 is also not denied; (ii) that, merely because appellant is posted at a place other than Gwalior, it cannot be made a ground for his exclusion from the zone of consideration.
The quota of eligible candidates should be determined by including all those officers who can attend the part-time classes when this attendance does not come in conflict with official duties; (iii) that, the punishment inflicted on 1831996 has been inflicted after the issuance of annexure P/3.
This is dated 24th February, 1996; and  (iv) that, all those arguments which have been raised in (v), (vi) and (vii) while dealing with LPA No. 182 of 1996 have also been pressed in this appeal.
15.
The case of the respondent-Board is that ratio of candidates eligible for admission has been indicated in annexure R/1 (LPA No. 182 of 1996) and this decision is administrative in nature.
It is argued that this decision is not amenable to judicial review.
16.
We are of the view that the appeal No. 182/96 must succeed.
17.
The contention raised by the Board that admission to appellants was given on provisional basis and they were to obtain no objection certificate is factually incorrect.
There is no mention of requirement to possess the no objection certificate in annexure P/1.
All that has been stated is that "final permission for part-time degree course" shall be dependent "on the basis of the performance in the examination".
The appellants are high in merit list.
If this be the position then they are entitled to continue with their studies.
All that was required to be seen was that their performance in the examination.
The requirement of no objection certificate as indicated above was not mentioned in annexure P/1.
This latter stand taken by the Board is not correct.
(Emphasis supplied)  18.
The other factor which has led to the ouster of the appellants from the course in question is that they do not come under the quota which has been fixed as per annexure R/3.
The number of candidates who are said to be eligible for joining the course are 15% of the total strength at the headquarters.
This has further to be divided by 4.
As to why this complicated formula has been provided for and as to why straightway ratio has not been fixed is again not apparent from the annexure.
A statisticion was asked to count the number of cows grazing in the field.
He gave a particular number.
When asked, how he determined the same, he stated that he first counted the legs and divided then by 4.
Precisely this is the exercise in the present case also.
The question as to whether this criteria is good or bad is required to be gone into.
If the interpretation placed by the Board is accepted then it would result in less meritorious candidates getting admission to the course in question.
The decision of the Board would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Some of the judicial precedents in this regard be noticed.
19.
In All India Reporter Manual 5th Edition Volume 9 certain casesin have been annotated.
At page 233, there is a case wherein University employee was seeking admission in MPhil.
course against the seat reserved for university employee.
He was denied admission on the ground of shorter length of service though he was first in merit list.
Denial of the admission to the highest merit holder on the basis of seniority was held to be discriminatory and hit by fundamental right enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
(1987) 13 Reports 74 (75, 76) (P&H).
20.
There is another decision at page 231 wherein it was held that the Government cannot consistently with its obligation under Article 14 to take away the right of an in-service candidate to compete for the general seat.
This case is reported as (1986) 2 Andhra law Times 433.
Again at item number 267 at page 231 - on the basis of criteria meritorious candidates were denied admission as they were coming from a particular area or college.
The criteria so adopted was held to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
This case is reported as 1984 Maharashtra Law Journal 633.
21.
There is another decision annotated at page 217 - item No. 93 of AIR Compilation.
The requirement of the rule was that the candidate should remain present and in case he fails to remain present then his candidature should be considered null and void.
As this rule was likely to deprive the meritorious candidates of admission, it was held that the rule is unreasonable and arbitrary.
This decision is reported as 1988 Mah.
LJ 279.
22.
From the decisions noted above, it can be said that if the working of a rule is likely to lead to a situation which would be hit equality clause enshrined in Article 14 and/or 16 of the Constitution of India then that decision is to be upheld.
23.
In the present case, the situation is no different.
On account of the interpretation sought to be placed by the Board, the appellants who were high in merit list would be out of the Institute and less meritorious candidates would get admission.
Such interpretation necessarily has to be avoided.
24.
Again, the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant in LPA No. 184/96 that restricting the eligibility criteria to the candidates at headquarters alone is totally unjustified and would again be hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is meritorious.
The object behind the rule is clear.
This object is that an employee should be able to complete his studies in the part-time course and joining the Institute should not hamper or stand in the way of performance of official duties.
If this be the guiding principle behind the rule then all those employees who can attend the classes should be granted admission to the part time course.
Such employees whether located at Banmore or Malanpur or other places who can reach Gwalior after office hours and attending the classes should also be considered.
See : decision of the Supreme Court reported as Minor P Rajendran v. State of Madras and others, AIR 1968 SC 1012, wherein it was held that on account of districtwise selection there was possibility of less meritorious candidates being admitted.
The same was struck down.
Though, the situation in the present case is a bit different and there may be merit in the classification sought to be made by the Board but then something is required to be said in favour of those candidates who are similarly situated as appellant in appeal No. 184/1996.
If he can come and attend the classes after office hours then he should not be deprived of this benefit.
25.
It is settled principle of interpretation of statutes that if by reading down a provision if it can be saved from vice of unconstitutionality then that interpretation should be adopted.
See : decision of the Supreme Court reported as The All Saints High School v. The Government of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1980 SC 1042.
Applying the above principle, it would be just and proper to conclude that all candidates who can reach the Institute after the office hours should be permitted to compete for admission to the course in question.
Similarly, while permitting the employees, the Board should give due weightage to the merit of the employees determined by the Institute in the written test.
There may be situation that none of the employees of the Board may come high in the merit list then the question of fixing of ratio would not arise.
Thus, ratio would always depend on merit.
The purpose of fixing the ratio appears to be is that a reasonable number of candidates should attend the course.
As in the present situation, certain candidates who have come in the merit list then they cannot be deprived of the admission merely on the ground that they do fall within the quota as has been prescribed in the annexure R/3.
Thus, fixing of quota is without any rationale.
To repeat, the only rationale appears to be is that there should not be any conflict between the duties which were to be performed by the employee and the time for attending the course.
This rationale could reasonably be applied to the present appellants who have joined the course and to the appellant in appeal No. 184/1996.
26.
Accordingly, we are of the view that all those candidates who have come high in merit list should be permitted to attend the course in question.
It is because :  (i) that, the interpretation placed by the Board vide annexure R/3 cannot operate in a manner which would result in the violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, and (ii) that, all those candidates who can come and attend the course after office hours without interference with official work should be permitted to join the course.
27.
There is another aspect of the matter also.
Some of the employees who have been selected for the course may still opt to join by taking study leave or any other kind of leave due.
This aspect of matter has also not been taken note of by the Board.
Thus, without striking down annexure R/3 as unconstitutional, we are of the view that it should be read in the manner suggested above.
In this way, it would yield workable results which would be just and in consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
28.
The principle of estoppel has also been raised by the appellants.
According to them they have been granted admission on the basis of annexure P/3 and they cannot be deprived of the benefit of completing the course.
29.
So far as the claim of equitable estoppel is concerned, it would be useful to refer to the decision reported as Registrar, University of Madras v. Sundara Shetti, AIR 1956 Mad.
309.
In this case the petitioner appeared for Secondary School Leaving Certificate examination held by Government of Madras in March, 1952.
Certificate was given by the University that he is eligible for admission to the University course of studies.
He got admission in Madras University.
While he was so undergoing his course of study, he was informed by the Principal of the College that his admission is liable to be cancelled as his name was not found mentioned in the list of candidates eligible for University course of study.
This was challenged in the High Court.
While dealing with this aspect of the matter Rajamannar, CJ in para 15 observed :  "It was not suggested by the University that the petitioner in this case knew that he had not been declared eligible and that his action was mala fide in embarking on a course of University study."
Nor was it suggested that he had procured endorsement of eligibility by fraud or improper means.
In these circumstances, we consider that a Mandamus should issue both to the University of Madras and to the Principal of the Thiagaraja College to forbear from preventing the petitioner to complete his intermediate course and appear for the intermediate examination in due course."
30.
This principle of equitable estoppel was made applicable by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in K Jagannadham v. District Collector, Kurnool, AIR 1966 Andhra Pradesh 59.
In this case probationer was discharged on the ground that he was not competent to appear for competitive examinations.
There was no concealment of facts on the part of the petitioner.
The order of Government cancelling the appointment of the petitioner was quashed.
31.
Again, reference may be made to the decision reported as Rajesh Kumar Mehta v. Karnataka University, AIR 1986 SC 1448, wherein the Supreme Court permitted the candidates to complete the course even though they lacked total initial qualification.
32.
There may be something to be said in favour of the appellants in this regard also.
The appellants in LPA No. 182 of 1996, were granted admission vide annexure P/1.
There is no reference to the obtaining no objection certificate in the above memorandum.
However, leaving the matter as it is, we are of the view that annexure R/3, if implemented in the manner sought by the Board, it would lead to anomalous result which would lead to a situation where less meritorious candidates would get admission and those who are meritorious would be kept out of course.
Again, the ratio fixed in annexure R/3 ignores quota of reserved categories.
One candidate namely; Dal Chand Rathore has again been kept out the Institute The policy, annexure R/3 does not take notice of this situation.
The Board would keep this in view when admissions are made in the next academic year.
Accordingly, the judgment passed by the learned single Judge is reversed.
The appellants of appeal No. LPA No. 182 of 1996, are held entitled to continue the course.
33.
So far as the appellant in LPA No. 184 of 1996 is concerned, it is held that exclusion of the employees who are not posted at Gwalior but who can attend part time course is not valid.
The exclusion of the appellant is thus not in accordance with law.
This interpretation placed by us shall have prospective effect.
The appellant did not join the course.
His claim be reconsidered.
While deciding his claim following facts be taken note of :  (i) that, the appellant had been granted permission earlier to join the course; (ii) that, the mere fact that he is located at a place other than Gwalior should not take away his right to study when that is not going to jeopardise the official work; and  (iii) that, the result of the appeal/representation, if any, preferred by the appellant on account of the punishment communicated to him vide order dated 1831996 be also awaited.
With the above observations, this appeal is disposed of.
34.
In the result, L.P.A. No. 182 of 1996 is allowed.
L.P.A. No. 184 of 1996 is disposed of in the manner indicated above.
There would be no order as to costs.