Mohinder Pal, J - Challenge by Inderjit Singh (petitioner), who belongs to Other Backward Class (for short `OBC'), in this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to appointment of Dharminder Singh (respondent No. 6) as Junior Engineer (Civil), whose name was forwarded by the Regional Employment Exchange, Union Territory, Chandigarh, to the respondent-Department under the quota meant for general candidates but he was appointed against the quota meant for OBC.
2.
Facts of this case are that the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Department, Union Territory, Chandigarh (respondent No. 4) sent requisition to the Regional Employment Exchange, Union Territory, Chandigarh (respondent No. 5) for recruitment/filling up of four posts of Junior Engineers (Civil).
Out of four posts, two were for general category candidates, one post for Scheduled Caste candidates and one for OBC.
The petitioner is domicile of Chandigarh.
He passed his Matriculation and 10 +2 from Chandigarh and also Diploma in Civil Engineering from the Government Central Polytechnic, Sector 26, Chandigarh, with first Division in August, 1993.
The petitioner belongs to OBC and Certificate in this regard, issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Union Territory, Chandigarh, has been placed on record as Annexure P-1.
He got his name registered with the Regional Employment Exchange, Chandigarh, as a candidate of OBC.
3.
The Regional Employment Exchange, Chandigarh, in response to the above- mentioned requisition, sent the names of eligible candidates including the petitioner to respondent No. 4.
Names of 27 candidates were sent under the General Category, 9 candidates under Scheduled Caste Category and 1 candidate under the OBC.
The petitioner was the only candidate whose name had been sent by respondent No. 5 for the post meant for OBC category.
The name of Dharminder Singh (respondent No. 6) was sent under General Category.
4.
All the candidates were interviewed by a four member Committee headed by respondent No. 4.
The petitioner alleges that he performed in the interview to the entire satisfaction of the Selection Committee.
However, the Chief Engineer-cum-Secretary Engineering Department, Union Territory, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2), who is the Appointing Authority, issued order dated November 11, 1996 (Annexure P- 2) appointing Dharminder Singh (respondent No. 6) as Junior Engineer (Civil) against the quota meant for OBC.
5.
The petitioner challenged the selection and appointment of respondent No. 6 as Junior Engineer (Civil) under the OBC category by filing Original Application No. 1180-CH of 1996 under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal'), which was dismissed vide order dated October 01, 2001 (Annexure P-5).
Hence this writ petition.
6.
In the written statement filed by respondents Nos. 3 and 4, it is admitted that the petitioner belongs to OBC category.
It has also been admitted that the Regional Employment Exchange, Union Territory, Chandigarh, had sent the name of petitioner only under OBC category.
However, it has been stated that respondent No. 6, who also belongs to OBC category, produced certificate in this regard at the time of interview before the Departmental Selection Committee.
7.
In the written statement filed by the Regional Employment Officer, Regional Employment Exchange, Union Territory, Chandigarh (respondent No. 5), it has been stated that name of the petitioner was recommended by the Regional Employment Exchange against the reserved vacancy of OBC whereas name of respondent No. 6 was recommended against general category.
8.
We have heard Mr. AK Chopra, Senior Advocate, assisted by Mr. ND Kalra, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, Ms. Alka Chatrath, Advocate, appearing for respondent Nos. 3 to 5 and Mr. TPS Chawla, Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 6 and have gone through the records of the case.
9.
In nutshell, the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner is that when the Regional Employment Exchange, Union Territory, Chandigarh (respondent No. 5) had sponsored the names of the candidates to the requisitioning Department for selection strictly according to seniority and reservation, as per requisition, it was not fair for the requisitioning authority/establishment to consider any other candidate under the OBC quota except the one sent by respondent No. 5.
In the present case, the choice of selection being restricted to only such of the candidates whose names had been sponsored by the Employment Exchange, each of the candidate was to be considered under the category sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
He argued that by selecting respondent No. 6, whose name had been sponsored under General Category, against the OBC category, the policy of fair play has been abandoned.
In support of his argument, he relied upon the cases reported as Sandeep Singh v. Punjab University, Chandigarh, 1996(3) SCT 767 (P&H), The Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam, Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh v. KBN Visweshwara Rao & Ors., JT 1996(9) SC 638 and Dolly Chhanda v. Chairman, JEE and others, 2004(4) SCT 546 : (2005)9 Supreme Court Cases 779.
10.
After perusing the record and hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the respondent-Department had no authority to permit respondent No. 6 to change his category from General to OBC after his name had been sponsored by the Regional Employment Exchange, Chandigarh, as a General Category candidate.
If the respondent-Department wanted to select candidates other than the ones sponsored by the Employment Exchange, nothing prevented it from calling for the names by publication in the newspaper etc. and in that eventuality equality of opportunity in the matter of employment would have been available to all eligible candidates.
11.
In Sandeep Singh's case (supra), it was held by a Division Bench of this Court that General Category cannot be allowed to switch over to Reserved Category after coming to know that one's name does not figure in the merit list of General Category.
In that case, the respondent's admission to MBBS Course, who had been given admission by switching over from General Category to Reserved Category, was cancelled and the petitioner was held entitled to admission against the last seat in Reserved Category.
12.
In KBN Visweshwara Rao's case (supra), it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that it should be mandatory for the requisitioning authority/establishment to intimate the employment exchange and the employment exchange should sponsor the names of the candidates to the requisitioning Department for selection strictly according to seniority and reservation, as per requisition.
13.
In Dolly Chhanda's case (supra), it was held by the Apex Court that eligibility qualification must be possessed on the last date fixed for purpose of applying for any course of study or a post for availing benefit of reservation and possession of requisite qualifications by the date fixed has to be established by producing the necessary certificates etc.
There can be no relaxation in regard to possession of requisite eligibility qualification by date fixed.
14.
While rejecting the claim of the petitioner, the Tribunal observed as under :-  "There is no bar of a reserved candidate or a person belonging to a reserved category, be it an OBC or any other, from getting his name registered with Employment Exchange under general category.
At the time of selection if he can show that he belongs to a reserved category which is entitled to be considered against a reserved point, in our opinion, nothing would prevent the respondents from considering such a claim".
The above observations of the Tribunal being clearly against the settled law, as discussed above, cannot be sustained and are bound to be set aside.
We order accordingly.
However, respondent No. 6 has put in more than eleven years' service as Junior Engineer (Civil) after his selection.
It will be a great hardship for him if we displace respondent No. 6 at this stage.
Equity is also in his favour.
It is also not disputed by the learned counsel appearing for the Chandigarh Administration that some vacancies of Junior Engineer (Civil) are still lying vacant with the respondent-Department.
Accordingly, we direct respondent No. 3 to appoint the petitioner as Junior Engineer (Civil) in the Public Health Department, Union Territory, Chandigarh, keeping in view his qualifications and his name having been sponsored by the Regional Employment Exchange, Chandigarh, against the quota reserved for OBC.
He will be treated to be in service with effect from November 11, 1996, i.e the date when respondent No. 6 was appointed as Junior Engineer (Civil).
The petitioner will be entitled to all consequential benefits of seniority, fixation of pay etc., but he will not be entitled to arrears of salary.
This writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.