Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the communication dated 10122007, Annexure P-12, whereby the services of the petitioner were terminated by the respondents in view of the notification of the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of the Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the `2006 Rules').
2.
The husband of the petitioner late Shri Sanjay was working as Safai Karamchari in the Municipal Council, Gurgaon.
He died on 3152006.
After the death of her husband, the petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate ground and vide letter dated 782006, the petitioner was appointed on the post of Safai Karamchari.
3.
Though it is the case of the petitioner that she joined on 10.8.2006, but on the basis of the clarification given by the State Government, an order terminating her services has been passed on 10122007 after providing an opportunity of hearing and considering the reply given by her.
4.
At the time of death of husband of the petitioner, the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of the Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the `2005 Rules') were in force.
However, the said Rules were repealed by 2006 Rules w.e.f.
1.8.2006.
Such Rules were framed by the State Government in terms of the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India  5.
The grievance of the petitioner in the present case is that once she has been appointed on compassionate ground, such appointment cannot be withdrawn on the basis of the Rules notified few days earlier.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 19562 of 2006, Murti Devi v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and others, the State Government was asked to clarify the stand of the State in respect of the word `Pending Cases' in Rule 19(2) of the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of the Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the `2005 Rules') and such words appearing in Rules 6 & 8 of 2006 Rules.
It was also sought to be clarified as to whether the Rules, as exist on the date of death of an employee, would be applicable or not.
In the aforesaid case, an affidavit of Mr. MR Anand, IAS, Special Secretary to Government, Haryana, General Administration Department, Chandigarh, has been filed pointing out that all the pending cases would be dealt with keeping in view the provisions of the Rules existing at the time of pendency of the cases and not at the time of death of the employee.
7.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
The State Government has framed the 2003 Rules, 2005 Rules and 2006 Rules in terms of proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India providing appointment on compassionate ground.
Therefore, the appointment on compassionate ground can be sought only in accordance with the Rules framed from time to time.
The appointment on compassionate ground is a concession granted to the family of the deceased Government employee to meet out immediate financial distress.
It is well settled that it is not a source of employment.
The purpose of granting compassionate appointment is not the replacement for the deceased employee.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in IG (Karmik) & others v. Prahalad Mani Tripathi, 2007(3) SCT 483 : 2007(4) RAJ 17 : 2007(6) SCC 162, has held that the public employment is considered to be a wealth and cannot be given on descent.
It was held to the following effect:-  "xx xx xx xx 5.
An employee of a State enjoys a status.
Recruitment of employees of the State is governed by the rules framed under a statute or the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India In the matter of appointment, the State is obligated to give effect to the constitutional scheme of equality as adumbrated under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
All appointments, therefore, must conform to the said constitutional scheme.
This Court, however, while laying emphasis on the said proposition carved out an exception in favour of the children or other relatives of the officer who dies or who becomes incapacitated while rendering services in the police department.
6.
Public employment is considered to be a wealth.
It in terms of the constitutional scheme cannot be given on descent.
When such an exception has been carved out by this Court, the same must be strictly complied with.
Appointment on compassionate ground is given only for meeting the immediate hardship which is faced by the family by reason of the death of the bread earner.
When an appointment is made on compassionate ground, it should be kept confined only to the purpose it seeks to achieve, the idea being not to provide for endless compassion.
xx xx xx x" In State Bank of India and another v. Somvir Singh, 2007(2) SCT 243 : 2007(2) RAJ 269 : 2007(4) SCC 778, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that indiscriminate grant of employment on compassionate ground would shut the door for employment to the ever-growing population of employed youths.
It proceeded to hold that :-  "xx xx xx xx 10.
There is no dispute whatsoever that the appellant Bank is required to consider the request for compassionate appointment only in accordance with the scheme framed by it and no discretion as such is left with any of the authorities to make compassionate appointment de hors the scheme.
In our considered opinion the claim for compassionate appointment and the right, if any, is traceable only to the scheme, executive instructions, rules, etc. framed by the employer in the matter of providing employment on compassionate grounds.
There is no right of whatsoever nature to claim compassionate appointment on any ground other than the one, if any, conferred by the employer by way of scheme or instructions as the case may be.
xx xx xx xx."
In view of the aforesaid principles, the facts of the present case need to be examined.
Though the husband of the petitioner died on 3152006, but the new Rules i.e., the 2006 Rules came into force w.e.f.
1.8.2006.
Even if the copy of the said Rules has been received in the office of the Municipal Council after the issuance of letter of appointment to the petitioner, but the applicability of the Rules in respect of the compassionate appointment is not depending upon the receipt of a copy of the Rules by a particular department.
As per the statutory Rules framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the appointment on compassionate ground is not permissible.
Only financial assistance, in terms of Rule 5 of the 2006 Rules, is admissible.
Therefore, we do not find any illegality or irregularity in the order, Annexure P-12, passed by the respondents terminating the services of the petitioner so as to grant her ex gratia financial assistance in terms of Rule 5 of the 2006 Rules.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
The same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.