Nirmal Singh, J - Petitioner is having Masters Degree in Business Administration.
He has also passed the State Eligibility Test for appointment as Lecturer/Assistant Librarian.
The certificate in this regard has been issued by the University of Jammu, copy of which is placed on record as Annexure B In Oct' 2000, the petitioner was appointed as Lecturer in Humanities Department on consolidated basis.
Thereafter, in Aug' 02, he was appointed as Lecturer in Bachelor of Business Administration.
This arrangement was also on consolidated basis with usual breaks after spell of 60 days and the petitioner is still continuing as such.
2.
Vide Notification No. 17-PSC of 2003 dated 31st of Dec '03, issued by respondent No. 3, applications were invited from eligible candidated for the post of Lecturer in Business Administration and other disciplines.
Thereafter, in supersession of the above notification, another notification was issued by the said respondent bearing No. 03-PSC of 2004 dt. 17th of Feb '04, whereby applications were invited for the post of Lecturer in different disciplines including the discipline of Business Administration.
Petitioner along with other eligible candidated applied for the post of Lecturer in the discipline of Business Administration, Higher Education Department.
He participated in the selection process but was not selected.
Private respondent No. 4 who was also a candidate for the said post has been selected.
It is this selection of private respondent No. 4 made vide order impugned No. PSC/DR/IIE/ Business Administration/1/04 dated 4th of Oct '06, which is the subject matter of challenge in the present petition.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that as per Clause 7 of Schedule II of the Jammu and Kashmir Education (Gazetted) College Services Recruitment Rules, 2004 (SRO 115), herein-after called the Rules, only those candidates are eligible for appointment to the post of Lecturer/Librarian/PTI's, who have qualified the National Eligibility Test (NET) or State Level Eligibility Test (SLET), and as private respondent No. 4 is not fulfilling this eligibility criteria, she cannot be appointed against the post of Lecturer.
It is stated that the earlier notification issued by respondent-Public Service Commission in Dec '03, was in accordance with the Rules and in the column of qualification which was required to be possessed, it was mentioned that only those candidated who have qualified the NET/SLET shall be eligible to apply but in the subsequent notification in pursuance to which the selection has been made, this clause of possessing of NET/SLET certificate was deleted, which is not in accordance with the Rules.
It is thus submitted that the selection of private respondent is not in accordance with the rules as she is lacking the above eligibility criteria.
Reference in this regard is made to Rule 5(1) of the Rules.
The said rule, for facility of reference is being reproduced below :-  "5.
Qualification and Method of Recruitment - (1) No person shall be eligible for appointment or promotion to any post in any class, category or grade in the service unless he possesses the qualification as laid down in Schedule-II and fulfills other requirements of recruitment as provided in the rules and orders for the time being in force...." 4.
The further case of the petitioner is that the post of Lecturer in Business Administration relates to vocational subjects and as per Schedule II IV-A(iv), the eligibility for the post of Lecturer in vocational subject and professional courses has been provided as Master's Degree in Professional/Vocational courses with at least 55% marks or its equivalent grade of "B" in the seven point scale from an Indian University or an equivalent course/degree from an Indian/foreign University.
In the said clause of the Schedule, it has been further provided that the requirement of passing of NET/SLET is relaxable in the case of candidates possessing Post Graduate Degrees in vocational subject Computer Applications & Management for a period of five years.
It is submitted that as the Rules have been stated to have come into force w.e.f.
27th of July '98, therefore, five years as per the above clause would be deemed to have expired in July '03, and thereafter, there is no SRO or Rule extending any relaxation so far as requirement of NET/SLET is concerned.
It is thus submitted that private respondent No. 4 who is only a Post Graduate without a certificate of NET/SLET could not have been selected being an in-eligible candidate.
In support of the submission made that the relaxation in terms of the Rules could not have been made, reliance is placed on the judgments of the Apex Court reported as Suraj Parkash Gupta and others v. State of J&K and others, 2000(3) SCT 34 : (2000)7 SCC 561, A Umarani v. Registrar Cooperative Societies and others, 2004(4) SCT 728 : (2004)7 SCC 112.
On notice, counter has been filed by respondent No. 3-Public Service Commission and also by the private respondent.
5.
Respondent No. 3 in its counter has stated that as there was no selection for the post in question w.e.f.
1998 to 2004 and the first selection in terms of aforesaid SRO is the present one, therefore, the Public Service Commission in its wisdom extended the benefit of relaxationin favour of private respondent so far as possessing of NET/SLET certificate is concerned.
It is stated that vide Government No. Edu-Coll/R.R/Gaz/II/96 dt. 12th of Feb '07, a clarification was made that the rules have been made applicable retrospectively but due to oversight the clause of relaxation has been made applicable only for a period of five years.
It is stated that in the said communication addressed to the respondent No. 3, it was mentioned that applications of candidates possessing Masters Degree in Computer Application and Business Administration may be entertained.
It is thus stated that it was on the basis of above, the candidature of private respondent No. 4 was considered and she was selected keeping in view her overall performance in the interview.
Somewhat similar stand is taken by the private respondent No. 4 also in the counter filed by her.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the opinion that this petition has merit and deserves to succeed.
7.
In the instant case, the appointment to the post in question is governed by the Rules aforementioned.
The eligibility criteria as prescribed under the Rules is that a candidate should possess Master's Degree in the subject concerned with at least 55% marks or its equivalent grade of "B" in the seven point scale from an Indian University or an equivalent course/degree from and Indian/Foreign University and the quota prescribed for direct recruitment and in-service candidates is in the ratio of 60:40.
It has been further provided in the rules that only those candidates for direct recruitment and in-service category posts of Lecturer/Librarian/PTT's shall be eligible who have qualified the National Eligibility Test (NET) or State Level Eligibility Test (SLET).
The relevant rule in this regard is being notice below:-  "Only such candidates for direct recruitment and in-service category posts shall be eligible for appointment to the post of lecturers/librarians/PTT's as have also qualified National Eligibility Test (NRT) or State level Eligibility Test (SLET) conducted by the UGC and CSIR/Universities of J&K State with accreditation from UGC".
There is a proviso to this rule which prescribes that those candidates who have completed MPhil.
degree by 31st of Dec '93 or have submitted PhD thesis to any University in the concerned subject on or before 31st December, 2002 are exempted from qualifying NET/SLET.
Even in cases where the candidates fail to obtain PhD degree, they have to pass NET/SLET as the clearance of probationary period is subject to passing of NET/SLET.
This provision, for facility of reference is also being reproduced below :-  "Provided, however, the candidates who have completed MPhil.
degree by 31st December, 1993 or have submitted PhD thesis to any University in the concerned subject on or before 31st December, 2002 are exempted from qualifying NET/SLET.
In case such candidates fail to obtain Ph.D degree, they shall have to pass NET/SLET and the clearance of their probationary period (if already appointed) shall be subject to their passing of NET/SLET".
Under Rule 9 of the Rules, the Government has the power to relax any of the provisions of the Rules but this power has been vested with the Chief Minister only with the concurrence of the Public Service Commission.
Rule 9 is also relevant and is being reproduce below :-  "9.
Power to Relax :- Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class, category of persons or posts.
Provided that while exercising discretion, the Government would keep the following principle in view :- (a) that the discretion is exercise bona fide; (b) that such an exercise specified subject test; (c) that it would satisfy any responsible man in place of the authority competent to relax; (d) that the power should be vested with the Chief Minister only; and  (e) that the Public Service Commission concurs to the relaxation in respect of any posts".
Under clause IV(A)(iv) of Schedule-II, there is a provision which lays down that passing of NET/SLET shall be relatable in the case of candidates with Post Graduate degrees in vocational subject Computer Applications & Management for a period of five years.
8.
In the present case, the post in question which was to be filled is Lecturer in Business Administration and this pertains to vocational subjects.
For filling up the said post, the eligibility criteria as noticed above, is Master's Degree in the relevant subject with requirement of passing of NET/SLET but this requirement as per the rules has been relaxed for a period of five years.
But this relaxation of five years has to be treated from July '98 to July '03 as the Rules in question have been deemed to come into force w.e.f.
27th of July '98.
The advertisement in this case for filling up the post in question was issued on 17th of Feb '04 and the appointment has been made in Oct '06.
Therefore, the provision added in the Rules regarding relaxation of passing National Eligibility Test (NET) or State Level Eligibility Test (SLET), which was for a period of five years has come to an end and the selection of private respondent No. 4 made in relaxation of the eligibility criteria regarding possessing of NET/SLET, is in violation of the rules and cannot be sustained.
9.
Even otherwise, as noticed above, the relaxation was for period of five years from the date, the Rules have been given effect to and thereafter, the same could have been given by the authority concerned which in the present case is the Chief Minister as prescribed under clause (c) of Rule 9 reproduced above and this has to be with the concurrence of the Public Service Commission.
The communication issued by the Under Secretary of Government, Higher Education Department to the Secretary, J&K Public Service Commission on which reliance is being placed by the respondent authorities for doing away with the possessing of qualification of NET/SLET is of 12th of Feb' 07, and therefore, not relevant in the present case as the selection has been made in Oct' 06.
As indicated above, the authority to relax any provision of the Rule vests with the Chief Minister only with the concurrence of the Public Service Commission, by exercising the discretion bona fide, but the communication relied upon, does not fulfill the said test being not issued by the competent authority, and therefore, any such communication/circular issued by an incompetent authority cannot over-ride the mandatory provisions of the Statute/Rules, and thus cannot be relied upon.
The stand of the Public Service Commission that in its wisdom, it deemed proper to extend the benefit of exemption and made the selection cannot be accepted as the said Commission under the Rules has no power to relax the qualification as prescribed under the Rules.
The appointment, thus, made in ignorance of the minimum educational qualification/eligibility criteria as prescribed in the Rules would be bad and illegal.
The judgment of the Apex court in this regard cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner in A Umarani's case (supra) can be relied upon.
What has been said in this regard in para 39 of the judgment in the aforesaid case is being reproduced below :-  ".....It is also now well settled that and appointment made in violation of the mandatory provisions of the statute and in particular, ignoring the minimum educational qualification and other essential qualification would be wholly illegal...." Therefore, I am of the opinion that no appointment can be made in deviation of the procedures laid down in the statutory rules.
10.
As noticed above, the relaxation as per the Rules could be given only for a period of five years w.e.f.
July '98 onwards and thereafter, the relaxation, if any, at the most could have been given that too with the permission of the competent authority if there was no suitable candidate possessing the requisite qualification as prescribed under the rules was available but in the present case, admittedly, the petitioner is the candidate who is eligible as per the qualification prescribed under the Rules, and therefore, the stand taken by the respondent Commission that the benefit of relaxation was given as no selection was made for five years from 1998 onwards cannot be accepted and the selection of the private respondent No. 4 in ignorance of the mandatory provisions of the Rules is thus held to be bad.
11.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed.
The condition of relaxation prescribed in the notification dt. 17th of Feb '04 regarding the requirement of NET/SLET is held to be in violation of the Rules and the appointment of private respondent No. 4 made to the post in question vide order impugned dt. 4th of Oct '06, keeping in view the aforesaid relaxation, as indicated above, is held to be bad and is accordingly quashed.
As the petitioner is the only eligible candidate whose name appears in the panel, copy of which was produced in a sealed cover by the counsel for the Commission for the perusal of the court and as there in nothing adverse against the petitioner, the respondent Public Service Commission shall recommend the name of the petitioner for appointment of the aforesaid post.
Let this recommendation be made by the Commission to the authority concerned within a period of fifteen days form the date a copy of this order is made available to them and thereafter, the authority concerned shall issue appointment order in favour of the petitioner within a further period of fifteen days.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits minus monetary benefits.
Copy of the panel produced in the sealed cover which was opened in the court for perusal has been returned to the counsel for the Public Service Commission in the court itself.
Writ petition along with connected CMPs us disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.