MM Kumar, J - The petitioners are candidates for appointment to the post of teachers in primary schools situated in rural areas working under Zila Parishads.
They have approached this Court with a prayer for quashing clarification dated 28.6.2007 (P-3) further restricting the eligibility criteria which has violated Rule 10(1) (b) of Punjab Panchayati Raj Primary Teachers (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2006 (for brevity `the Rules') (P-1).
2.
Brief facts may first be noticed.
For filling up 1569 posts of teachers in primary schools in rural areas which have been transferred to Zila Parishads, an advertisement was issued by respondent No. 2 inviting applications from eligible candidates.
For receipt of applications last date fixed was 20.7.2007.
The petitioners who are domicile of UT Chandigarh and have passed out Elementary Teachers Training course from State Institute of Education, Sector 32, Chandigarh being fully eligible have applied for the post in Mohali District.
According to the eligibility criteria published by respondent No. 2 the recruitment was to be made district wise and from amongst those who are domicile of the district.
The candidates who were domicile in UT Chandigarh could have applied for Mohali district only.
The qualifications for the post were :  "(i) 10+2 Pass and Diploma in Elementary Teacher Training course recognized by School Education Board of any State Government or the Central Government or a certificate of an equivalent course from the Defence Services of the Union of India.
(ii) Candidate must have passed Punjabi in Matriculation examination equivalent or higher.
Applications without proof having passed Punjabi as above will not be received.
(iii) Candidates submitting their application with grades in place of marks will not be considered."
3.
It was further provided that in case candidates with qualifications of Elementary Teachers Training were not available then candidates with B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
plus B.Ed.
were to be considered.
The petitioners being fully eligible applied for the post in Mohali District.
However, their candidature became doubtful when respondent No. 2 issued a clarification dated 28.6.2007 (P-3) which imposed further condition to adjudge their `domicile' which led to the filing of the instant petition.
When the matter came up for consideration on 1372007 a Division Bench of this Court had directed the respondents to accept the applications of the petitioners provisionally and consider their claim in the process of selection.
The result of the petitioners was required to be retained in a sealed cover, which could be opened only on the passing of express order by this Court.
4.
It is appropriate to mention that in pursuance to the provisions of Section 227 read with Section 196(2) of the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (for brevity `the Act'), respondent-State has framed Rules known which were notified in the Gazette on 25.5.2006 (Annexure P-1).
According to Rule 10 no person can be appointed to the service unless he possesses a diploma in Elementary Teachers Training Course (for brevity `the ETT') recognized by the School Education Board of any State, Central Government or a certificate of an equivalent course from the Defence Services of the Union of India.
The candidate is required to be domicile of the State of Punjab or Union Territory, Chandigarh.
A candidate is required to obtain minimum score of 100, as per the criteria laid down in Rule 11(3) of the Rules.
It is only in case of non-availability of ETT teachers that the candidates with higher qualification i.e. B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
and B.Ed.
from recognized University or Institution were to be considered for appointment to the said post and such candidates are required to undergo orientation training of six months within a period of five years from the date of joining the service.
According to the clarification letter they were required to be resident of a district in which the post of ETT teacher is to be filled.
With regard to the candidate belonging to Chandigarh, the district of Mohali has been declared to be the district where such candidate could be appointed.
According to Rule 11 of the Rules, appointment to the service should be made from amongst the eligible candidates from the areas in the specified order namely the village in which the school is situated; adjoining villages and towns; block and towns contiguous with block; adjoining blocks and contiguous towns; and district.
Sub Rule 2 of Rule 11 further specified that no appointment should be made from outside the district.
5.
During the course of arguments, it transpired that the petitioners have not challenged the constitutional validity of Rule 11 of the Rules so as to argue that it violates the equality clause enshrined by Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as selection process has been confined only to local areas and then gradually expanding it to the districts.
The argument raised is that the object of any selection is to select the best one available in the field and all citizens in the country would be eligible to compete for any civil post.
However, in the absence of any challenge to the Rules such an argument could not be entertained.
Accordingly, learned counsel for the petitioners confined his prayer to the declaration of result of those candidates belonging to Chandigarh who have competed for the post of ETT teachers in the permissible district of SAS Nagar (Mohali).
Accordingly, we had issued directions on 11.7.2008 requiring the respondents to produce the sealed cover so as to find out if any of the petitioner has qualified.
6.
The sealed cover has, been produced, which has been opened by the Bench Secretary.
On perusal of the sealed cover, we find that petitioner Nos. 3, 8 and 10, Sushri Jyoti Verma, Indu Makkar and Shikha Sumi, who belong to Chandigarh have appeared and qualified for the post of ETT teachers in SAS Nagar, Mohali and their claim is meritorious.
The aforementioned position is conceded, wherein, it has been found that all the aforementioned three candidates have requisite merit for the post of ETT teachers under general category.
However, it has been suggested that they did not fulfil the domicile criteria fixed by the department vide clarification letter dated 28.6.2007 (Annexure P-3).
With regard to a candidate from Chandigarh, in Clause 3 of the clarification following conditions have been laid down :  3.
"Candidate from Chandigarh - It has been mentioned in the guidelines for ETT teachers that the `Candidate from Chandigarh' would be eligible for applying for the post of ETT teachers only in the district of SAS Nagar (Mohali).
But the definition of the `Candidates from Chandigarh' has not been given and clarified.
It is hereby clarified that `Candidates from Chandigarh' would mean only those candidates - (1) Whose one of the parents is an employee of the Punjab Government or its Boards/Corporations AND posted in Chandigarh atleast for the last three years continuously i.e. From 142004 or earlier to-date OR  (2) Whose one of the parents is a retiree of the Punjab Government or its Boards/Corporations who retired from Chandigarh.
AND  (3) That the parents of the candidate do not own immovable property in any district of the State.
If the parents of the candidate own any immovable property in any district of the State, then that district would be deemed to be the domicile district of the candidate and the candidate would be eligible to apply from that district.
In case the parents are posted in Chandigarh or retired from Chandigarh and they do not own any movable property from any district of the State, then only the candidates would be `deemed to be from Chandigarh' and they would be eligible to apply for the district of Mohali."
7.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the aforementioned clarification is patently violative of Rule 10 (1)(b) of the Rules, which provides that no person could be appointed to the service unless he is a domicile of the State of Punjab or Union Territory, Chandigarh.
According to the learned counsel the Rules do not contemplate any further condition requiring a candidate either to be a ward of an employee of the Punjab Government or a Board/Corporation or the parents are required to be posted in Chandigarh for the preceding three years.
Accordingly he has submitted that the Rules would prevail over the clarification and the candidates at Sr.Nos.
3, 8 and 10 would be considered to be eligible.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record with their able assistance, we have reached the conclusion that this petition deserve to succeed.
It would be appropriate to examine Rule 10(1)(b) of the Rules which reads thus :  " 10.
Qualifications.
- (1) No person shall be appointed to the Service, unless he, - (a) xx xx xx xx  (b) is a domicile of the State of Punjab or Union Territory of Chandigarh; and xxx xxx xxx"  A perusal of the afore-mentioned rules show that only a person domicile in the State of Punjab or Union Territory of Chandigarh is qualified to be appointed to the post of a teacher in the primary school.
The afore-mentioned rule has been framed by virtue of power conferred by Section 227 read with sub-section 2 of Section 196 of the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (for brevity `the Act').
However, in the clarification dated 28.6.2007 the definition of the `candidate from Chandigarh' has been provided to mean that one of the parents of the candidate is either an employee of the Punjab Government or its Board/Corporation and posted in Chandigarh atleast for the last three years continuously from 142004 or earlier thereto or one of the parents of such a candidate is a retiree of the Punjab Government or its Board/Corporation who retired from Chandigarh and the parents of the candidate do not own any moveable property in any district of the State.
In case the parents of the candidate have any property in any district of the State then such a district would be deemed to be the domicile district of the candidate and he/she would be eligible to apply from that district.
It is thus evident that Rule 10(1) (b) of the Rules provides that a person who is domicile of the State of Punjab or Union Territory of Chandigarh is eligible to be appointed whereas in the instructions `a candidate from Chandigarh' has been (sic) contrary to rules.
Such a clarification cannot be regarded as supplementary to the rules or supplanting the rules.
It is contrary to rules.
9.
It is well settled that no instruction or clarification which is contrary to the rules occupying the field could be issued because power of rule making authority is superior to that of the authority issuing instructions or clarification.
In that regard reliance may be placed on a Constitution Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1967 SLR 906 and State of Haryana v. Shamsher Jang Bahadur, 1972 SLR 441.
The afore-mentioned judgments have been repeated followed and applied by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Gujarat v. Akhilesh C Bhargav and others, (1987)4 SCC 482; Parmeshwar Prasad v. UOI, 2002(3) SCT 482 : 2002(1) SLR 86 and M Srinivasa Prasad and others v. Comptroller and Auditor General of India and others, 2007(4) SCT 380 : 2007(5) RAJ 402 : (2007)10 SCC 246.
10.
In the present case, rules have been framed in pursuance to the delegation of power conferred on the respondent-State under Section 227 read with sub- section 2 of Section 196 of the Act whereas clarification dated 28.6.2007 (Annexure P.3) has been issued by the Department of Rural Development and Panchayats.
The clarification is contrary to the rules in as much as the rules provide that a person domicile in the State of Punjab or Union Territory of Chandigarh is eligible for appointment to the post of a teacher in rural area whereas according to the clarification if one of its parent is an employee of the Punjab Government or its Board/Corporation with further requirement of posting in Chandigarh atleast last three years continuously i.e. 142004 or earlier thereto or the parent of such a candidate is retiree of Punjab Government or its Board/Corporation and, have retired from Chandigarh and that the parents of such a candidate do not own any moveable property in any district of the State.
Therefore, the clarification to the aforementioned extent which adversely affect the rights of the petitioner is declared as ultra vires of Rule 10(12)(v) of the Rules.
11.
In view of above, the writ petition with regard to petitioner Nos. 3, 8 and 10 is allowed as they are admittedly more meritorious than the candidates who have been selected and given appointment.
They shall be issued appointment letters w.e.f.
the date persons lower in order of merit have been issued appointment order.
Shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary but they would be entitled to suitable place according to their order of merit.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, with regard to other petitioners, submits that the writ petition be dismissed as withdrawn so as to enable him to challenge the validity of Rule 11 of the Rules.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition disposed of.