Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioners have challenged the order dated 28.11.2001, Annexure P-3, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred as "the Tribunal") whereby the Original Application filed by them was declined.
2-3.
The petitioners are working as Electrical Signal Maintainer (for short "ESM") either in Grade-I or Grade-II.
On 2351996, a circular was issued for selection to the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III against 20% Intermediate Quota.
Applications were invited for three post of general category and one post of Scheduled Caste form the candidates who are Electrical Signal Maintainer/Mechanical Signal Maintainer who are matriculates, below the age of 45 years and had completed three years of service as on 30th April, 1996 in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500.
It may be noticed that 40% posts of Signal Inspector Grade-III are required to be filled by direct recruitment and 40% by promotion by selection from Maintainers in the immediate lower grade.
Balance 20% is to be by induction of Intermediate Apprentices from amongst Maintainers possessing the requisite qualification in terms of Rule 147 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual, Volume I (hereinafter to be referred as "Railway Manual").
The said qualification reads as under :  "SIGNAL INSPECTORS  147.
(1) The vacancies in the category of Signal Inspectors Grade III in scale Rs. 1400-2300 will be filled as under : (i) 40% by direct recruitment through the Railway Recruitment Board,  (ii) 20% by induction of Intermediate Apprentices from amongst Maintainers possessing the qualification of Matriculation with three years service and below 45 years of age; and  (iii) 40% by promotion by selection from Maintainers in the immediate lower grade."
It is the case of the petitioners that the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III is a selection post and Rules 215 and 219 of Chapter II of the Railway Manual regulates the selection process.
Rule 211.3 defines 'selection posts' as post, grade or class which has been declared as such by the Railway Board and to which promotion is made on the basis of a positive act of selection as per procedure in force for filling up the selection post.
Rule 215 deals with the attributes of the selection post.
The relevant extract from Rule 215 reads as under :  "215.
Selection Post.
(a) Selection post shall be filled by a positive act of selection made with the help of Selection Boards from amongst the staff eligible for selection.
The positive act of selection may consist of a written test and/or viva-voce test; in every case viva-voce being a must.
The staff in the immediate lower grade with a minimum of 2 years service in that grade will only be eligible for promotion.
The service for this purpose will include service if any, rendered on ad hoc basis followed by regular service without break.
The condition of two years service should stand fulfilled at the time of actual promotion and not necessarily at the stage of consideration.
(b) The selection for promotion to a selection post shall be made on the basis primarily of merits.
(c) to (f) xx xx xx xx xx"  The above Rule would show that selection for promotion to a selection post is to be made on the basis primarily of merits.
The procedure required to be adopted by the Selection Board is contained in Rule 219 of the Railway Manual.
The relevant clauses of Rule 219 are (g), (i) and (j) which read as under :  "219.
Procedure to be adopted by Selection Board.
(a) to (f) xx xx xx xx  (g) Selection should be made primarily on the basis of overall merit, but for the guidance of Selection Board the factors to be taken into account and their relative weight are laid down below : Maximum Marks Qualifying Marks  (i) Professional ability 50 30  (ii) Personality, address, Leadership and academic qualification 20 -  (iii) A record of service 15 -  (iv) Seniority 15 -  NOTE : (i) The item 'record of service' should also take into consideration the performances of the employee in essential Training Schools/Institutes apart from the examining CRs and other relevant records.
(ii) Candidates must obtain a minimum of 30 marks in professional ability and 60% marks of the aggregate for being placed on the panel.
Where both written and oral tests are held for adjudging the professional ability, the written test should not be less than 35 marks and the candidates must secure 60% marks in written test for the purpose of being called in viva-voce test.
This procedure is also applicable for filling up of general posts.
Provided that 60% of the total of the marks prescribed for written examination and for seniority will also be the basis for calling candidates for viva-voce test instead of 60% of the marks for the written examination.
(h) xx xx xx xx  (i) For general posts i.e., those outside the normal channel of promotion for which candidates are called from different categories whether in the same department or from different departments, the selection procedure should be as under : (i) All eligible staff irrespective of the department in which they may be working who satisfy the prescribed conditions of eligibility and volunteer for the post should be subjected to a selection which should consist of both written test and viva-voce test; and  (ii) The Selection Board should call for viva-voce test all candidates who secure not less than 60% marks in the written test.
The final panel should be drawn up on the basis of marks obtained in the written and viva voce test in accordance with the procedure for filing selection posts.
(j) The names of selected candidates should be arranged in order of seniority but those securing a total of more than 80% marks will be classed as outstanding and placed in the panel appropriately in order of their seniority allowing them to supersede not more than 50% of total field of eligibility".
4.
In pursuance of the circular issued by the Railways on 23051996, the petitioners have got higher marks in terms of the factors contained in Rule 219(g) of the Railway Manual but respondents Nos. 5 to 8 have been promoted on the basis of seniority presumably in terms of clause (j) of the said Para.
It may be noticed that 15 marks were allocated for seniority in Rule 219(g) of the Railway Manual but such marks were set aside by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in M Ramjayaram v. General Manager, South Central Railway, AIR 1996 SC 3126 wherein it was held that the selection is required to be done on the basis of the criteria laid down under Rule 219(g) of the Railway Manual.
The selection should be made primarily on the basis of overall merit but for guidance of Selection Board the factors to be taken into account and the relative weightage were laid down therein.
It was found that weightage of 15% for seniority was illegal.
The relevant extract from the aforesaid judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court reads as under :  ".......The selection is required to be done on the basis of the criteria laid down under Rule 219(g) of the Railway Manual.
Selection should be made primarily on the basis of overall merit but for guidance of Selection Board the factors to be taken into account and the relative weightage laid down was as under :  "Rule 219(g) of the Indian Railway Manual states selection should be made primarily on the basis of overall merit but for guidance of Selection Board the factors to be taken into account and their relative weightage are laid down as below: Maximum Marks Qualifying Marks  (iii) Professional ability 50 30  (iv) Personality, Leadership and academic qualification 20 - (v) Record of service 15 -  (vi) Seniority l5 -"  In this case since the contesting respondents are not from the same unit but of different units, Rule 320 stands excluded, weightage of 15 marks for seniority given to the respondents obviously is illegal.
Therefore, there is force in the contention of the appellant that his non-selection tantamounts to arbitrary exercise of power on the part of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
We set aside the order of the CAT, Hyderabad made in OC No. 1039/92 dated March 21, 1995.
The respondents are directed to consider the selection according to rules and make appointment according to law".
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has vehemently argued that clause (j) of Rule 219 of the Railway Manual contemplates that the names of selected candidates should be arranged in order of seniority is wholly illegal, arbitrary and discriminatory for the same reason as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ramjayaram's case (supra).
The learned Tribunal found that a panel is prepared of all those persons who have obtained the qualifying standards.
Thereafter the panel is to be drawn upon the basis of seniority from amongst those who qualify it.
Therefore, one cannot find any flaw with the panel prepared by the respondents as the Railways had been preparing such panels.
It was also found that 15% marks for seniority is not only the basis for preparing the panel, particularly when that part of the Rule is not under challenge.
The Tribunal found that there is no ground to declare clause (j) of Rule 219 of the Railway Manual to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, we are of the opinion that the order passed by the Tribunal cannot be sustained in law.
The appointment to the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III is from three sources i.e., direct recruitment, promotion and against 20% posts through Intermediate Quota.
For direct recruitment posts, there is no dispute.
The promotions are to be made from the feeder cadre of the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III.
The rule of seniority would be relevant for promotion for the employees who fall in the same channel of promotion.
7.
For Intermediate Quota of 20%, the candidates are eligible from different sources.
They are not necessarily from the same branch or in the same pay scale.
It is evident from the fact that petitioner No. 1 is ESM Grade-I in the pay scale of Rs. 1320-2040, whereas petitioners Nos. 2 and 3 are ESM Grade-II in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-1800.
In terms of Rule 215 of the Railway Manual, selection for promotion to a selection post is to be made primarily on merits.
It is not disputed that the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III is a selection post and the procedure prescribed in Rules 215 and 219 is applicable.
The guiding star for selection to the post of Signal Inspector Grade-III is the merit alone.
Merit alone would be relevant for determining the right of promotion.
It is the said principle which led to striking down for 15% marks in Rule 219(g) of the Railway Manual.
8.
No doubt, it is correct that a candidate who obtains 60% marks of the aggregate qualifies for placing his name on the panel.
However, it does not mean having obtained better marks in the selection process, the rule of seniority shall be made applicable for determining the right of promotion.
The candidates are not from the common feeder channel nor in the same scale or in the same cadre.
9.
Clause (j) of Rule 219 of the Railway Manual contemplates that the names of selected candidates i.e., the candidates who have obtained more than 60% marks in the written test, are to be arranged in the order of seniority.
As mentioned above, there is no common seniority list on the basis of which their names can be placed in seniority for promotion against 20% Intermediate Quota posts.
Clause (j) is wholly illegal and arbitrary as the rule of seniority sought to be introduced when there is none and when the promotion is to a selection post by a selection method on merit in the qualifying examination.
It is more so, marks for seniority having been set aside by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as arbitrary.
Therefore, for the same reason as weighed with the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ramjayaram's case (supra), promotion against 20% Intermediate Quota posts is required to be made only on the basis of merit and uninfluenced by seniority of the candidates occupying the lower eligible cadre.
Thus, the said Rule is set aside.
As a consequence thereof, the impugned order passed by the Tribunal is unjustified.
Consequently, the impugned order passed by the Tribunal is set aside.
The promotion of respondents Nos. 5 to 8 is set aside and respondents Nos. l to 4 are directed to promote the petitioners to be post of Signal Inspector Grade- III from the same date when respondents No. 5 to 8 were promoted.
However, the petitioners shall not be entitled to arrears of pay and allowances but the entire period shall be taken into consideration for the purposes of pay fixation etc.
Petition allowed.