Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is alleging that Eastern Coal Fields Limited acted wrongfully in that it failed and neglected to provide him an employment on compassionate grounds, though he was entitled to that according to rules.
2.
His father was an employee in the company.
He died in harness on December 21, 1997.
It has been claimed that mother of the petitioner applied for compassionate appointment for the petitioner.
Nothing has been produced to show that any application for compassionate appointment was ever made.
3.
My attention has been drawn to an indemnity bond dated February 25th, 1998 allegedly submitted by the mother of the petitioner.
I find that in that document it was stated that mother of the petitioner had applied for compassionate appointment of the petitioner.
From the letter dated Jun, 10th, 1999 issued by the welfare officer of the colliery concerned, I find that a dependant of the deceased employee was one of the persons who were called upon to appear before the screening committee with original papers.
It has been stated in the writ petition (para 9) that the petitioner duly appeared before the screening committee, but appointment was not given to him, though similarly situated other persons were favoured with compassionate appointment.
4.
From 1999 till March 12th, 2005 (the writ petition was taken out on that date), the petitioner did not agitate the issue.
It has, however, been claimed that he gave a legal notice dated November 9th, 2004.
The company has filed an opposition stating that for want of vacancy the company, having surplus employees and incurring huge loss, was not in a position to give compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
Counsel for the petitioner prays for an order directing the authority of the company to reconsider the case.
He relies on a judgment dated December 21st, 2004 given by me in W.P. 2059 of 2004 (Rajia Devi v. Coal India Limited and Ors.) I do not see how that judgment is of any assistance in this case.
There the writ petition was disposed of at the admission stage directing the company concerned to consider the application, if submitted for bringing the son of the petitioner concerned on live register.
That is not the case here.
5.
On the facts of the case, I do not find any reason to interfere in the matter.
Regarding delay counsel relies on statement made in para 11 of the writ petition.
In my view, nothing therein explains the delay in approaching the writ Court, and on the ground of delay alone relief should be denied to the petitioner.
At best an order directing the company to consider the case of the petitioner could have been made.
But I think this is not a case where such an order should be made.
The employee died as back as December 21, 1997.
In June, 1999 the position became clear to the petitioner that the company was not going to give him a compassionate appointment.
It is apparent from his conduct that he accepted the situation, and decided not to take the matter further.
6.
Long after he appeared before the screening committee he decided to approach the writ Court (it was after around six years).
Since he was asking for a compassionate appointment that was to be given only in case of extreme financial hardship taking place because of sudden death of the sole bread earner of the family, in my view, he just disentitled himself to any relief from the writ Court by approaching it after around eight years from the date of death.
Besides, he never took any steps to question in action of the company, if any, though the position became absolutely clear to him as back as June, 1999.
In my view, in case of compassionate appointment the writ Court should not give any relief to a petitioner who approaches it at a grossly belated stage.
It is to be noted that no explanation whatsoever has been given regarding the delay.
7.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.