Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is questioning the selection of the seventh respondent for a group-D post in Baliadanga NPM Balika Vidyalaya, Nadia.
2.
In connection with the recruitment process initiated by the institute name of the seventh respondent was not sponsored by any employment exchange, though name of the petitioner with other was sponsored.
The seventh respondent filed WP No. 2058 (W) of 2001 in this Court alleging that the authorities were wrong in not permitting her to participate in the selection process.
By letter dated February 15, 2001 her advocate requested the authority of the institute to permit her to participate in the selection process, since the writ petition filed by her was pending decision in this Court.
Accordingly the authority of the institute permitted her to participate in the selection process in connection wherewith the candidates were interviewed by the selection committee on February 18, 2001.
3.
In the panel prepared by the selection committee while the seventh respondent occupied the first position, the petitioner occupied the second position.
The panel was submitted to the district inspector of schools, who did not take any decision regarding approval because of the financial embargo imposed by the State.
Suddenly on April 5, 2006 the petitioner took out this writ petition contending that since the seventh respondent was not eligible, on the basis of advocate's letter dated February 15, 2001 the authority of the institute was not competent to permit her to participate in the selection process.
Her further contention is that since the writ petition filed by the seventh respondent was dismissed on March 29, 2001, the authorities should have deleted her name from the panel.
4.
The question whether a person not sponsored by the employment exchange for such post as is in question was entitled to participate in the selection process was considered by a five judge bench of this Court in Rabindra Nath Mahata and Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors., 2005(2) CLJ 161.
Their Lordships held that since the recruitment procedure prescribed and notified by the director of school education was not statutory in nature, a person even if not sponsored by the employment exchange would have been entitled to participate in the selection process.
Their Lordships declared the legal position that existed all along.
Therefore even in the absence of any order of any Court, the seventh respondent was entitled to participate in the selection process in which she participated by appearing before the selection committee on February 18, 2003.
5.
Since she had a right to participate in the selection process, I do not find any wrong with the step taken by the authority of the institute, though it was taken on mere receipt of letter of advocate for the seventh respondent dated February 15, 2001.
I am also of the view that subsequent dismissal of the writ petition filed by the seventh respondent was not of any significance, since in view of the five judge bench decision she was entitled to participate in the selection process even in the absence of any order from the Court.
It is not a case where the question for consideration is whether the five judge bench decision is to be applied with retrospective effect.
There is no reason to say that that decision will get a retrospective effect, if action of the institute permitting the seventh respondent to participate in the selection process is upheld on the basis of law declared by it.
6.
It is relevant for determining the question whether on February 18, 2001 the seventh respondent was entitled to participate in the selection process.
In my opinion, she was, since relying on the same recruitment procedure that was considered in the five judge bench decision the seventh respondent had asserted her right to participate in the process.
I am therefore unable to accept the contention of counsel for the petitioner that the seventh respondent ought not to have been considered an eligible candidate for the post in question.
It is also to be noted that the selection process is yet to be concluded, since the district inspector of schools has not yet given the decision on the question of approval of the panel.
It is therefore apparent that the five judge bench decision declaring the position of law has come to be given during progress of the selection process.
In my view, on the facts of the case the decision will fully apply.
7.
For these reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.