MN Rao, J - Shri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapur, the first respondent herein issued a notification on 23988 inviting applications for filling certain teaching posts including one post of Professor of Physics (Lien vacancy) in the University.
The petitioner Dr. Hyder Khan, the third respondent Dr. E Rajagopal who were already working as Readers in Physics in the University and one Dr. Rao were called for interview on 23189.
The third respondent Rajagopal was selected for the post.
Challenging that appointment the present writ petition was filed.
2.
At the time of the notification there was a lien vacancy in the post of Professor of Physics as Professor SV Subrahmanyam, the previous Professor went on deputation to Kenya.
He resigned the post subsequently as a result of which a permanent vacancy had arisen.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that he was senior to the third respondent in the post of Reader, his academic qualifications were far superior to those of the third respondent but he was denied the post due to extraneous considerations.
The fourth respondent, Professor Venkat Reddy, Vice Chancellor was ill-disposed towards him due to personal animosity.
The constitution of the Selection Committee was done in such a way that Prof. Jayarami Reddy, a close relation of the Vice-Chancellor was made a member of the Committee to manoeuvre the appointment of the third respondent.
As per the provisions of the Sri Krishnadevaraya University Act (Act 36/81) (for short SKD) only persons serving as Professors should sit on the selection Committee; the second respondent Professor Seshagiri Rao, a member of the Selection Committee, by the date of selection had retired from the service as Professor and, therefore, his association with the Selection Committee had vitiated the entire proceedings.
4.
Counters were filed on behalf of the University, the selected candidate and the Vice-Chancellor controverting the allegations.
5.
The first question to be considered is whether the selection was vitiated because of the alleged mala fides on the part of the Vice-Chancellor, the fourth respondent.
6.
In 1984 the fourth respondent was the Registrar of the University.
The petitioner herein and some others were invigilators for the MA Degree examination held on 91284.
It is alleged by the petitioner that when the examination commenced at 10 am, the students got up, made commotion and left the hall.
The question papers were collected by the attender and the students reported to the examination hall with the concerned teacher who happened to be the then Registrar and all the question papers were found to contain some notes.
The invigilators refused to sign on the answer scripts because of the irregularity and all of them submitted memorandum on 91284 to the Principal of the University College complaining about the irregularity.
The fourth respondent who was the Registrar at that time was also Professor of Agricultural Economics.
The allegation of the petitioner is that the fourth respondent made certain notings to help the students to secure good marks.
Because the irregularity committed by the then Registrar was brought to the notice of the higher authorities, he bore grudge against the petitioner and other invigilators and when the Registrar became Vice-Chancellor, he manoeuvred the whole process of selection so as to eliminate the petitioner from the race.
7.
The allegation was denied specifically by the fourth respondent in his counter-affidavit.
He asserted in his counter :  "11.
When I entered the examination hall, I found most of them in ruffled state and in the mood to boycott the examination.
I calmed them down, as they were my students and explained to them the futility of boycotting the examination.
Such a step entails loss of money to the institution plus loss of 3 to 6 months for students to write a re-examination.
I also explained to them that the questions were all within the syllabus, that they are unnecessarily getting frigtended without reading the questions properly.
Thus I was successful in persuading them to write the examination.
I would have taken 5 to 10 minutes time in this exercise.
There is nothing unusual or illegal about the incident.
12.
The scripts of the examination were duly valued and results published in due course.
All those students are now eking out their livelihood with the help of the degrees granted to them.
It should be surprising that the petitioner having forgotten the incident for the last six years now suddenly remembers everything so vividly.
13.
The actual issue of selection of professor in Physics department is clear and unassailable.
A comparative reading of the list of academic achievements of the petitioner and Dr. Rajagopal would make it clear that Dr. Rajagopal is superior to the petitioner in academic excellence.
In fact, Dr. Rajagopal was recommended by the Head of the Department of Physics and the Chairman of the Board of Studies for Physics.
The Selection Committee has unanimously recommended Dr. Rajagopal for the post of Professor without any reservations.
The allegations of mala fides against me are wholly unfounded and unfortunate."
8.
What transpired six years ago cannot be verified now.
The University authorities at that time did not find even prima facie material in the allegation levelled, warranting any probe.
No action whatever was taken and the entire matter was closed.
I, therefore, do not find any material on record to hold that the Vice-Chancellor had bias against the petitioner resulting in his not being selected.
9.
The Executive Council of the University is one of the authorities under Section 15 of the SKD Act.
Section 17(1) says that the Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University.
Sub-section (2) lays down that its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the statutes.
Section 27 specifies all the matters that may be provided for by statutes.
The procedure for making statutes is laid down in Section 28.
Statute No. 16(1) which deals with constitution of Selection Committee reads :  "16(1) There shall be constituted a Selection Committee in regard to the appointment of Professors, Readers and Lecturers which shall consist of the following, namely : (1) The Vice-Chancellor; (2) Nominee of the University Grants Commission; (3) Three experts from outside the University to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor of whom at least two shall be present in the Selection Committee; (4) Chairman of the Board of Studies concerned;  (5) Head of the Department concerned : Provided that no person shall participate in the meetings of the Selection Committee for any appointment if he or his near relative is a candidate for that appointment :  Provided further that no teacher holding a post lower in rank than the one to which the appointment is to be made shall be a member of the Selection Committee."
10.
One of the members of the Selection Committee was Professor T. Seshagiri Rao, the second respondent.
At the relevant time he was a retired Professor.
The contention advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the constitution of the Selection Committee was vitiated as at the relevant time the second respondent was not a serving Professor.
I cannot agree.
The second proviso to sub-paragraph (1) of statute No. 16 does not prohibit a retired Professor from functioning as a member of the Selection Committee; what it forbids is that a person holding a post lower in rank than the one to which the appointment is to be made shall not be a member of the Selection Committee.
For example, a person holding the post of a Reader cannot sit on the Selection Committee to consider the claims of candidates for appointment to the post of a Professor.
A person who has retired as a Professor is not ineligible to sit on the Selection Committee.
By virtue of his long experience a retired professor may on some occasions be more useful and competent to serve on the Selection Committee than a serving Professor.
At any rate, it cannot be said that a retired Professor is less suitable and less merited compared with a serving Professor to sit on a Selection Committee.
11.
The allegation of the petitioner that one of the members of the Selection Committee was very close to the Vice Chancellor was denied by the latter in his affidavit.
There is no material on record warranting inference that the Vice Chancellor actuated by mala fides had manoeuvred the composition of the Selection Committee in order to ease out the petitioner from getting the post.
12.
One of the contentions very forcefully put forth by Shri Mirza Munawwar Ali Baig, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the third respondent was not qualified for appointment to the post of Professor.
The advertisement for the post of Professor mentions the following qualifications :  "Professor :- An eminent Scholar with published work of high quality actively engaged in research.
About ten years' experience of teaching and/or research, Experience of guiding research at doctoral level.
OR An outstanding Scholar with established reputation who has made significant contribution to knowledge."
It is not in dispute that both the petitioner and the third respondent obtained PhD Degrees in Physics.
The petitioner obtained a first class in MSc, whereas the third respondent obtained a second class in MSc According to Shri Mirza Munawwar Ali Baig, possession of a high second class in MSc is a necessary qualification for consideration for appointment to the post of Professor.
The advertisement does not say so.
It only mentions that the candidate should be an eminent Scholar with published work of high quality actively engaged in research.
He should also have about ten years experience of teaching and/or research.
He should have experience in guiding students for doctorate degree.
The alternate qualification is that the candidate should be an outstanding Scholar with established reputation who had made significant contribution to knowledge.
The following table shows the relative qualifications of the petitioner and third respondent :  "Qualifications and Experience".
(1) Prof. E Rajagopal (R3) (2) Dr. V Hyder Khan (Petitioner)  Qualifications : Qualifications : MSc IInd Class March 1967 MSc 1st Class 1967 PhD in Physics 1975 Ph.D. in Physics 1972 As Lecturer from 29375 to 4.11.80 As Lecturer from 2.8.76 to 8.7.84 As Reader from 5.11.80 to 7.9.82 As Reader from 9.7.84 to date As Professor from 9.7.84 to 21.2.89 As per SR entry.
As Professor from 22289 to date.
As per SR entry.
13.
The Selection Committee awarded 75 marks to the third respondent and 64 marks to the petitioner.
Under the head "Research Guidance" the petitioner was awarded 12 marks whereas the third respondent was given 10 marks.
For "Teaching Experience" for a period of six years the petitioner was given 10 marks whereas the third respondent was given 8 marks.
The petitioner had 17 monographs to his credit and, therefore, under the head "Publications" he was given 10 marks, the maximum prescribed and the same marks were given to the third respondent who had 37 publications to his credit.
The petitioner did not publish any books and, therefore, under the head he was not given any marks.
The third respondent had published two books for which he was awarded 4 marks.
The 3rd respondent also received awards from UGC, CSIR, etc., for which two marks were given to him; the petitioner did not have any such awards and, therefore, rightly no marks were given to him.
For performance in the interview the petitioner was awarded 32 marks whereas the third respondent was awarded 35 marks.
14.
The Selection Committee which consisted of experts, had acted fairly.
How many marks each candidate deserves for his performance at the interview cannot be assessed by this Court; it has neither the expertise nor power to do so.
The law in this regard is very clear.
The Supreme Court in University of Mysore v. Govinda Rao, AIR 1965 SC 491 at 496 para 13 stated the law thus :  "Boards of Appointments are nominated by the Universities and when recommendations made by them and the appointments following on them, are challenged before courts, normally the Courts should be slow to interfere with the opinions by the experts.
There is no allegation about mala fides against the experts who constituted the present Board; and so, we think, it would normally be wise and safe for the courts to leave the decisions of academic matters to experts who are more familiar with the problems they face than the courts generally can be.
The criticism made by the High Court against the report made by the Board seems to suggest that the High Court thought that the Board was in the position of an executive authority issuing an executive fiat, or was acting like a quasi-judicial tribunal, deciding disputes referred to it for its decision.
In dealing with complaints made by citizens in regard to appointments made by academic bodies, like the Universities, such an approach would not be reasonable or appropriate.
In fact, in issuing the writ, the High Court has made certain observations which show that the High Court applied tests which would legitimately be applied in the case of writs of certiorari.
In the judgment it has been observed that the error in this case is undoubtedly a manifest error.
That is a consideration which is more germane and relevant in a procedure for a writ of certiorari.
What the High Court should have considered is whether the appointment made by the Chancellor had contravened any statutory or binding rule or ordinance, and in doing so, the High Court should have shown due regard to the opinion expressed by the Board and its recommendations on which the Chancellor has acted."
15.
The appointment of the third respondent is not in violation of any of the provisions of the SKD Act, any statute or ordinance.
He was qualified and eligible to be considered for appointment and Selection Committee acting fairly had recommended him for appointment.
The allegations of mala fides against the Vice Chancellor are without any foundation.
The constitution of Selection Committee does not suffer from any illegality.
16.
The Writ Petition, therefore, fails and accordingly, it is dismissed but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.