Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for an order directing the authority of Bijay Krishna Girls' College to cancel the recruitment process initiated by employment notice dated August 04, 2006 for appointing a laboratory attendant.
He is also asking for a mandamus directing the college authority to regularize his appointment to the post of laboratory attendant on the ground that he has been serving in the college from 1991.
2.
Counsel submits that though in 1991 the petitioner was appointed on casual basis, in the selection process initiated by the college authority for appointing a laboratory attendant the petitioner was permitted to participate.
He says that in the panel prepared by the selection committee the petitioner was the first person.
His argument is that since nothing was informed to the petitioner about cancellation of that selection process, the college authority is not empowered to initiate a fresh recruitment process for making appointment to that post.
Counsel for the college authority submits that the selection process initiated in 2001 was cancelled, since government had imposed an embargo on making appointment.
3.
From para twelve of the writ petition I find that the petitioner had full knowledge of the fact that the selection process initiated in 2001 was cancelled.
Hence I do not find any reason to accept his contention that because of that selection process in which a panel was prepared, the college authority is not empowered to initiate a fresh selection process.
In my view, the college authority has committed no wrong by initiating a fresh recruitment process.
The decision of the authority to cancel the previous selection process was never questioned by the petitioner in any manner whatsoever.
4.
As to the relief for regularization, counsel submits that in view of the constitution bench decision of the apex court in Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Umadevi & Ors. AIR 2006 SC 1806, the petitioner is entitled to get the benefits, since in the 2001 selection process initiated according to recruitment rules he was selected for appointment.
I am unable to agree with him.
True it is that in 2001 he participated in the selection process and that a panel was prepared.
But the admitted fact is that selection process was cancelled by the competent authority.
As a result the petitioner remained engaged only on casual basis.
5.
His continuous engagement on casual basis, in my view, did not create any enforceable legal right to get permanent appointment in the college.
He is not entitled to get any benefit of the selection process initiated in 2001, since that selection process was cancelled according to law.
The constitution bench has categorically held that the concept of regularization is contrary to the scheme of the constitution.
It is not the case of the petitioner that in 1991 he was appointment in the college according to recruitment rules.
That was an appointment on casual basis, and no order can be made by the court directing the employer to give permanent appointment to a person working on casual basis.
Hence I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
6.
Needless to say that if the petitioner is eligible according to recruitment rules, and that if his name is sponsored by the employment exchange, if that is necessary, then he will be free to participate in the selection process.
This clarification will not create any right in his favour.
It will be for the college authority to decide whether he is entitled to participate in the selection process.
Counsel prays for an order directing the college authority to relax the age bar provisions.
He says that in view of the constitution bench decision such an order can be made by the court.
I am unable to agree with him.
If the petitioner has crossed the maximum age, and if there is no provision permitting relaxation, the court cannot make an order for the purpose.
The matter will be examined by the college authority, if the petitioner applies for the post.
7.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.