Tapan Mukherjee, J - This appeal at the instance of the writ petitioner- appellant is directed against the judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge passed in W.P. 2293 of 2002.
2.
The appellant was an employee of the respondent-Bank and lastly he was serving the Bank as a Manager of Dakshin Chatra Branch in the District of 24 Parganas (North).
By circular dated 23122000 the United Bank of India had circulated a scheme called United Bank of India Employees' Voluntary Retirement Scheme 2000 and the eligible employees were required to submit application within January 2001.
Accordingly, the appellant made an application seeking voluntary retirement in the prescribed proforma on 312001 as he fulfilled the eligibility criteria under paragraph 4 (i) of the Scheme.
On 3152001 a complaint was lodged by two fictitions persons namely Prabir Das and Archana Das alleging irregularities in the matter of disbursing loans against the appellant The Regional Manager of the said Bank informed the Superintendent of Police North 24 Parganas of the said complaint on 4.9.2001 seeking appropriate security measures and protection.
On 1092001 the appellant's application for voluntary retirement was declined inviting his attention to paragraph 4(d) of the aforesaid circular regarding Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
Pursuant to enquiry made by, the Vigilance Department into the complaint dated 3152001, a letter of explanation was issued to the appellant alleging irregularities in sanction an disbursement of loans under SC/P/TSP Scheme.
Appellant submitted his explanation on 1942002.
On 2882002 he was severally cautioned.
The appellant challenged the said order of rejection of his prayer for voluntary retirement as on the date of his application neither any disciplinary proceeding was contemplated nor pending nor he was under suspension an the provision of 4(a) of the said circular regarding voluntary retirement did not come to play on the date of submission of the said application for voluntary retirement.
The said rejection of his application for voluntary retirement was wrong, illegal and without jurisdiction.
Against the said rejection the appellant-writ petitioner moved this Court in writ jurisdiction.
3.
Learned Single Judge by his impugned order held that the Bank was justified in rejecting the prayer and upheld the application of.
Clause 4(d) of the Scheme and declined to grant any relief to the writ petitioner.
4.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge the writ petitioner preferred this appeal.
5.
It was contended by the learned lawyer for the appellant that the order rejection of the application of the writ petitioner seeking voluntary retirement under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme is illegal and without jurisdiction.
On the date of application i.e., on 312001 the writ petitioner fulfilled the eligibility criteria of voluntary retirement as contemplated in the said scheme i.e., United Bank of India Employees' Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 and neither any disciplinary proceeding was pending nor there was contemplation of any such proceeding nor the writ petitioner was under suspension.
The provision of Clause 4(d) of the said United Bank of India Employees ' Voluntary Retirement Scheme, 2000 did not apply in this case and the concerned authority should have allowed the prayer of the writ petitioner but the matter was dragged and then a False complaint alleging irregularities in the matter of disbursing loans was brought against the writ petitioner and the complaint was under investigation and the writ petitioner's application for voluntary retirement was declined in view of Clause 4(d) of the concerned Scheme.
Learned counsel for the writ petitioner contended that on the date of application for voluntary retirement the same did not attract the mischief under Clause 4(d) of the Scheme as no disciplinary proceeding was neither pending nor contemplated nor the writ petitioner was under suspension.
The petitions was not disposed of immediately and after lapse of about 7 months the Bank issued a letter on 342002 calling upon the petitioner to furnish explanation to some alleged lapse with regard to sanctioning and disbursement of loans under SCP-TSP Scheme during the writ petitioner's incumbency as Manager, Dakshin Chatra Branch during the period of March, 2001 to May, 2001 and the writ petitioner submitted a detailed explanation on 1942002 denying all the allegations.
But after lapse of four months the Regional Manager by letter dated 2882002 had alleged that his reply was found unsatisfactory and the petitioner was severally cautioned.
In the meantime, on 1092001 his application for voluntary retirement was rejected in view of Clause 4(d) of the Scheme.
Learned lawyer further contended that the Learned Single Judge failed to appreciate the scope and ambit of Clause 4 of the said Scheme of 2000 providing for the eligibility criteria of the employees seeking voluntary retirement on the date of application and erred in law by extending the disability clause of the said Scheme by giving prospective effect of the same.
The order of the Learned Single Judge is not in accordance with law and the same is liable to be quashed.
Learned lawyer for the appellant further contended that the prayer for voluntary retirement was to be disposed of by the concerned authority reasonably, fairly and judicially.
The discretion was not unfettered or absolute.
When the writ petitioner satisfied all the conditions for voluntary retirement his prayer should have been allowed and should not have been denied on the basis of the subsequent complaint.
Leaned lawyer placed his reliance upon the ruling reported in (2000) 7 Supreme Court Cases at page 390 and 1979 (1) Services Law Reporter at page 52.
6.
Learned lawyer for the respondent supported the judgment of the Learned Single Judge and also to order of rejection of the appellant's petition for voluntary retirement.
He contended that there was no inordinate delay, in depositing of the petition of the appellant for voluntary retirement and the said petition for voluntary retirement was under process and during that time the complaint alleging financial irregularities in advancing loans involving the writ petitioner was received and there was substance in the said complaint and as such before the date of passing order the complaint received against the complainant was sufficient to raise the contention that the disciplinary proceeding was contemplated against the writ petitioner on the date of passing the order and mischief under Clause 4(d) of the said Scheme was attracted and the order of rejection of the prayer for voluntary retirement was lawful and within jurisdiction and the order of the Learned Single Judge was also justified and the same is sustainable in law.
7.
Admittedly, the writ petitioner-appellant was Branch Manager serving under the respondent-Bank.
It is further undisputed that on 312001 the appellant made an application for voluntary retirement under the United Bank of India Employees' Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 and on the date no disciplinary proceeding was either pending or contemplated for the appellant was under suspension.
So, the provision of Clause 4(d) of the said Scheme disentitling the writ petitioner to seek voluntary retirement was not attracted on the date of filing the application.
It is not expected that on the date of very application for voluntary retirement the same would be disposed of.
Obviously, the said application for voluntary retirement was to be scrutinised in the light of the scheme of as certainment whether the petitioner fulfilled all the eligibility criteria and for that time was necessary.
When the petition for voluntary retirement was under process and the same was under consideration of the Bank the complaint alleging financial irregularities in the matter of disbursing loans was received against the writ petitioner-appellant on 3152001.
It is true that it is provided in Clause 4(i) of the said Scheme that all permanent full time employees of the Bank will be eligible for seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme provided they meet the eligibility criteria mentioned therein on the date of application.
Such provision does not impose any restriction on the part of the Bank Authority to consider any subsequent circumstance or matter which stood on the way of accepting the said application for voluntary retirement.
It is an enabling provision and it only provided the eligibility criteria for making application for voluntary retirement.
The request of voluntary retirement would continue as a request until and unless the same was accepted by the competent authority and if subsequently during process it appeared to the competent authority that there was bar of entertaining such prayer for voluntary retirement the competent authority was at liberty to reject the said prayer notwithstanding the fact that such bar did not exist on the date of making the application for voluntary retirement.
In this regard, it will be relevant to refer to clause 10(a) and 10(d) of the said Scheme.
Clause 10(a) of the said.
Scheme provides that it will be prerogative of the Bank either to accept the request for voluntary retirement or to reject the same depending upon the exigency requirements of the Bank.
Clause 10(d) provides that the mere request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme will not take effect until and unless it is accepted in writing by the competent authority and communicated by the Bank in writing by the applicant.
So, it is crystal clear from the scheme itself that it is prerogative of the Bank either to accept or to reject the application for voluntary retirement and the mere request seeking voluntary retirement does not take effect as soon as the same is filed and the same will take effect only on acceptance in writing by the competent authority and communication of the same to the applicant.
In this case, when the application was in process a serious complaint of financial irregularities in the matter of disbursing loans by the writ petitioner was received on 3152001 and it appears that while the application for voluntary retirement of the petitioner and others was being scrutinised by the Bank Authority for ascertaining whether the applicant fulfilled the eligibility criteria of reaping the benefit of the said Scheme, the Vigilance clearance of the concerned officer was also called for and it appears from letter dated 162001 addressed to the Assistant General Manager (PA & OE), UBI Head Office that they received the complaint against Naresh Chandra Biswas, Manager Dakshin Chatra Branch, SPF No. 10600 which was under their investigation.
It appears that subsequently after the investigation on 342002 a letter was issued by the Regional Manager concerned to the writ petitioner calling upon him to submit an explanation in regard to the complaint of financial irregularities in the matter of disbursement of loans within 15 days and on 1942002 the writ petitioner submitted a detailed explanation and on consideration of the said explanation on 2882002 the concerned authority found the same unsatisfactory and the writ petitioner was severely cautioned.
The writ petitioner has not yet challenged the said enquiry or proceeding against him and the punishment of caution inflicted upon him on the basis of the said vigilance enquiry: So, obviously, the concerned authority entertaining the appellant's application for voluntary retirement was duty bound to give due importance to the said complaint against the petitioner and also to the report of the Vigilance Cell that the said complaint was under investigation.
Obviously, it can be said that during examination of the said application for voluntary retirement submitted by the appellant the serious complaint about financial irregularities in the matter of advancement of loan was received against the petitioner and the same was pending for investigation and a disciplinary proceeding was contemplated on 1092001 when the application for voluntary retirement was rejected and the same attracted the mischief of clause 4(d) of the Scheme.
So, on the date of rejection of the application for voluntary retirement steps were taken for embarking on disciplinary proceeding against the appellant in near future and the mental process was completed.
The decision reported in 1979 (1) Services Law Reporter at page 52 does not come to an aid of the appellant.
The facts and circumstances in the case reported in (2000) 7 Supreme Court Cases at page 390 and the facts and circumstances of the present case are different.
In the said case before the Apex Court the application for the voluntary retirement was filed under Assam Industrial Department Corporation Voluntary Retirement Scheme 1992 and the recommending authority recommended for accepting the petition for voluntary retirement on the same date of filing the same.
So, the said decision of the Apex Court is also no help to the appellant.
8.
Under the circumstances the order of rejection of the petitioner for voluntary retirement cannot be said to be illegal and without jurisdiction and the impugned judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge cannot be interfered with.
9.
In result, the appeal fails and the same is dismissed without any order of costs.
Appeal dismissed.