Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is alleging that the authorities are not permitting him to participate in a selection process initiated for the post of Gram Panchayat Karmee.
2.
Counsel submits that according to the relevant recruitment rules names of the eligible candidates were to be obtained by the authorities from the employment exchanges, and that name of the petitioner was not sponsored.
His contention is that in view of numerous judgments of the apex Court and this Court, the authorities were under the obligation to publish the employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates, and that they were not empowered to confine the source of candidates only to the employment exchanges.
3.
Counsel concedes that validity of the relevant recruitment rules or of the selection process initiated by the authorities has not been questioned by the petitioner who wants only an order from this Court permitting him to participate in the selection process.
I do not see how such a relief can be given to him.
Admittedly he is not questioning the validity of the recruitment rules confining the source of eligible candidates only to the employment exchanges.
4.
I am unable to understand how it can be said that because of judgments of the apex Court and this Court, none cited, the statutory provision should be ignored, when it is not the case that in any of the decisions the rule was struck down on the ground that it was ultra vires any provision of law.
I am also unable to see how an order can be made permitting the petitioner to participate in the selection process, when his name has not been sponsored by the employment exchange.
5.
On his questioning the selection process on any ground, the questions of admitting the writ petition and making a restraining order, in aid of the final order, not permitting him to participate in the vitiated process, but cancelling the process and directing initiation of a lawful process, could arise.
Admittedly he is not questioning the process.
Hence I do not see how an order can be made in the case directing the respondents to permit him to participate in the selection process.
In my view, this is a misconceived petition.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.