MM Aggarwal, J - Paramjit Singh respondent, who had joined Punjab Police as Constable on 25.6.1985 had proceeded on two days' leave from 631990 and was to report back on 931990 but he did not turn up.
2.
According to Paramjit Singh, he had fallen sick and then his leave was to be got extended.
He got some problem in his spine and there was severe low back pain.
He had some mental problem for which he had to get proper treatment.
He had been getting treatment from Civil Hospital and mental hospital and keeping on informing his departmental officials with respect to the reasons for not reporting for duty.
He was being marked absent.
Then some inquiry was conducted.
The statutory provisions of Punjab Police Rule 1624 were not complied and the respondent was not given opportunity to cross- examine the witnesses.
Thereafter, his services were terminated on 15.9.1992.
3.
Paramjit Singh filed a suit for declaration challenging dismissal order dated 15.9.1992, which was decreed by Sub-Judge, Ist Class, Amritsar on 7101994.
On an appeal filed by the State of Punjab, that appeal was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Amritsar on 1381997.
4.
This is Regular Second Appeal by State of Punjab.
Suit was decreed on the ground that the order of dismissal dated 15.9.1992 was in violation of provisions of Rule 162(1) of the Punjab Police Rule, which provides as under :  "162 Dismissal.
- (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
5.
Relying on some judgments, it had been held by the courts below that before imposing punishment, punishing authority did not record that it was gravest act of misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
Length of service of the petitioner and claim of pension were not taken into consideration.
6.
On behalf of the State, now appellant, it was argued that respondent had gone only two days' leave on 631990 and he was to report back on 931990.
He sent telegram for seven days, still after expiry of seven days, he did not report for duty and he had wilfully absented till the date of dismissal.
That departmental inquiry was initiated.
It was conducted in accordance with Punjab Police Rules.
Notice was sent through special messenger, which was received by the brother of the respondent.
Still respondent did not join departmental inquiry.
Then another notice was issued, which was received by the father of the respondent, still the respondent did not come up and ex parte proceedings were initiated.
After ex parte proceedings and inquiry report, a show cause notice dated 2581992 along with finding of departmental inquiry was delivered through SI Gulzar Singh.
Still respondent did not turn up.
Ultimately the dismissal order was made.
It was argued that the conduct itself will show that it was gravest act of misconduct.
It was also pleaded by the State in the suit that plaintiff, now respondent had departmental remedy of filing appeal, which he did not.
7.
Respondent had put in less than five years of service i.e. from 25.6.1985 to 631990.
8.
Counsel for the respondent had argued that provisions of Rule 162 of Punjab Police Rule were mandatory and when punishing authority failed to take notice of the rule then order of dismissal was vitiated and had to be set aside and there was no infirmity in the judgment of the courts below.
Judgments of this Court reported in Parkash Chander v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(3) SLR (sic); The Punjab State and another v. Balwant Singh, Ex- Constable, 1989(4) SLR 105 and The State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174 had been relied and it was argued that mere absence without leave does not amount to gravest act of misconduct.
9.
Here is a case, where plaintiff, now respondent had put in just less than five years of service.
He went only two days' leave on 631990 and did not report back at all for more than two years in spite of the fact that the inquiry had started.
Notices regarding inquiry were sent.
Then after the receipt of inquiry report, show cause notice had been sent.
Respondent appears to have filed the suit in the trial Court on 15.6.1993 even after about nine months of the order of dismissal, which will mean that he never tried to report back for about three years.
Even if the punishing authority did not specifically record that it was gravest act of misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfit for police service, still all these facts must have been taken into consideration vide order dated 15.9.1992 of dismissal.
The length of service put in had been just less than five years when the petitioner absented.
It is settled law that the civil courts are not to impose their judgment and lightly interfere in the orders of departmental authorities.
10.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in judgment reported as Maan Singh v. Union of India, 2003(2) SCT 84 : AIR 2003 SC 1800 had held that when a Constable is dismissed for remaining absent from duty, then that order of dismissal shall not be interfered with.
11.
Plaintiff, now respondent was a member of police department, where discipline is to be maintained and orders to be obeyed.
Continuous absence for two years together is definitely gravest misconduct proving incorrigibility.
Since the service was just five years, there would be no claim to pension etc.  From the above discussion, it is held that there is merit in this appeal and the same is accepted and suit of the plaintiff shall stand dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.