TPS Mann, J - Aggrieved by order passed by Superintendent of Police, Kaithal on 14.4.2007 (Annexure P.6), whereby the petitioner was served with three months' notice for compulsory retirement, the petitioner has filed the present petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was born on 341952 and was enrolled as a Constable on 23.4.1973.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 1721984 and confirmed as such on 3181986.
He was further promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on 11111995 and confirmed as such on 3112001.
Vide order dated 822006, Superintendent of Police, Kaithal further promoted the petitioner as officiating Sub Inspector.
Although, there was nothing adverse against the petitioner after his promotion, which was done in view of Rule 131 of the Punjab Police Rules, yet he was arbitrarily ordered to be compulsorily retired vide impugned order dated 14.4.2007.
3.
Upon issuance of notice, respondents have filed their reply.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had submitted that the promotion of the petitioner as officiating Sub Inspector was made on 6.2.2006 and any adverse report against him pertaining to the earlier period lost its effectiveness.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents had referred to the instructions regarding retaining of Class-III employee in service on his attaining the age of 55 years, wherein it is required that such an employee must have earned atleast 70% good or above reports during the last ten years.
Further that, the perusal of Annual Confidential Reports (for short `ACRs') file would show that such reports for the period from 10.12.1996 to 3131996, 28122000 to 3132001, 142001 to 3132002, 1.4.2005 to 22.7.2005 and 142006 to 31.11.2006 were found recorded as adverse and were also conveyed to him.
It was also submitted that during the last ten years, only six ACRs were good i.e., for the year 1997-98, 1998-99, 1999-2000, 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05.
Thus, only six out of last ten ACRs were good, which were less than 70% of the reports required for retaining the petitioner in service on his attaining the age of 55 years.
6.
We had heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the records, especially the Confidential/Personal file of the petitioner.
7.
The stand of the learned State Counsel regarding the conveying of adverse remarks to the petitioner on six different occasions and also of the existence of only six good reports during the preceeding ten years is borne out from the Confidential/Personal file of the petitioner.
The requirement of 70% or above good reports during the last ten years has not been fulfilled in the case of the petitioner.
8.
The latest promotion granted to the petitioner of officiating Sub Inspector could wipe out the effect of adverse entries only in the matter of promotion and not for the purpose of considering the case of the petitioner for retaining him in service on his attaining the age of 55 years.
When the department is considering the case of the petitioner to find out as to whether the petitioner is to be retained in service or not, his entire service career is required to be perused.
9.
When the petitioner was promoted as officiating Sub Inspector vide order dated 822006, it was clearly stated that the promotion was purely temporary and fortuitous.
It was also mentioned that he would have no right of seniority to the said post and would be liable to be reverted without any notice.
It is, thus, obvious that though the appointment as officiating Sub Inspector was purported to have been made under Punjab Police Rules 13.1, yet it was purely temporary and fortuitous.
It was done only against an existing vacancy in that rank.
By being promoted as officiating Sub Inspector, the petitioner did not attain any right of being further retained in service beyond the age of 55 years.
10.
Even if the petitioner was promoted as officiating Sub Inspector, that by itself did not have the effect of wiping out the adverse entries earlier existing in the service record of the petitioner.
The authorities would be well within their right to consider the entire service record of the petitioner unless and until there were any rules or instructions, specifically excluding service record of the concerned employee, beyond a particular period, from the zone of consideration.
11.
In State of Orissa and others v. Ram Chandra Das, 1996(4) SCT 288 : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 2436, the order of compulsory retirement made after taking into consideration the service record and pending departmental enquiry was found to be legal and valid.
It was held that the fact that promotion was given after adverse entries were made, was not sufficient to invalidate the order of compulsory retirement.
The relevant observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court are as under :  "....The material question is : whether the entire record of service was considered or not ?
It is not for the Court/Tribunal to see whether the decision of the Government to compulsorily retire the Government servant is justified or not.
It is for the Government to consider the same and take a proper decision in that behalf.
As stated earlier, it is settled law that the Government is required to consider the entire record of service.
Merely because a promotion has been given even after adverse entries were made, cannot be a ground to note that compulsory retirement of the Government servant could not be ordered.
The evidence does not become inadmissible or irrelevant as opined by the Tribunal.
What would be relevant is whether upon that state of record as a reasonable prudent man would the Government or competent officer reach that decision.
We find that self-same material after promotion may not be taken into consideration only to deny him further promotion, if any, but that material undoubtedly would be available to the Government to consider the overall expediency or necessity to continue the Government servant in service after he attained the required length of service or qualified period of service for pension.
It is also made clear that in this case adverse entries were made only after promotion and not earlier to promotion.
Compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
He is entitled to all the pensionary benefits."
12.
The adverse reports, as mentioned above, were conveyed to the petitioner.
This fact is not disputed by the petitioner.
It is also not disputed that during the preceeding ten years, only six reports were good which fell short of the 70% requirement as per the instructions available on the subject.
For these reasons, the petitioner was not retained in service and was ordered to be retired vide impugned order.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Shri Baikuntha Nath Dass and anr. v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and anr., 1992(2) SCT 92 : 1992(2) Recent Services Judgments 308 to contend that if a government servant was promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lost their sting and could not be considered later on for compulsorily retiring such an employee.
14.
In the aforementioned judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it was held that the adverse remarks made earlier to the promotion could not be considered at a later stage if such an order of promotion was based upon merit and not upon seniority.
In the present case, the promotion of the petitioner as officiating Sub Inspector was clearly mentioned as temporary and fortuitous.
It was also stated in the promotion order that the petitioner would have no right of seniority to the said post and also liable to be reverted without any notice.
15.
The principle behind retiring a government servant is public interest and such decision could be made upon evaluation of entire service record of the concerned employee.
The object of such a rule is backed by purpose of weeding out the dead-wood from service cadre.
The authorities may be well within their rights to deny continuation in service even to an average employee, who may be considered by the authorities to be not useful to the department.
Utility of a government servant for its department is a matter, which would fall within the subjective decision of the authorities taken objectively.
The satisfaction has to be of the authorities and taken in conformity with the relevant rules and principles of law governing that field.
The impugned order does not suffer from any such defect.
For the reasons stated above, no merit is found in the present writ petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.