Mahesh Grover, J - The present appeal by the defendant is directed against the judgments of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Pehowa, dated 431992 and that of the Addl.
District Judge, Kurukshetra, dated 10101994.
2.
The facts leading to the present controversy are that the plaintiff- respondent No. 1 filed a suit for declaration and mandatory injunction with a consequential relief of permanent injunction inter alia pleading that he was appointed as a Sub-Divisional Clerk (for the sake of brevity known as `SDC') w.e.f.
16121981 whereas Roop Lal respondent No. 3 was appointed directly as SDC w.e.f.
691983 in the cadre which is common to SDC's/Auditors/Account clerks.
In the seniority list prepared by the Appellant Board, the respondent No. 1 was at Sr. No. 48 while respondent No. 3 was placed at Sr. No. 67 in the cadre of SDC's.
Respondent No. 3 was working as a clerk in the lower scale but he was promoted in the cadre of SDC in the year 1983 in which the respondent No. 1 had come in 1981.
Despite the fact that respondent No. 3 was junior to the respondent No. 1, yet the former was promoted as Assistant vide order dated 3151989 in complete violation of the rules.
Respondent No. 1, being senior, better in merit, was entitled to be promoted as Assistant before respondent No. 3.
With the aforesaid back draw (backdrop ?)
of the facts, the respondent No. 1 made the following prayers :  (a) Declaration to the effect that the plaintiff is entitled to be considered and promoted to the post of Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 w.e.f.
3151989, the date from which his junior i.e. defendant No. 3 has been promoted, along with all consequential benefits attached to the post, including the arrears of difference of salary along with interest at the rate of 18 per centum per annum from 3151989 till realization.
(b) Declaration to the effect that the order dated 3151989, whereby defendant No. 3 has been promoted, are illegal, null and void, unjust, arbitrary and in violation of the principles of natural justice.
(c) Declaration to the effect that the plaintiff is still senior to defendant No. 3.
(d) Mandatory injunction directing the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to promote the plaintiff on the basis of his seniority qua defendant No. 3 and others, from 3151989, along with all the ancillary benefits attached to the post of Assistant.
(e) Mandatory injunction directing defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to restore the seniority of the plaintiff in the cadre of Assistant.
(f) Permanent injunction directing the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 from promoting other juniors without promoting the plaintiff first and also restraining these defendants from getting any deputationist from any departments to the posts of the Assistant.
3.
The suit was contested by the appellant and the respondent No. 3 and it was contended that the plaintiff-respondent No. 1 was appointed as SDC on 16121981 directly whereas respondent No. 3 was promoted from post of Clerk to that of SDC on 691983.
The seniority as pleaded by respondent No. 1 was not specifically denied and it was pleaded that respondent No. 3 was promoted from the post of Peon to that of Clerk on 931978 and he was further promoted as Assistant vide impugned order dated 3151989, because for the promotion to the post of Assistant seniority of Clerk is to be considered and not that of SDC's.
Since the respondent No. 1 did not fulfill the said criteria laid down in the Haryana State Agriculture Market Board Service Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules'), hence, he was not entitled to be considered for promotion and on the basis of these pleadings sought the dismissal of the suit.
The trial Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the plaintiff is senior to defendant No. 3 and is entitled for promotion of Assistant w.e.f.
3151989 ?
OPP 2.
Whether order dated 3151989 is null and void and binding upon the rights of the plaintiff ?
OPP 3.
Whether the plaintiff is also entitled to all the ancillary benefits attached to the post of Assistant w.e.f.
3151989 ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder and misjoinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 6.
Whether the plaintiff has concealed the material facts from the court, if so, its effect ?
OPD 7.
Relief.
4.
After appraisal of the evidence led by the respective parties the learned trial Court vide its judgment dated 431992 decided issue Nos. 1 to 3, 5 and 6 in favour of respondent No. 1 and decreed the suit.
The appeal against the said judgment resulted in affirmation of the findings of the learned trial Court vide judgment dated 10101994.
5.
The present Regular Second Appeal by the appellant-Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board, is directed against the aforesaid judgments.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant sought to place reliance on the Rule 16 of the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974, which is as follows :  16.
Asstt/ Head Clerk  (i) Graduate of a recognised university with five years clerical experience in a Government office/local body/corporation/Board  (i) in the case of promotion  he has at least five years experience as Clerk # # [=]  (ii) in the case of appointment by transfer or deputation,, he should be a graduate of recognised University and should have atleast five years clerical experience in an `A' Class Office of the Government/ local body/corporation (i) by promotion; or (ii) by transfer or deputation.
7.
On the strength of the aforesaid rules learned counsel for the appellant contended that for being promoted as an Assistant five years experience as a Clerk is necessary.
Since, respondent No. 1 was never appointed as Clerk and worked only as SDC, therefore, he was not entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant besides the rule contemplates promotion by way of transfer or deputation and in that eventuality five years clerical experience is required.
Respondent No. 1 not being qualified could not be promoted.
8.
The aforesaid contention of learned counsel for the appellant was contested by learned counsel for the respondents who contended that the eligibility as per aforesaid rules is only five years experience as a clerk.
There was no distinction between a Clerk and SDC and the rules were silent on the subject besides concededly that respondent No. 1 was senior to respondent No. 3 and hence the judgments of both the courts below were perfectly valid.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length and have perused the record.
10.
There is no dispute as to the facts of the case.
The seniority of respondent No. 1 is also not in question.
The lower Appellate Court has noticed an amendment of the Rules carried out on 2981980 by which the word `clerk' was deleted from the qualification prescribed for the post of Assistant.
In the case of a direct recruit, the rules provided that he should be graduate with five years clerical experience whereas in the case of promotion he should have five years experience.
The post on which this experience is to be acquired has not been specified.
Concededly, respondent No. 1 had worked as SDC for more than five years and having been appointed on 16121981.
The post of SDC is apparently a clerical post.
Hence, according to the Rules, respondent No. 1 was clearly eligible for being promoted as an Assistant.
Undisputedly respondent No. 1 was senior to respondent No. 3.
That apart Rule 10 lays down that the promotion shall be made on the basis of experience.
Nothing adverse has been pointed out against respondent No. 1.
11.
Both the courts have found respondent No. 1 eligible for being promoted as an Assistant and learned counsel for the appellant has been unable to show any violation of the Rules or any distinction existing in the Rules between a Clerk and SDC.
12.
No substantial question of law has arisen in the present appeal.
Hence, the same is devoid of any merits and dismissed as such.
Appeal dismissed.