SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitionr joined the office of CPWD, New Delhi (respondent No. 2) in September, 1944.
He worked with the aforesaid department till 1691991.
While he was still employed with respondent No. 2, he applied through proper channel, for selection on the post of Lecturer to the Punjab Public Service Commission.
According to the petitioner, on selection, he joined Government College, Bhatinda (in Punjab) on 1991961.
This was just three days after he had submitted resignation to respondent No. 2, which had been accepted by the Ministry of Human Affairs on 1691961.
After serving Government College, Bhatinda for 1 year and 3 months, he took up a job as Lecturer in Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
He retired from Kurukshetra University as a Reader on 31121988.
The petitioner made numerous requests to the respondents for grant of pensionary benefits.
Vide letter dated 2131995 petitioner was informed that his request had been carefully considered, but it has not been found possible to accept the same.
He was informed that the reasons had been specified in the earlier communication dated 2691994.
The petitioner was also informed that his resignation had been accepted by the Government and hence under Rule 26 of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, for short `Pension Rules', he had forfeited his past service.
It was also observed that when a Central Government servant is transferred to State Government, the past service rendered by him is allowed to be counted by mutual consent by the latter for the purposes of pension and gratuity.
The petitioner already having retired from the State services, there was no scope for the Central Government even to consider his request for payment of retiral benefits.
The petitioner was informed that under the circumstances, no further correspondence will be entertained or the subject.
The petitioner thereafter sent a representation to the Government of India, Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment.
In this application the petitioner reiterated that he had applied for the post of Lecturer to the Punjab Public Service Commission through proper channel and his application was forwarded to the Commission on 16.6.1961.
He also stated that a condition was prescribed that in case he was selected for PES-II on the post of Lecturer, he would have to resign from the permanent post which he was holding with respondent No. 2.
He had tendered his resignation vide letter dated 1291961.
The department concerned did not ask the petitioner either to give one month's notice or surrender one month's salary in lieu thereof.
The resignation was accepted with effect from 1891961 vide order dated 25.9.1961.
The petitioner, therefore, claims that the resignation was merely a technical formality for all practical purposes.
Therefore, under Rule 26(2) of the Pension Rules the service of the petitioner with respondent No. 2 could not be forfeited.
Thereafter the petitioner made another representation on 1481995.
He also submitted a reminder on 1491995.
The representation submitted by the petitioner was rejected by the Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment on 13101995.
Dissatisfied the petitioner filed OA No. 977/HR of 1997 before the Chandigarh Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal.
2.
The respondents submitted a written statement to the OA It was pleaded that the petitioner had made an application for grant of pension after a period of 27 years from the date of his resignation, on 30121988.
It was also stated that the OA was liable to be dismissed as it had been filed after an extra-ordinary delay of 26 years.
Even otherwise, petitioner having voluntarily resigned, his service has been forfeited under Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
3.
Vide judgment and order dated 14.7.1998 the Tribunal dismissed the OA Thereafter, the petitioner filed a review petition, which has been dismissed vide order dated 1791998.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders of the Tribunal, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the orders of the Tribunal.
The petitioner also seeks a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to release the retiral benefits to him.
4.
The respondent Nos. 2 & 3 and 5 filed separate written statements.
They have reiterated that the claim is liable to be rejected being barred by delay and laches.
It is also pleaded that the respondents have rejected the claim of the petitioner under CSR 418-A, which was applicable at the time when the petitioner submitted his resignation.
The provisions of CSR 418-A are identical to Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
In both cases, the service of the petitioner has been rightly forfeited.
Respondent No. 5 in its written statement pointed out that the service rendered by the petitioner was not pensionable.
After completing 25 years of service, the petitioner had been paid all the retiral benefits as admissible to him under the rules of the respondent-University i.e. Contributory provident fund, gratuity and leave encashment etc.
The petitioner retired from service on 31121988.
Since the pension scheme was not introduced in the University till April, 1995, the petitioner would not be entitled to any benefit from Kurukshetra University.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that a perusal of the annexures would show that resignation of the petitioner had been accepted in order to enable the petitioner to join on the post of Lecturer, therefore, the respondents cannot now be permitted to say that the petitioner had forfeited the service under Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
Since the petitioner had applied on the post of Lecturer through proper channel, his claim for pension would be governed by Rule 26(2).
As the petitioner had served for more than 17 years before submitting the resignation, he would at least be entitled to pensionary benefits under Rule 49(2)(b) of the Pension Rules.
7.
On the other hand, counsel for Union of India Mr. Anil Rathee, argues that the claim of the petitioner has been rightly rejected by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
The service of the petitioner has been forfeited under the provisions of CSR 418-A as well as under Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
Since the entire service of the petitioner has been forfeited, he cannot be given benefit of Rule 49(2)(b).
The aforesaid rule would only apply in case the petitioner had superannuated and had more than 10 years of service to his credit.
It would not apply in cases, where the service is forfeited under CSR 418-A or Rule 26(1).
8.
We have perused the entire record with the assistance of the learned counsel.
It appears that the service of the petitioner was duly verified by the respondents on 2551989 in response to his letter dated 30121988.
It is accepted that petitioner had served as a Grade `B' Clerk with the CPWD from 591944 to 1891961.
His representations dated 2071994 and 191994 were rejected vide order dated 2691994.
The petitioner was inter alia informed that he had resigned from Central Government service in 1961 and that his resignation had not been treated as a technical formality as required under the Pension Rules for the purpose of counting his past service in the new organisation.
The petitioner was also informed that since the new organisation did not fall under the Central Government, there is no question of automatic counting of past service after he had been relieved from the Central Government service.
The petitioner was further informed that in case of resignation, the Government servant forfeits his entire service for the purpose of pension and gratuity under the Pension Rules.
With regard to his plea of reciprocal arrangement between the Central Government and the State Government, it was clarified that under the Pension Rules, where a Central Government employee borne on pensionable establishment is allowed to be absorbed in a State Government/Autonomous body, the service rendered by him under the Central Government shall be allowed to be counted towards the pension under the State Government/Autonomous body.
It was pointed out that from his representation, it seems that the Central Government had not given permission for his absorption in the State Government and that the question of absorption, if any, had never been taken up between the organisation concerned under the State Government and the Central Government.
Since the petitioner continued to make representations, he was again informed vide letter dated 2131995 that his claim cannot be accepted.
It was noticed as follows :-  "(i) As admitted by himself, Shri Sinha's resignation has been accepted by the Government and hence under Rule 26 of Pension Rules, he has forfeited his past service.
(ii) When a Central Government servant is transferred to State Government, the past service rendered by him is allowed to be counted by mutual consent by the latter for the purpose of pension and gratuity.
Shri Sinha already having retired from the State service, there is at present no scope for the Central Govt. even to consider his present request for payment of retirement benefits.
Under the circumstances, it is to be stated that no further correspondence will be entertained on the subject."
From the above it becomes apparent that the petitioner had himself admitted that his resignation had been accepted by the Government and he had forfeited his service under Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
Taking note of the aforesaid observations, the Tribunal has dismissed the OA It has been observed that it was for the petitioner to establish his claim by producing the necessary documents.
The petitioner had, however, heavily relied upon the letter dated 1691961 in which he had stated that his case had been recommended by respondent No. 2.
Neither the petitioner nor the respondents have placed the aforesaid letter on the record.
The respondents in the written statement filed in this Court have clearly stated that the record from the year 1961 is not available.
On the other hand, the petitioner has attached letter dated 1291961 in which he had made a reference to the letter dated 961961.
Surprisingly, the letter dated 961961 has not been attached, whereas the letter dated 1291961 has been attached with the writ petition.
The petitioner has also attached with the writ petition letter dated 25.9.1961 received from respondent No. 2 in which a reference has been made also to the letter dated 1691961.
We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that the conclusion reached at by the Tribunal that the petitioner has failed to place on record the requisite documents in support of his claim cannot be said to be based either on extraneous considerations or on no evidence.
The claim of the petitioner, therefore, has to be rejected under Rule 26(1) of the Pension Rules.
9.
The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Rakesh Kumar, 2001(2) SCT 1085 (SC) : AIR 2001 Supreme Court 1877 considered a similar situated and has posed the following question :-  "Whether members of BSF who have resigned from their posts after serving for ten or more years but less than 20 years are entitled to pension/pensionary benefits under the relevant provisions of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 and the Border Security Force Rules, 1969 or the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 ?"
The Supreme Court after considering the entire matter, has held as follows :-  "...
This would only mean that in a case where Government servant retires on superannuation i.e. the age of compulsory retirement as per service conditions or in accordance with the CCS (Pension) Rules after completing 10 years of qualifying service, he would get pension which is to be calculated and quantified as provided under Clause (2) of Rule 49.
This clause would cover cases of retirement under Rules 35 and 36, that is, voluntary retirement after 20 years of qualifying service, compulsory retirement after prescribed age and such other cases as provided under the Rules.
However, this has nothing to do with the quitting of service after tendering resignation.
It is also to be stated that Rule 26 of CCS (Pension) Rules specifically provides that resignation from a service or post entails forfeiture of past service unless resignation is submitted to take up, with proper permission, another appointment under the Government where service qualifies.
Hence, on the basis of Rule 49 member of BSF who has resigned from his post after completing more than 10 years of qualifying service but less than 20 years would not be eligible to get pensionary benefit.
There is no other provision in the CCS (Pension) Rules giving such benefit to such Government servants."
These observations are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
Even otherwise, Rule 26(1) categorically provides for forfeiture of service on resignation, unless it is allowed to be withdrawn in public interest by the appointing authority.
Undoubtedly, the resignation of the petitioner had been accepted and thereafter he had actually retired from Kurukshetra University.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioner has been rightly rejected.
The Tribunal has also observed that the claim of the petitioner was highly belated.
We are also of the opinion that the petitioner cannot be permitted to claim that since he is claiming pensionary benefits, the law with regard to delay and laches will have no relevancy.
We may notice that the State of Punjab has been impleaded as respondent No. 4.
No relief, whatsoever, has been claimed against the State of Punjab.
Since no relief has been claimed against the State of Punjab, it has rightly chosen not to file any reply either to the OA or to the writ petition.
We find no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.