Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - A group of employees numbering 325 have come with the application after obtaining Voluntary Retirement Scheme in terms of the Circular dated 10th March, 2003.
In fact, they have received substantially the benefit of the above Scheme.
In this writ petition they have asked for the following reliefs :  (a) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to forthwith lease the quarters of the petitioners as per the terms and conditions with the Priyadarshini Private Profitable School;  (b) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents not to recover the interim relief paid earlier being part of the salary, pending wage revision;  (c) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay the petitioner salary till the date they were actually released ;  (d) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to withdraw the application of VR In respect of the petitioners as per the 137 employees and Sri Goutam Kumar Bose; 108 executives and to transfer them to the other units of IISCO;  (e) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to maintain a 100 bed hospital at Kulti to provide treatment to the petitioners and their family as assured by issuing medical cards ;  (f) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay the petitioners closure allowance as is applicable to the employees of Government of India Undertaking on its closure ;  (g) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay the petitioners the amount equal to LTC/LLTC for the block years 1998-1999 to which they would have been entitled, had there not been the purported orders of voluntary retirement under threat of retrenchment;  (h) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to extend the petitioners all payments at par with the payment made to those beyond the age group of 54 years and above and/or the amount being paid to the employees beyond the age group of 54 years; (i) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to review and reconsider the valuation of the quarters as per the policy adopted in case of employees of Durgapur Steel Plant;  (j) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay the petitioners unpaid amount of gratuity, which has not been paid so far due to the retention of the quarters which are to be leased out to the petitioners; (k) A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to pay the petitioners the benefit of voluntary retirement as per the benefits which have been paid to the other employees of the other units of SAIL and which is again likely to be reintroduced by the SAIL, in which the employees have been paid the salary in every quarter till the date of superannuation;  (1) A writ of or in the nature of Certiorari commanding the respondents to produce or cause to be produced all relevant records, papers and documents in connection with the differential treatment to the petitioners and denial of the legitimate benefits, so that conscionable justice may be rendered by quashing the same; It is clear from the prayer as above and the facts stated in the petition that the petitioners and each of them have alleged firstly that they were not willing to accept the Voluntary Retirement Scheme but they were forced to accept it because of threat of losing their jobs.
Even the respondents concerned have meted out discrimination while implementing the Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
They say that as, in case of 108 executives, staff and other 137 employees, their applications for Voluntary Retirement Scheme were allowed to be withdrawn and after closure of Kulti Unit they were transferred to the Burnpur Unit of the respondent No. 1 meaning thereby that they have been retained in their services.
In case of the petitioners this procedure has not been followed and discriminating methodology for implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme was kept secret.
As such, the application already submitted by the petitioners and each of them would have been allowed to be withdrawn.
2.
Besides that, the respondents and each of them are not implementing each and every term and condition of the VR Scheme and some of them are still left outstanding and to be fulfilled by the respondents.
3.
Mr. Moloy Kumar Basu, Learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, contends that the option exercised by the petitioners and each of them and acceptance thereof by the respondents is bad in law as this was compelled to be done under threat.
It is settled position of law that any contract entered into under thereat or coercion is not enforceable and vitiates with illegality.
Moreover so, a section of the employees have been picked up to be favoured with retention in the employment with the mode of transfer to some other units whereas these petitioners have been eased with termination from their employment.
4.
His next contention is that even some of the pecuniary and other benefits were allowed to a section of the employee, before their acceptance of the option of Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
As such, this discriminatory treatment should not be allowed by this Court.
5.
Mr. LK Gupta, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the respondents, contends that the story of threat and coercion is unfounded.
All petitioners and each of them voluntarily applied for accepting the scheme in terms of the Circular dated 1st January, 2003.
This scheme has been evolved in view of the stipulation and direction of the BIFR, by the Central Government.
In order to bail out the IISCO from financial problem, there was no option but to close the Kulti Unit for right sizing of the work force in the IISCO as a whole.
It was optional for the employee to accept the Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
Had they not accepted they would have been retrenched and they would have got the retrenchment benefit.
The Court cannot compel any employer to keep any employee in service for all the years to come.
It is for the respondents to decide whether all the employees should be retained for running its industries.
It is true that few employees are transferred to Burnpur Unit allowing their application for withdrawal of Voluntary Retirement Scheme as they were essential staff and their services were needed at Burnpur Unit.
So they were transferred.
Moreover, he contends that the petitioners and each of them have been paid all the benefits and dues in terms of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme.
The petitioners and each of them have given undertaking in writing that they will not demand any other benefit in any manner whatsoever other than the benefit given in the scheme.
6.
According to him, as far as the release of gratuity amount is concerned, the same shall be released the moment the quarters occupied by them are vacated or they will come to the terms with the respondents for getting the respective quarters on the basis of lease.
As far as the medical facilities are concerned the same shall be made available in terms of the said clause.
He contends further that the petitioners cannot compel respondents to maintain 100 beds hospital since the unit has been closed and the respondents are not bound to nor can maintain such a large medical establishment.
A small unit is functioning for the existing staff and from this Unit the medical facilities can be given to the employees as far as possible or they can avail of Burnpur Unit for claiming medical benefit.
7.
So far the grievance for non-payment of LTC or LLTC for the blocked period is concerned, the same cannot be given by appropriate notification to the notice and knowledge of the petitioners and each of them that such benefit has been withdrawn.
8.
Therefore, he contends that this application is wholly abuse of the process of the Court.
His further contention is that a person retired under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme cannot get any benefit other than mentioned in the terms and this has been settled in a case decided by the Supreme Court reported in 2003 (11) SCC 572.
9.
I have heard respective contentions of the Learned Counsels and have gone through the materials placed before me.
The first question raised by the petitioners is as to whether the petitioners and each of them were compelled to submit their Voluntary Retirement Scheme under threat and coercion or not.
I do not find any substance in this submission as each and every employee was given opinion either to accept the Voluntary Retirement Scheme or they are to be retrenched in accordance with law.
An industrial unit can lawfully retrench the employees under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Constitution does not envisage any guarantee for employment to any citizen for all the time to come.
A citizen has got right to remain in employment so long his service is required and this right is also statutorily protected.
Similarly an employer has also right to close his business in accordance with law by any method and mode as provided therein.
As such, the question of threat and coercion does not and cannot arise.
The respondents have not adopted this policy.
It was the decision of the Government for implementing the scheme formulated by the BIFR.
The scheme provides various terms and conditions.
Undisputedly the petitioners and each of them have already received benefit in terms of the said scheme.
10.
Significantly, at the time of submitting the applications and subsequently thereafter there was no protest either in writing or otherwise that they were subjected to threat and coercion: for making the applications.
11.
As far as retention of some of the employees by way of transfer to Burnpur Unit, after allowing them to withdraw their application is concerned, this step of the respondents cannot be termed to be discriminatory.
It is the discrimination amongst the un equals, and reasonable classification amongst the un equals is also permissible.
The officers and also some sections of the employees cannot be placed at a same level with all sections and classes of the employees.
It is the choice of the respondents as to whom should be retained and whom should be asked to walk out.
Exercise of such choice in a case of this nature is not discriminatory act.
So, I do not find any substance in the submission of Mr. Basu.
12.
The payment of LTC amount for the block period cannot be granted in view of the withdrawal of such benefit by a notification dated 28th June, 2002.
This notification has not been challenged.
In my view all the demands and claims of the employees for the period prior to exercise of the option of Voluntary Retirement Scheme have been merged with the teens and conditions of the said Scheme.
Moreover, as rightly contended by Mr. Gupta, because of the undertaking given by each and every applicant no other claim can be allowable.
13.
Mr. Gupta admits that the gratuity amount due and payable to some of the applicants here was not paid because of holding of the quarters.
He contends further and assures this Court that at the present moment the quarters are vacated by them, the gratuity amount shall be paid.
As far as the settlement of the quarters by way of long term lease is concerned the same can be worked out.
However, the method of settlement cannot be at par and/or equated with the school.
The school has been given special concession for the welfare of the children of the locality.
It is a collective and public interest and as such concession has been granted.
This concession cannot be extended to each and every private individual.
14.
So far as the medical benefit is concerned I find that under the scheme there is a provision for medical benefit at the hospitals or Medical Unit run by the respondent No. 1 and granting medical insurances.
It is an admitted position that the respondent authority has been running the medical Unit at Kulti but in smaller scale.
I accept the argument of Mr. LK Gupta that the respondents cannot be compelled to run a hospital of 100 beds as suggested by the petitioners.
However, so long this medical Unit at Kulti is run in any manner the respondent authority must give medical facilities as far as possible in that Unit to the petitioners or the petitioners can get medical benefit from other medical Unit run at Burnpur or can ask for medical insurance.
15.
Since it has been agreed by the respondents that quarters retained by the petitioners will be settled on the basis of the long-term lease I direct the respondents to negotiate with each and every petitioners for settling the quarters on the basis of the long term-lease at reasonable terms having regard to the financial capacities of the petitioners.
This shall be done by the respondents within a period of two months of the communication of this order.
If on mutual discussion the retention of the quarters is settled then the payment of gratuity shall be decided accordingly.
If any of the petitioners does not want to agree with the terms of the long-term lease then they shall be paid their respective gratuity amount forthwith on their written undertaking that they shall vacate their respective quarters within two months from the date of receipt of such gratuity amount failing which it would be open for the respondents to evict them with the help of the police.
16.
Thus, there will be no further order, no relief save and except as above.
Order accordingly.