Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is questioning the order of the District Judge, Hooghly, dated December 19, 1997, relevant portion whereof is : "With reference to his letter No. 614 dated 151297 the undersigned informs him that Shri Madan Gopal Ganguly, Bench Clerk-I of Judicial Magistrate, Additional Court, Hooghly, is not entitled to get the benefit of his service which he has claimed in his petition dated 12.12.97 as per Government of West Bengal Finance Department's Memo No. 212-F (Law) dated 24.4.96 Shri Ganguly may please be intimated."
2.
Advocate submits that the finance department memo was not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
He says that the petitioner claimed benefit of scale-6 in view of orders made by the Courts from time to time granting that benefit to the similarly situated process servers.
3.
The process servers wanted benefit of scale-6 contending that scale given to the seal bailiffs had been wrongfully denied to them, though they had been discharging same duties and responsibilities.
The writ petition by the aggrieved process servers was filed in 1981.
Orders were made by this Court in 1990, and litigations attained finality with the disposal of special leave petition by the apex Court in May 1991.
4.
As a result, the authorities extended benefits of that scale-6 to the process servers discharging the same duties and responsibilities that the seal bailiffs working in the City Civil and Sessions Court, Calcutta were discharging.
The benefits were given in 1991.
In 1996 the finance department issued the memo mentioned by the district judge in his order.
5.
In my view, if the petitioner was not governed by the finance department memo, dated April 24, 1996, then there was no question of granting him the benefit.
As process server he worked during the period from June 8, 1981 to September 1, 1985.
He never approached the Court of law seeking benefit of scale-6.
His pay was duly fixed according to the scale prescribed for the process servers.
On September 2, 1985 he was appointed as lower division clerk.
Thus he left the cadre of process server with effect from September 2, 1985.
He submitted representation to the authority seeking benefit of scale-6 (necessarily calling for refixation of his pay in the cadre of process server) only in 1997.
At that time he was not borne in the cadre of process server.
These being the admitted facts, in my view, there was absolutely no scope to give the benefit of pay fixation to the petitioner by extending the benefit of scale-6 for his working as process server in the past.
Not being a party in the cases in which orders were made from time to time, he was not entitled to get benefit of orders made in those cases just as a matter of course.
He waited for the others to fight out the case.
In my view, in such a case benefit flowing from orders made in those cases was not to be extended to the petitioner.
6.
Advocate points out that there is no dispute about the petitioner's discharging the duties and responsibilities of seal bailiff, though he was working as process server.
He says that in many cases subsequently filed orders were made directing authorities to extend the benefit of scale-6 to the process servers.
On the basis of these submissions, he says that the petitioner should not be approved of the benefit.
7.
I am unable to agree with him.
The case of the petitioner has to be decided on its facts.
Here the peculiar features of his case are that he left the cadre of process server as far back as 1985, and that when he was working in the clerical cadre, and that too long twelve years after entering into such cadre, he approached the authority for refixation of his pay in the cadre in which he had worked at one point of time in the past.
In my view, he was not entitled to get the benefit.
At the date he agitated the issue, he was not working as process server.
8.
For these reasons I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.