BK Sharma, J - Heard Mr. SC Biswas, learned counsel for the petitioner and Ms. R Chokraborty, learned State counsel for the respondents.
2.
By this writ application, the petitioner has prayed for a direction to the respondents to regularize the service of the petitioner as Circle Organizer (CO) of Village Defence Organization (VDO) stated to be lying vacant in the Bilasipara Police Station.
3.
The facts narrated in the writ petition are that the petitioner had been an active volunteer of Pub Batuatali Village Defence Party for about 10 years.
In reorganization of his such service and experience, he was appointed as honorary CO, VDO on 6-5-03 and was posted to Dhubri Police Station vide order dated 9-6-03.
The order reads as follows:  "OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE: DHUBRI ORDER In pursuance of this office memo No. VD/ 2003/944-47 dated 6-5- 03, newly appointed Hony.
CO. VDO outsider Md Anwar Hussain Sk.
S/o.
Hasan Ali Munshi village Batuatali PO Balajan, PW Golakganj.
Dist.
Dhubri is hereby posted at Dhubri PS He should report before O/C.
Dhubri PS accordingly.
Superintendent of Police, Dhubri.
Memo No. VD/2003/1214-17 Dated Dhubri the 9-6-03."
4.
It is the case of the petitioner that while working as CO, VDO, he made a representation dated 10-11-04 before the Superintendent of Police.
Dhubri to appoint him as regular CO, VDO against a post going to be vacant shortly.
According to the petitioner, the post has now fallen vacant and his case for regularization of service against the said post should be considered.
The Superintendent of Police, Dhubri forwarded the representation of the petitioner to the Chief Controller, VDO, Assam by his letter dated 2-12-04 making a mention therein that the Minister of State, Govt. of Assam has also recommended the appointment of the petitioner against the post.
5.
In the meantime, by a WT message dated 7-2-05, it was intimated that an interview would be held on 28-2-05 in the Police Reserve, Dhubri for the post of CO, VDO The eligibility criteria were also laid down in the WT message.
It was further intimated that written and oral tests would be held and that preference would be given to the candidates having experience.
The respective In-Charges of the Police Stations were directed to give wide publicity about the contents of the WT message.
6.
In response to the said WT message, the petitioner offered his candidature and thereafter appeared in the selection.
It is the case of the petitioner that in view of the long standing experience he had the legitimate expectation that he would be selected and appointed.
However, in paragraph 11 of the writ petition, the petitioner has stated that his candidature was not considered in violation of the terms and conditions laid down in the said WT message and that persons with lesser qualification and experience have been considered.
In paragraph- 12 of the writ petition, the petitioner has made a further statement that the respondents have considered some candidates who have no work experience.
7.
Further statement made in paragraph 12 of the writ petition is that in spite of the fact that the petitioner has got long standing experience, his candidature has not been considered and the select list prepared by the Selection Board has been sent for approval of the Chief Controller, VDO, Assam.
Thus, according to the petitioner it leads to the violation of the Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In paragraph 13 of the writ petition the petitioner has made a statement that the respondents are trying to appoint a candidate having lesser qualification and experience as CO, VDO which according to the petitioner is on the basis of the political influence, without following the criteria laid down in the WT message.
9.
It is in the aforesaid backdrop the instant writ petition has been filed praying for a direction to the respondents to appoint/regularize his service as CO, VDO  10.
While entertaining the writ petition, this Court requested the learned State counsel to get instruction in the matter.
Ms. R Chokraborty, learned State counsel who has been furnished with the instruction in writing, has produced the same before this Court.
11.
As per the said instruction, against the claim of the petitioner that he was appointed as CO. VDO by Annexure-III order dated 9-6-03 and has been continuing as such, it is the stand of the respondents that the petitioner was discharged from his honorary service on 18-11-03 on the basis of the instruction furnished by the Chief Controller VDO, Assam.
The letter dated 18-11-03 intimating the petitioner about dispensation of his service has been furnished along with the instruction.
It appears that this aspect of the matter has been withheld by the petitioner from this Court.
12.
The petitioner was appointed as CO, VDO by an order dated 6-5-03 but he has chosen not to annex the copy of the same.
Instead, he has projected the order dated 9-6-03 quoted above, to be his appointment order by which he was posted at Dhubri Police Station pursuant to the order of appointment dated 6-5-03.
The order of appointment dated 6-5-03 which has been withheld by the petitioner, has now been furnished by the respondents and the same is quoted below:  "OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT OF  POLICE: DHUBRI  ORDER  In pursuance of communication of the Chief Controller, Village Defence Organization.
Assam, Guwahati conveyed vide his Memo No. VDO/Hony./2003/2048 dated 28-4-03 outsider Md Anwar Hussain Sheikh, S/o.
Hasan Ali Munshi village Batuatali PO Bajan, PS Golakganj, Dist.
Dhubri is hereby appointed as Hony.
CO, VDO on condition that he will not claim any permanent appointment in this strength and he will serve purely voluntarily without any pay or remuneration.
The service of the incumbent is purely temporary and may be terminated at any time without assigning any reasons and without prior any notice.
Superintendent of Police.
Barpeta.
Memo No. VD/2003/944-47 dated  Dhubri the 6-5-03".
13.
On perusal of the aforesaid order of appointment dated 6- 5-03, it is seen that petitioner was appointed as honorary CO, VDO on the condition that he would not claim any permanent appointment on the strength of the appointment and that he would serve purely voluntarily without any pay or remuneration.
It was also provided that his service is liable to be terminated at any time1.
14.
Apart from withholding the order of appointment dated 6-5- 03, the petitioner has also withheld the information that his such honorary service stood dispensed with w.e.f.
18-11-03.
Thus, for suppression and/or withholding material facts from this Court, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
However, I have considered the case on merit.
15.
The petitioner has staked his claim for regularization of his service as CO, VDO on the basis of his experience which according to him is by far better than any other candidate.
He has made a vague statement in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of the writ petition that ignoring his long standing experience, the respondents are trying to appoint some other candidates on extraneous consideration.
No material particulars have been disclosed as to what are the extraneous considerations and upon whom such extraneous considerations have been showered.
The petitioner has also stated about political influence being mounted in the matter without disclosing any material part iculars.
Although the petitioner has made a statement that the respondents are trying to appoint one candidate with lesser qualification and experience, but nothing has been stated as to how the qualification and experience of the candidate are inferior to that of the petitioner.
The said candidate has also not been made a party to this proceeding.
On this score also the writ petition is not maintainable.
16.
As against the claim of the petitioner that the candidate (who has not been made a party to this proceeding) who has been recommended for appointment on the basis of political influence, it is the petitioner himself who has been recommended by political personnel for such appointment.
17.
Although the petitioner has made a statement in the Writ petition that pursuant to the advertisement dated 7-2-05 he had offered his candidature for the post of CO, VDO, he has not annexed the copy of his application.
However, the records produced by the learned State counsel contain the representation dated 10-11-04 made by the petitioner to the Minister of State, Agriculture, Minority and Char Area, Assam for his appointment as CO, VDO  18.
In the said representation to the Minister, the petitioner made a request for his appointment as CO, VDO and on the body of the representation, the Minister made the following endorsement.
"S.P.
Dhubri, Pl.
Arrange to appointment against the retired vacancy Sd/- (illegible) 12-11-04 Minister of State (Ind.)
Agriculture and WMD, Assam Dispur, Guwahati -6" 19.
It is on the above basis the petitioner made his claim in the writ petition casting aspersion on the respondents and the candidate whose identity has not been disclosed in the writ petition and who has not been made a party to this proceeding.
The approach to the Minister by the petitioner in the matter of public employment is also reflected in the Annexure-V letter dated 2-12-04 addressed to the Chief Controller, VDO, Assam by the Superintendent of police in which it was mentioned that the Minister of State has also recommended appointment of the petitioner against the vacancy.
20.
From the above, it will be seen that it is the petitioner who approached the political bosses for procuring appointment and when he could not succeed in his selection, has approached this Court with material suppression of fact and also making wild, vague and indefinite statements and allegations in the writ petition as noticed above, and also without making the candidate who according to the petitioner has been selected, a party to the proceeding.
21.
Thus on all counts, i.e. suppression and withholding of material facts, misrepresentation and non-disclosure of material particulars and failure to establish the own case of the petitioner, the writ petition fails.
On scrutiny of the writ petition and the records produced by the respondents, it leads to irresistible conclusion that the petitioner found fault with the selection process when his endeavour to get employment through political influence did not materialize.
According to the petitioner he alone backed by political recommendation, is entitled to be considered and others who could come through the selection process are not entitled to be appointed.
22.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Although it is fit case for imposition of cost against the petitioner.
I refrain from doing so in view of the fact that the petitioner is an unemployed.
Petition dismissed.