Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - Twenty persons have joined together in this single writ petition alleging that the respondents are not empowered to recruit primary school teachers considering only those candidates who are sponsored by the employment exchanges.
Nothing has been stated in the writ petition who initiated the recruitment process and when.
The case of the petitioners is that having acquired the requisite qualifications all of them became eligible to be considered for appointment as primary school teacher, and hence the employment exchanges are under the obligation to sponsor their names to the prospective employers.
2.
I have no hesitation in saying that this is an absolutely vague and speculative writ petition.
It lacks in material particulars with respect to the recruitment process initiated by any district primary school council which is the statutory authority to initate the process for recruiting, selecting and appointing primary school teachers within its jurisdiction.
Almost in every district of the state there is such council.
Functioning of the council is governed by the provisions of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973; for bringing into effect the purposes whereof several rules including the West Bengal Primary School Teachers' Recruitment Rules, 2001 were framed by the competent authorities.
Every thing connected with recruitment, selection and appointment of primary school teachers is governed by those rules.
3.
In this case the District Primary School Council, North 24-Praganas was not a respondent.
In terms of order dated March 31, 2006 made in the case that council was added as the sixth respondent.
It is represented through its counsel.
Although no specific case has been made out in the writ petition about any illegality committed by the employment officers of the exchanges or the council, on the strength of the five judge bench decision of this court in Rabindra Nath Mahato v. State of West Bengal & Ors,.
2005(2) CLJ (Cal.)
161, counsel for the petitioners has argued two points; (i) the employment officers of the employment exchanges are under the obligation to sponsor names of all eligible candidates, once a requisition from a council for sponsoring names of candidates eligible for the post of primary school teachers is received; (ii) in addition to requisitioning names from the employment exchanges, every district primary school council is under the obligation to give wide publicity to the requisite employment notice inviting applications for the notified vacancies from all eligible candidates.
4.
Although it seems to me that the questions have been raised in the abstract (because no particular selection process has been targeted by the petitioners), I think I should give decisions on them, since counsel for the parties have advanced their arguments at length.
According to counsel for the petitioners for violation of the above-noted two things by the employment officers and the council, the petitioners apprehend infringement of their fundamental right guaranteed under art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
His contention is that in view of what was stated in paras 40 and 41 of the five judge bench decision of this court, the employment officers and the council are under the obligation to follow the procedure mentioned in his above-noted two points.
5.
Counsel for the district primary school council submits that the five judge bench decision of this court has no manner of application to a recruitment process initiated by a council established under provisions of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973.
He says that everything connected with recruitment, selection and appointment of primary school teachers is governed by the statutory provisions made in the West Bengal Primary School Teachers' Recruitment Rules, 2001.
By referring me to the provisions in r. 8 and 9 of those rules, he has argued that the council is under the statutory obligation to consider only those candidates who are sponsored by the employment exchanges.
According to him, there is no scope to publish any employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates, because the statutory rule specifically mandates that the council shall obtain the names of the eligible candidates only from the employment exchanges.
In reply counsel for the petitioners relies on an order dated March 27, 2006 made by Soumitra Pal, J in W.P. No. 4162 (W) of 2006.
6.
I fully agree with counsel for the council that the five judge bench decision of this court has no manner of application to a selection process initiated by a council established under the provisions of the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973.
Everything connected with the selection process to be initiated by such a council is to be strictly governed by the provisions of the West Bengal Primary School Teachers' Recruitment Rules, 2001.
The five judge bench decision was given in the context of the guidelines issued by the director of school education in exercise of powers conferred on him by provisions of the Management of Recognized Non-government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) Rules, 1969.
There it was held that since those guidelines were not statutory in nature, the appointing authorities were not under any statutory obligation to appoint secondary school teachers only from candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges.
7.
For appointing primary school teachers the selection process is to be initiated under the statutory rules, and such rules clearly mandate that with respect to the notified vacancies a council shall obtain names of the eligible candidates only from the employment exchanges.
In the face of such unambiguous statutory rules, I find no reason at all to say that the council is under any statutory obligation to publish an employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates.
The number of candidates to be sponsored by the employment exchanges has also been mentioned in the rules.
Therefore, there is no scope either to say that the lawmakers, by implication, intended that the council should publish an employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates other than the candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges.
8.
It is to be noted that the question whether candidates sponsored by the exchanges are only to be considered in a selection process initiated by district primary school council was decided by a division bench of this court in Malda District Primary School Council & Anr. v. Md Faridur Rahaman & Ors. 2001 (1) CHN 204, and it was held in that case that a council established under the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 was under the obligation to consider candidates sponsored only by the employment exchanges.
This legal position was also noticed by their Lordships of the five-judge bench, as will appear from para 44 of the report publishing the decision.
Their Lordships observed that things connected with the selection process required to be initiated by a council established under the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 were to be governed by the statutory rules making provision confining the source of the candidates eligible for the post of primary school teacher only to the employment exchanges.
9.
I do not find any merit either in the submission that the employment officers of the exchanges are under the obligation to sponsor names of all the eligible candidates once requisition is received from a council.
That is not what has been held in the five-Judge bench decision, in the paragraphs I have been referred to.
Their Lordships rather held that the employment officers would be under the obligation to sponsor names strictly according to the requisition of the employers.
I therefore do not find any substance in this writ petition.
Before I make my order, I only say that the order made by Soumitra Pal, J (as relied on by counsel) has absolutely no relevance to the points argued in the present case.
There his Lordship was pleased to direct the employment officer to give a reasoned decision after considering the case of the petitioner in that case.
Nothing was decided in that case.
10.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed without any order for costs.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy and also copy duly authenticated by AR (C) or ACO shall be given to the parties, on the usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.