Arvind Kumar, J - The prayer in this petition is for quashing of award dated 21.4.2005 passed by respondent No. 2 vide which the petitioner-department has been directed to reinstate respondent No. 1-workman with continuity of service and other consequential benefits along with 50% back wages from the date of demand notice i.e. 27.1.2001 till the publication of award and full wages thereafter till the re-instatement of the workman.
2.
The facts which are not in dispute are that, the services of workman Sat Narain were engaged by the petitioner-department on 111995 as a Cook, as per D.C. Rates.
He worked as such till 512001 when his services were terminated.
His termination gave rise to an industrial dispute.
The grouse of the petitioner was that his services have been terminated without issuing any charge-sheet or paying any retrenchment compensation and that the persons junior to him namely Radhey Shyam, Dalip Singh and Ram Avtar etc. have been retained in service by the department.
Whereas, on the other hand, the stand of the petitioner-department was that the services of workman, which have since been replaced by regular employees, are no longer required.
Additionally, it was pleaded that the department does not fall within the definition of "industry" as prescribed under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act).
The lis was adjudicated upon by the Labour Court and vide the impugned award dated 21.4.2005 it answered the reference in favour of the workman in the manner noticed above.
Hence, the instant writ petition.
3.
Upon notice of the petition, respondent No. 1-workman filed the written statement controverting the stand taken by the petitioner-department in the instant writ petition.
Dismissal of the writ petition has been sought.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the paper-book carefully.
5.
The contention of learned Deputy Advocate General is two folds.
Firstly, the respondent No. 1-workman was replaced by a regular Cook Radhey Shyam, whose services were regularized in compliance of directions of this Court.
Accordingly, compliance as provided under Section 25-F of the Act was not required to be made and secondly, the petitioner-department does not fall within the definition of "industry".
6.
The contentions are meritless.
Retrenchment has been defined in Section 2(oo) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called as the Act), which reads as under :-  "2(oo) "retrenchment" means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include - (a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or  (b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or [(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non- renewal of the contract or employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or] (c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- health;]" A bare perusal of the said definition shows that the termination of a workman "for any reason whatsoever" would constitute retrenchment except in cases excepted in the above-said section itself.
The burden lies on the employer and not upon the employee-workman to prove that the case falls within one of the excepted clauses and thus, is not retrenchment.
In the instant case, there is absolutely no evidence led by the respondent-department to prove if the case of the petitioner-workmen falls in any of the excepted categories.
It is the case of the petitioner-department itself that the services of the petitioner-workmen were dispensed with on account of regularization of services of one Radhey Shyam, Cook.
The action of the mangement does not fall in any of the exceptions mentioned above.
Therefore, this case falls within the terms termination of the services "for any reason whatsoever".
It would, thus, be retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act, referred to above.
7.
It is an admitted fact that prior to terminating the services of petitioner on 512001 he had served the petitioner-department for more than 240 days in 12 preceding months.
Therefore, provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were to be complied with.
Admittedly, there was non-compliance of mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
Thus, we have no hesitation to say that the termination of workmen due to non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Act is illegal.
8.
The plea that petitioner-department is not an industry, as defined in the Act, has adequately been dealt by the Labour Court on the strength of a decision rendered in case re : Manphool Singh Beniwal v. Rajasthan State Sports Council, 1995(2) SCT 208 (Raj.).
Therefore, the findings of Labour Court returned in this regard does not require any interference.
In view of the discussion above, this petition fails and the same is accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.