Ashutosh Mohunta, J - Cross-Objection No. 16 of 2002  Mr. Amit Paul, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent prays that he be allowed to withdraw the cross-objections filed by him.
The prayer is allowed.
The cross-objections are dismissed as withdrawn.
R.S.A.
No. 2651 of 2002  Whether or not an employee posted temporarily on a superior post is entitled to the pay scale of the said post ?
is short and the only question that arises for consideration in the present appeal.
2.
Undisputed facts giving rise to the present appeal are that Shree Bhagwan was appointed as Octroi Moharrir with the Municipal Committee, Samalakha in the year 1983.
The superior post of Octroi Inspector fell vacant in the year 1989.
Plaintiff Shree Bhagwan was posted to work as Octroi Inspector by the Municipal Committee, Samalkha temporarily, vide resolution No. 324 dated 2691989.
On the request made by Shree Bhagwan plaintiff, the Municipal Committee headed by its Administrator sent his case for promotion as Octroi Inspector to the Deputy Commissioner vide resolution No. 17 dated 1691991 (Mark `B').
The Deputy Commissioner sent the case of Shree Bhagwan back to the Municipal Committee, Samalkha vide letter (Ex. D3) with the remarks that first the case regarding regularization of ad hoc employees of the Committee be submitted and after that combined seniority list of the employees of the Municipal Committee, Panipat, as well as the Municipal Committee, Samalkha, be prepared.
Only then the case be submitted for promotion in order of seniority.
Until the combined seniority list is prepared, the employees working on the posts would continue to work there.
Consequently, the plaintiff continued to work on the post of Octroi Inspector.
In the combined seniority list his name fell at Serial No. 67.
He filed the present suit for permanent injunction against the defendant Municipal Committee, Samalkha, directing it not to revert him to the post of Octroi Muharrir, and also for directing the defendants to pay him the salary meant for the post of Octroi Inspector and accordingly arrears of salary be paid to him with effect from the date he continued to work as Octroi Inspector.
The Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Panipat, vide judgment and decree dated 23.9.1997 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff holding that he was neither entitled for the grant of mandatory injunction against reversion from the post of Octroi Inspector nor he was entitled for the grant of the salary corresponding to the promoted post and the consequential arrears of pay as he was appointed as such only as a stop-gap arrangement.
However, on appeal, the Additional District Judge, Panipat, vide judgment and decree dated 2232002 partly allowed the suit of the plaintiff by holding that he was entitled to the grant same salary and allowances as were admissible to regular employees holding similar posts.
In the present appeal the Municipal Committee, Samalkha, has challenged the judgment and decree dated 2232002 passed by the lower appellate Court.
3.
The primary contention raised by Mr. Jagdish Manchanda, learned counsel for the defendant-appellants, is that the plaintiff-respondent was only appointed to work on the post of Octroi Inspector by the Municipal Committee as a sop- gap arrangement and no appointment letter was ever issued to him.
Another contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants is that the Municipal Committee, Samalkha, was not the competent authority to promoter him as Octroi Inspector.
Rather the competent authority is the Deputy Commissioner.
Thus, it has been contended that the Additional District Judge, Panipat, has erred in directing the Municipal Committee to grant him the salary meant for the post of Octroi inspector.
4.
The contentions raised by Mr. Jagdish Manchanda, counsel for the appellants, have vehemently been controverted by Mr. Amrit Paul, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff-respondent.
He has placed reliance on a Division Bench as well as a Single Bench authorities of this Court, which are respectively reported as Pushpa Sharma v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) S.C.T.
464 : 1997(3) Recent Services Judgments 656, and Ravi Kant Gupta v. State of Punjab and another, 1955(5) Services Law Reporter 367.
4.
The facts in brief as narrated above are not disputed by the parties.
The only question that remains to be answered is whether plaintiff Shree Bhagwan is entitled to the same salary and allowances as are admissible to the regular Octroi Inspectors for the period he worked as such.
In Ravi Kant Gupta's case (supra), the petitioner, who was employed as a Clerk, was required to perform the duties of accountant in addition to his own duties.
It was held by this Court that he was entitled to same salary and allowances as are admissible to the regular employees holding similar posts.
Similarly, in Pushpa Sharma's case (supra), the petitioner was given ad hoc promotion as Lecturer-cum- Manufacturing Chemist for six months.
The Ad hoc promotion extended upto 17121992.
Thereafter, neither she was regularised nor ad hoc promotion was extended.
But she continued to work on the promoted post till 1741996.
She claimed regularisation and pay scale of the promoted post for the period from 17121992 to 1741996.
It was held by a Division Bench of this Court that the petitioner was not entitled to the promoted post as it did not exist in the Rules.
However, since the petitioner worked on the post during 17121992 to 1741996, it was held that she was entitled to the pay of higher post and interest on the amount due at the rate of 12% per annum till the date of payment.
The ratio of the said authorities is squarely applicable to the facts appearing in the present case.
Undisputedly, the plaintiff-respondent herein was asked to work on the post of Octroi Inspector by the Municipal Committee, Samalkha, vide resolution No. 324 dated 2691989 and he continued to work as such 26.9.2989 till date.
As plaintiff has worked on the superior post, he is also entitled to the grant of salary meant for the post.
In view of the ratio of the aforesaid authorities of this Court, I do not find any infirmity in the well-reasoned judgment and decree dated 2232002 passed by the Additional District Judge, Panipat.
Consequently, there is no merit in this appeal.
It is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Appeal dismissed.