Jyotirmay Bhattachary, J - Inspite of service, none appears on behalf of the School authorities.
Let the affidavit of service filed today be kept with the records.
2.
The petitioner claims that the petitioner possesses the requisite qualification for the post of Group-C (Lower Division Clerk) in Bandhuchak Gayaprosad Siksha Niketan, District Paschim Medinipur.
The petitioner further claims that the petitioner can satisfy the other eligibility criteria for the said post.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is against the school authorities as the said school authorities have refused to allow the petitioner to participate in the selection process for the said post which is going to be filled up by the school authorities on the ground that the name of the petitioner had not been sponsored by the concerned Employment Exchange for the said post.
4.
The specific grievance of the petitioner in this writ petition is that the name of the candidates junior to the petitioner with reference to the date of registration of their names with the Employment Exchange have been sponsored.
5.
Accordingly, the instant writ petition has been moved seeking direction upon the school authorities to permit the petitioner to participate in the selection process for the said post.
6.
Learned Advocate appearing for the State Respondents, however, by relying upon the decision of the Special Bench of this Court reported in the case of Debasish Dutta v. State of West Bengal & ors. reported in 1998(2) CLJ page 1, submits that the prayer of the petitioner to allow him to participate in the selection process cannot be allowed as the name of the petitioner was not sponsored by the concerned Employment Exchange.
According to the learned Advocate for the State Respondents, no candidate can be allowed to participate in the selection process by dehoring the extant Rules.
Accordingly, learned Advocate for the State Respondents opposes the prayer of the petitioner, as prayed for, in this writ petition.
7.
After hearing the learned Advocate for the parties and after considering the materials on record and in view of the unreported decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed on 1222002 in the case of Abu Taher v. Abdul Wahab & ors. in Civil Appeal No. 1203/2001, in my view, the decision which was passed by the Special Bench of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Debasish Dutta (supra) has virtually been over-ruled.
8.
In such view of the matter, by following the principles as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Abu Taher (supra), I hold that the petitioner is entitled to participate in the selection process provided, however, the petitioner can satisfy the eligibility criteria for the said post.
9.
Accordingly, I dispose of this writ petition by directing the school authorities to allow the petitioner to participate in the selection process on the date when such interview will be taken up by the Selection Committee for the said purpose provided, however, the petitioner can satisfy that he possesses the requisite qualification for the said post.
10.
In the event, it is found that the petitioner is eligible for the said post, the candidature of the petitioner will be taken into consideration along with other participants by the school authorities and the school authorities will prepare the panel and will take further steps for giving appointment to the selected candidate in accordance with law.
11.
This writ petition accordingly stands disposed of.
There will, however be no order as to costs.
12.
Let a plain copy/Xerox plain copy of this order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the learned Advocate for the petitioner on usual undertaking.
Order accordingly.