HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The writ petitioners are the appellants before this Court.
2.
The facts of the case are that the Government of India, Ministry of Welfare (respondent No. 1) pursuant to a survey introduced a programme for setting up rehabilitation centres at the district level in each State.
The State Government was entrusted with the task of implementing the abovesaid scheme with the financial assistance being provided by the Central Government.
The staffing pattern i.e. the nomenclature, designation of posts, pay scales etc. were also provided by the Central Government, whereas the actual appointment and placement of the selected employees was left to the discretion of the State Government.
With a view to implement the scheme, the State Government issued an advertisement dated 1851989 indicating various factors, including the pay scales etc. for various categories of posts.
The appellants applied for the posts which were in the pay scale of Rs. 1600-2660/-.
They were duly selected and appointments were given to them in the aforesaid grade.
They thereafter filed a representation before the State Government claiming that several persons occupying similar post in the State Health Department were getting the senior scale i.e. Rs. 2000-3500/- and this anomaly ought to be removed.
Having failed before the State Government, the appellants filed the present writ petition.
In the reply filed by the State Government the plea taken was that the pay scales that were being given to the appellants were as per the direction of the Central Government.
It was also pleaded that the writ petitioners had sought parity with employees of PGIMS, Rohtak which was not a part and parcel of the State Government.
3.
The Learned Single Judge in his judgment dated 2942002 held that the appellants were claiming parity with the employees working in the Medical College, Rohtak and as the said Institution was not a part and parcel of the State Government, the question of parity did not arise, the more so as the posts in the Medical College were gazetted ones, whereas, the posts of the appellants were non-gazetted and finally, as they had accepted the pay scales at the time of their appointment, they could not subsequently claim a higher pay.
The writ petition was accordingly dismissed.
4.
Shri RK Malik, the learned counsel for the appellants has pointed out that finding of the learned Single Judge that the Medical College was not a part and parcel of State Government was erroneous and in this regard he has referred to Annexure P-49 dated 2272003, a note issued by the Director of the College.
He has also placed reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in Surinder Singh and another v. The Engineer in Chief, CPWD and others, AIR 1986 SC 584, wherein it has been held that an employee could claim a higher pay scale even after having accepted a lower one.
It was urged that the status of an employee with respect to the categorization as a gazetted or non-gazetted would be determined by the Government according to the pay scales of a post and this reason given by the learned Single Judge too was not conclusive in nature.
5.
Dealing with the first question, we deem it proper to refer to Annexure P- 49.
A bare perusal of Annexure P-49 a certificate issued on behalf of the Director of Medical College, Rohtak shows that the said college was being run by the State Govt. of Haryana.
In this view of the matter, we are in no doubt that the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge to the contrary cannot be sustained.
6.
While dealing with the second question, reference must be made to the judgment rendered in Surinder Singh's case (supra) in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that even if an employee had accepted employment with the full knowledge that he would be paid a certain specified wage and not the salary due to other employees who were identically situated, the acceptance of the job could not provide an escape route to the Government to avoid the mandate of equality enshrined in Article 14 of Constitution.
The Court further observed that the Government i.e. the State and the Central Government and all public sector undertakings were expected to function like model and enlightened employers and hypertechnical arguments should not be raised.
We find that the aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court clearly apply to the present case.
The appellants are occupying Class III posts.
In this view of the matter, the higher pay scale by given to other employees merely because they fall under the category of gazetted employees, is not relevant to the ultimate claim of the appellants.
This appeal is accordingly allowed, the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside, the respondents are directed to grant the pay scales of Rs. 2000-3500 from the date of initial appointment with subsequent revisions as provided from time to time.
The arrears shall be paid to them within a period of six months from today but shall be restricted to a period of 38 months prior to the filling of the writ petition.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.