The petitioner was a candidate for selection against nine posts of HCS (Executive Branch) and Other Allied Services, which had been advertised in the year 2004.
The last date for submission of the application form was 972004.
The essential qualifications provided the upper age as 40 years with relaxation upto 45 years in case of candidates belonging to the reserved categories of SC/ST/BC and Haryana Government Employees with four years of service.
(The employees of Boards/Corporations/Universities/Banks etc. are not eligible for this concession in the upper age limit).
At the relevant time, even though the petitioner was 42 years of age, he submitted his application for preliminary examination.
Being a government servant he would have been entitled to relaxation, upto the age of 45 years.
On the basis of the application submitted by the petitioner, he was permitted to provisionally appear in the preliminary examination.
He was also allowed to sit in the main examination with the following conditions :-  "You are being allowed to sit in the Main Examination provisionally.
However, you have to produce the proof of 4 years regular Govt. Service before the declaration of the result."
2.
Subsequently, the petitioner failed to produce the required proof.
The candidature of the petitioner has been rejected by the HPSC on the ground that he is over age and, therefore, ineligible.
Mr. JS Manipur, learned counsel for the petitioner argues that once the petitioner had been permitted to appear in the preliminary examination, final examination and the viva voce, the respondents could not possibly now reject the candidature of the petitioner on the ground that he is over age.
In support of the submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sanatam Gauda v. Berhampur University and others, 1990(2) RSJ 55, in which it has been observed as follows :-  "11.
This is apart from the fact that I find that in the present case the appellant while securing his admission in the Law College had admittedly submitted his marks-sheet along with the application for admission.
The Law College had admitted him.
He had pursued his studies for two years.
The University had also granted him the admission card for the Pre-Law and Intermediate Law Examinations.
He was also admitted to the Final year of the course.
It is only at the stage of the declaration of his results of the Pre- Law and Inter-Law Examinations that the University raised the objection to his so-called ineligibility to be admitted to the law course.
The University, is, therefore, clearly estopped from refusing to declare the results of the appellant's examination or from preventing him from pursuing his final year course.
12.
For all these reasons, I am of the view that the University is not justified in refusing to declare the appellant's results of the pre-Law and Intermediate Law examinations.
The appeal, therefore, succeeds.
The respondent-University is directed to declare the said results as well as the result of the Final examination if the appellant has appeared for the same.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Lalit Mohan Sharma, J. : I agree that the appeal should be allowed as indicated by my learned Brother."
3.
Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel, we are of the opinion that the observations of the Supreme Court quoted above, would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In that case, a student had been permitted to study in the Law College.
He had submitted the mark-sheet along with the application for admission.
He had studied for two years and he was studying in the final year when the University refused to declare his result for the Pre-Law and Intermediate Law Examinations.
The Supreme Court came to the rescue of, and protected the career of a young law student and directed the respondents to declare his result.
4.
In the present case, appearance of the petitioner in all the examinations including the viva voce was provisional subject to his producing the necessary proof that he had rendered four years regular government service.
The aforesaid proof was not produced by the petitioner.
In such circumstances, it would be an exercise in futility to direct the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner.
Even if the petitioner is held to be successful, he would not be entitled to be appointed as he would be over-age and, therefore, ineligible.
In such circumstances, the respondents would be fully justified in declining to appoint the petitioner.
It is settled proposition of law that in public employment appointments can only be made in strict compliance of the statutory rules and the qualifications prescribed.
Any deviation from the statutory rules would render the action of the authorities arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
We are fortified in this view of ours by the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of The District Collector & Chairman, Vizianagaram (Social Welfare Residential School Society), Vizianagaram and another v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi, 1990(4) SLR 237, wherein it has been observed as follows :-  "It must further be realised by all concerned that when an advertisement mentions a particular qualification and an appointment is made in disregard of the same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post because they did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.
It amounts to a fraud on public to appoint person with inferior qualifications in such circumstances unless it is clearly stated that the qualifications are relaxable.
No court should be a party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.
We are afraid that the tribunal lost sight of this fact."
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.