Surya Kant, J - The petitioner who had joined the Municipal Council, Noor Mehal, District Jalandhar as an Octroi Moharar on 221962 and retired from the post of Accountant on 3111998, has approached this Court with a prayer to quash the Pension Payment Order (PPO), Annexure P-2, to the extent that it has taken into consideration only 18 years and five months as the qualifying service instead of 36 years for the purposes of grant of post-retiral benefits, and has sought a direction to the respondents to grant him all the post-retiral benefits on the basis of the total length of service including the service rendered by him on a non-provincialised post with effect from 221962 to 2081978.
2.
Shorn of the details, it may be mentioned that the Govt. of Punjab notified the Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the `Pension Rules'), which came into force with effect from 1.4.1990 and were made applicable equally to those whole time regular employees also who were working immediately before the 1st day of April 1990 and who were willing to opt for these Rules.
The petitioner opted to be governed by these Pension Rules.
On his retirement with effect from 3111998, the pensioner applied for the grant of retiral benefits like leave encashment, gratuity and pension, etc. but nothing was released thereby compelling him to approach this Court by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 9795 of 1998.
During the pendency of the said writ petition, the retiral benefits were partly released and certain amount pertaining to the pension was deposited in his pension account as a result of which the writ petition was disposed of.
On a review application moved by the petitioner, a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 2742001 directed the respondents that in case the petitioner is not paid his pension, needful shall be done within two months.
It is thereafter that the PPO (Annexure P-2) was issued.
The petitioner, however, was shocked to find out that the total length of service which was taken into account was nineteen years, five months and eight days out of which one year and eight days was also treated as non-qualifying service thereby leaving qualifying service of eighteen years and five months only though he had actually served from 221962 to 3111998 i.e. for 36 years.
3.
Aggrieved at the action of the respondents in not treating the entire service of the petitioner as qualifying service for the purpose of post- retiral benefits, he served the respondents with a legal notice dated 2782001, Annexure P-4, a reply to which dated 18102001, Annexure P-5, was received informing the petitioner that from 221962 to 2281978 he worked against a non-provincialised post and that the said service could not be counted towards the "qualifying service" for releasing the retiral benefits.
The petitioner has, accordingly, approached this Court again.
4.
Notice of motion was issued and in response thereto separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 & 2, 3 and 4 taking a somewhat similar stand that the scope and status of funding of the Pension Rules is different from the Punjab Civil Service Rules as in the case of the latter, the pension is paid out of State Exchequer whereas in the case of Municipal Pension Rules, a Municipal Fund has been created exclusively with the employer's share of contributions towards the contributory provident fund and as per sub-rule (4) of Rule 8 of these Rules, the sanctioning authority is required to ensure that the contributions of the employer for the period reckoned for pension has been duly credited to the Fund.
Therefore, the period during which the employee was not a "member of contributory provident fund and has not contributed to it", cannot be counted as qualifying service for pension; that for the period the petitioner served on a non-provincialised post from 221962 to 2281978, he has already withdrawn the amount of contributory provident fund including the employer's share, therefore, the said period has been rightly excluded from the qualifying service for pension.
Respondent No. 4 in its written statement has further laid emphasis that in terms of Rule 8(4) of the Pension Rules, the period to be reckoned for pensionary benefits has to be restricted to the period for which an employee had been contributing to his contributory provident fund and not otherwise; that the petitioner was allowed the benefit of contributory provident fund with effect from 181967 and it was only after his promotion as an Assistant that he was brought on the provincialised cadre but he came to be posted against a post in the provincialised cadre vide order dated 2181978, therefore, the service rendered by him from 221962 to 2281978 in the non- provincialised cadre has been excluded from the qualifying service.
5.
We have heard Shri S.S. Chandi, learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri SS Behl, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab and Shri Heman Aggarwal, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 and have perused the record.
6.
With a view to appreciate the controversy in its right perspective, a brief reference to the relevant provisions of the Pension Rules may be made.
Rule 1(2) provides that these Rules shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the first day of April, 1990.
Sub-rule (3)(ii) of Rule 1 provides that these Rules shall apply to those employees of the Committee also who were working immediately before the first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis and opt for these Rules.
Rule 2(h) defines the expression "municipal fund" which means the fund constituted under Section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
Rule 2(j) defines the expression "qualifying service, Rule 4 provides the Corpus, namely, the establishment of the fund out of which payment of pension is to be made whereas Rule 5 provides the transfer of amount from contributory provident fund to the Pension Fund.
Rule 8 prescribes general provisions relating to the grant of pension.
For the purposes of resolving the controversy in this case, Rules 2(h), 2(j), 5 and 8 being relevant are reproduced below :-  "2(h).
"Municipal Fund" means the fund constituted under Section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
2(j).
`Qualifying Service' means the service, rendered under a Corporation for which an employee is paid from the Corporation fund and shall include any service rendered under the Government of Punjab, any Improvement Trust, a Committee or any other Public Sector Undertaking immediately before joining the Service : 5.
Transfer of amount to the Fund - (1) The share of money contributed by the Corporation along with interest accrued thereon standing in the Contributory Provident Fund account to the credit of an employee of a Corporation, who opts for these rules or who is governed by these rules, shall stand transferred to the Fund to the extent it was contributed by the Corporation during the period of service of the employee along with any loss caused to the contribution either by the Corporation or by the employee through withdrawal during the tenure of service of the employee or due to any other reason which shall be made good by the Corporation or the employee, as the case may be, by paying the amount along with interest due for that period to the Fund.
(2) The Corporation shall make monthly contribution towards the Fund at the rate of ten per cent of the basic pay of the employee.
The rate of monthly contribution shall be subject to any change which may be made by the Government from time to time.
(3) The amount of the Fund shall be kept in any branch of the State Bank of India or the State Bank of Patiala or the Punjab State Co-operative Bank and where there is no branch of either of these banks, it may be kept with any other Scheduled Bank.
8.
General provisions relating to grant of Pension:-  (1) For the purpose of grant of pension to the employee, the rules relating to pension as contained in the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the committees also and for that purpose the terms and expressions not otherwise defined in these rules, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I.
(2) After completion of the pension papers of the retiring employees the form and manner, specified in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time, Executive Officer of the concerned committee shall send the same to the Examiner, for verification of qualifying service and emoluments for the purpose of grant of pension.
(3) The Examiner, after necessary verification, shall send the pension papers to the concerned sanctioning authority as shown in Appendix `A' for sanction of pension.
(4) While sanctioning pension, the sanctioning authority shall ensure that the contribution of the employees for the period reckoned for pension, has been duly credited to the fund."
Similarly, Section 51 of the Municipal Act, 1911 reads as follows :-  "51.
Constitution of Municipal Fund.
- There shall be formed for each municipality a municipal fund, and there shall be placed to the credit thereof - (a) all sums received by, or on behalf of the committee under this Act or otherwise; and (b) the balance (if any) standing at the credit of the municipal fund of this municipality at the commencement of this Act."
7.
It has been denied by the respondents that during the period the petitioner worked on a "non-provincialised post" he was paid salary from the `municipal fund' constituted under Section 51 of 1991 Act.
On a conjoint reading of Rules 2(h) and 2(j), in no uncertain terms it stands testified that the service rendered by the petitioner from 221962 to 2281978 has to be treated as the `qualifying service' for the purpose of Pension Rules.
It appears that the categorisation of the said service period as a "non- provincialised service" and/or its exclusion from the total qualifying service for the purpose of pension has been made pursuant to the executive instructions dated 811999 (Annexure R-4) issued by respondent No. 2, inter alia, providing that since the Pension Rules have been made applicable in lieu of CPF, "the period to be considered as qualifying for pension has to be restricted to the period for which the employee was contributing to his CPF.
The period during which the employee was not contributing to his CPF whereby the employer also did not make matching contributions, cannot be treated as service qualifying for pension."
8.
In our view, the embargo sought to be created upon counting of the service rendered by the petitioner against a non-provincialised post on the basis of the afore-mentioned instructions is totally misconceived and unsustainable in law for more than one reason.
Firstly, the instructions refer to a service period for which the employee was not contributing to his CPF and the employer also did not make matching contribution.
It is the case of the respondents themselves that during the period from 221962 to 2281978 "the petitioner got the benefit of contributory provident fund where the Municipal Committee contributed its own share/fund, a sum equal to 10% of the basic pay of the employee and that he had withdrawn the afore-mentioned amount from his contributory provident fund".
Thus, it was not a case of rendering service during which no contribution towards provident fund was made by the employee or the employer.
For an employee who has opted to be governed by the Pension Rules but has already withdrawn an amount from the contributory provident fund, which is required to be transferred to the `Pension Fund' under Rule 5 (ibid), the rule making authority has taken stock of such a contingency by expressly providing that the loss caused to the contribution either by the committee or by the employee through withdrawal during the tenure of service of the employee or due to any other reason is liable to be made good by paying the amount along with interest due for that period to the fund.
Thus, the petitioner, in terms of Rule 5(1) of the Pension Rules, ought to have been given an option to deposit to the `Pension Fund' the entire amount of the contributory provident fund drawn by him along with the interest for the period in question.
Thereafter, the said period ought to have been taken into account towards the `qualifying service' for pensionary benefits.
9.
Secondly, the import and sustainability of the Executive Instructions, referred to above, viz. statutory rules, namely, the Pension Rules came up for consideration before a Division Bench of this Court in Harjinder Singh v. State of Punjab, 2003(4) SCT 1, when in somewhat similar circumstances, the Bench held as follows :-  "The above instructions issued by the Director Local Government purporting to interpret the Pension Rules, are in fact contrary to the same.
Besides, the said instructions cannot substitute or supplant the substantive provisions of the Pension Rules.
However, as already noticed above, there is nothing in the Pension rules which requires the `qualifying service' to be computed from the date the employee makes contribution towards CP Fund or from the date of his confirmation.
Rather the position is that the `qualifying service' is to be counted in terms of Rule 2(j) for the period of service rendered by the employee for which he is paid from the Municipal Funds which is the fund constituted under Section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
The emphasis on the words "appointed on regular basis" in the above memo on the basis of Rule 1(3)(ii) of the Pension Rules is also misplaced.
Rule 1(3)(ii) of the Pension Rules, in fact provides that the Pension Rules shall apply to the employees of the Committee who are appointed on or after the first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis and opt for the said rules....." The Bench, thereafter, concluded as follows :-  "17.
Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances, it is evident that the stand of the respondents that the `qualifying service' of the petitioner is to be counted from the date he started making contributions to the CP Fund is absolutely misconceived and baseless.
The same is not supported by the Pension Rules applicable in respect of the petitioner.
The petitioner, therefore, has been unnecessarily denied the benefit of pension, which as per the settled law, is not a bounty or a matter of grace nor an ex gratia payment payable at the sweet will and pleasure of the Municipal Council (respondent No. 4).
It is a payment for the past service rendered and is a social welfare measure to those who in the heyday of their life rendered service on an assurance that in their old age they would not be left in the lurch.
The payment of pension is governed by the Pension Rules governing the grant of pension to the employees of the Municipal Council.
It is the liability undertaken by the Municipal Council under the Pension Rules and whenever it becomes due and payable it is to be paid."
We, thus, find the case of the petitioner fully covered by the aforesaid Division Bench judgment as well.
10.
For the reasons aforementioned, we allow this writ petition with the following directions.
(i) The petitioner shall be entitled for pension on the basis of the entire service period i.e. from 221962 to 3111998 during which he was paid out of the Municipal Funds for the purposes of post-retiral benefits.
(ii) The respondents, within a period of two months from the date of the receipt of a certified copy of this order, shall inform the petitioner about the total amount of contributory provident fund drawn by him for the period from 221962 to 2281978 along with simple interest as per the Pension Rules which the petitioner is liable to deposit in the `Pension Fund' for getting his entire service treated as qualifying service for pensionary benefits.
(iii) The petitioner, on receipt of the communication in terms of direction No. (ii) above, will convey his consent or otherwise in writing to the respondents within a period of two weeks.
(iv) In case the petitioner agrees to deposit the arrears of contributory provident fund which he had withdrawn for the period from 221962 to 3111978 along with interest as calculated in terms of direction No. (ii) above, the respondents shall re-fix the pensionary benefits payable to the petitioner on the basis of his entire service from 221962 to 3111998 and shall be entitled to deduct the amount which the petitioner is liable to deposit in the Pension Fund in terms of direction No. (ii) above, from the arrears of his pension and release the balance amount of such arrears within a period of one month thereafter along with simple interest @ 6% per annum.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.