JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The candidature of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Constable Driver with the Indian Reserve Battalion has been declined, vide order dated 1032004 (Annexure P-3), on the premises that the petitioner does not possess a heavy motor vehicles driving licence.
2.
The aforementioned factual position is not disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The solitary contention of counsel for the petitioner, however, is that the petitioner should be provisionally appointed against the post of Constable Driver with the condition that he must obtain a heavy motor vehicles driving licence within a defined period of time.
3.
It is not possible for us to accept the aforementioned contention of counsel for the petitioner.
Eligibility for appointment must be acquired before actual appointment.
4.
It would be unfair to the learned counsel for the petitioner, if we do not refer to the decision, rendered by this Court in Miss Sukhjit Sekhon v. Punjab Agriculture University through its Registrar, Ludhiana, Punjab and others, 1993(2) Recent Services Judgments 759, which was relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner to substantiate the claim of the petitioner.
From the aforestated judgment, learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the following observations recorded therein :-  "6.
The petitioner was a duly selected candidate having the requisite qualifications.
The Selection Committee consisted of eminent expert in the relevant subject.
The Selection Committee unanimously recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment.
The Vice-Chancellor was not justified in ordering review of the case by the Selection Committee with a view to accommodate respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 also does not fulfil the qualification of the post.
7.
A duly selected candidate should be offered appointment otherwise the Constitutional guarantee as enshrined under Article 16 becomes a mere formality.
The Vice-Chancellor without affording the petitioner any opportunity of being heard ordered the review of her selection by the Selection Committee.
It was obligatory for the Vice-Chancellor, before exercising the power of review, to afford the petitioner an opportunity of being heard according to the principles of natural justice."
5.
The issue, in hand, cannot be adjudicated upon, on the basis of the determination in Miss Sukhjit Sekhon's case (supra), on account of the fact that the selected candidate in the judgment relied upon was eligible, whereas the candidate, who had been appointed despite her ineligibility, was sought to be dislodged, without affording her an opportunity of hearing.
The issue of affording an opportunity of hearing only arises in a case where civil rights, vested in an employee, are sought to be altered to his detriment.
In the instant case, the petitioner, admittedly, has not been favoured with an offer/order of appointment.
As such, the rules of natural justice are not required to be followed, in the present factual scenario.
6.
On the same issue, as was canvassed by counsel for the petitioner, based on Miss Sukhjit Sekhon's case (supra), he also invited our attention to the decision, rendered by the Apex Court in Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 376.
He placed reliance on the observations, recorded in paragraph 6 of the judgment.
For the same reasons, as have been noticed herein above, we are satisfied that the decision, rendered by the Apex Court, in Shri Krishan's case (supra), is also inapplicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the instant writ petition and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.