Tarun Agarwala, J - The petitioner's father was working as a Constable.
On 30-12-1982 an FIR was lodged stating therein that the petitioner's father was missing.
An investigation was made and the police submitted a report before the competent Court, stating therein that the petitioner's father is missing.
The said report was eventually accepted by the Court wherein the father of the petitioner was declared missing.
The matter did not end here.
The petitioner's mother filed Original Suit No. 49 of 1992 before the Court of Munsif.
The suit was eventually decreed by a judgment dated 24-4-1992 and the Court declared that the petitioner's father was dead.
2.
The petitioner's date of birth is 1-6-1979.
Upon reaching the age of 18 years, the petitioner moved an application for an appointment on compassionate ground.
Subsequently, in the year 1999, another application was moved.
The petitioner's request for an employment was rejected by an order dated 28-1- 2000.
Consequently, the present petition has been filed for the quashing of the order dated 28-1-2000 and for issuance of a direction to the respondents commanding them to appoint the petitioner on compassionate ground under the Dying in Harness Rules, 1974.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order indicates that the petitioner's application had been rejected on the ground that the Dying in Harness Rules, 1974 was not applicable to the heirs of missing persons and therefore the petitioner could not be given an employment on compassionate ground.
4.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
Before proceeding any further, it would be appropriate to quote Rule 5 of the Dying in Harness Rules, 1974 :  "Recruitment of a member of the family of the deceased -  5(1) In case a Government servant dies in harness after the commencement of these rules and the spouse of the deceased Government servant is not already employed under the Central Government or a State Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government, one member of his family who is not already employed under the Central Government or a State Government, or a Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government shall on making an application for the purposes, be given a suitable employment in Government service on a post except the post which is within the purview of the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission, in relaxation of the normal recruitment rules if such person - (i) fulfills the educational qualifications prescribed for the post.
(ii) is otherwise qualified for Government service, and -  (iii) makes the application for employment within five years from the date of the death of the Government servant : Provided that where the State Government is satisfied that the time limit fixed for making the application for employment causes undue hardship in any particular case, it may dispense with or relax the requirement as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner.
(2) As far as possible, such an employment should be given in the same department in which the deceased Government servant was employed prior to his death."
6.
From a perusal of the above rule, it is clear that where a Government servant dies in harness, a member of his family could be given an employment under the Dying in Harness Rules.
7.
The question which arises for consideration is whether the Rules of 1974 contemplate a death of a particular kind in order to benefit the heirs or whether all kinds of death could be included under the Dying in Harness Rules, 1974.
8.
It may be stated here that a human being can die under various circumstances, for example, a person may die on account of natural causes or on account of an accident or that the person may commit suicide, or die in war or in anti-terrorist activities, or there may be a presumptive death, namely, that a person is missing since long and therefore, presumed to be dead.
The Rules of 1974 does not specify the manner of death that would qualify for an employment to the heirs.
Therefore, in my view, all kinds of death caused by every possible manner would be included in the Dying in Harness Rules and the benefit of employment has to be given to the dependant of the person, who dies in harness.
9.
In my view, a person who is missing is since long and is presumed to be dead, his heirs are entitled to be considered for employment on compassionate ground.
10.
In the present case, admittedly the father of the petitioner was missing for more than seven years and was presumed to be dead.
Not only this a decree has been issued by a competent Court of law declaring him to be dead.
Based on this declaration, the widow of the Government servant was being paid the family pension.
Under these circumstances, I see no reason why the benefit of the Dying in Harness Rules, 1974 could not apply to the case of the petitioner.
11.
In view of the aforesaid, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
The writ petition is allowed and the order dated 28-2-2000 rejecting the petitioner's application for employment under the Dying in Harness Rules is quashed and the Senior Superintendent of Police, Kanpur Nagar, respondent No. 2 is directed to re-consider the petitioner's application for employment under the Dying in Harness Rules within two months from the date a certified copy of this judgment is served upon respondent No. 2.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to cost.
Petition allowed.