SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioners had applied for the posts of Excise and Taxation Inspectors, in response to advertisement No. 1/99 dated 151999.
A written examination was held.
All the petitioners qualified in the written examination.
They also appeared for the interview.
Before the result could be declared, Civil Writ Petition No 19267 of 2001 was filed on 10122001 seeking the quashing of the result of the written examination declared by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for the 55 posts of Excise and Taxation Inspectors in which the petitioners had been declared successful.
On 11122001, a Division Bench of this court issued notice of motion and also directed that the final outcome of the selection shall be subject to the decision of the writ petition.
By a subsequent order dated 1412002 passed in CM No. 1251 of 2002, this court directed that the selection process will not be finalised.
Pursuant to the aforesaid directions of this court, the selection of the petitioners was not finalised.
The result was not declared, although it was kept in a sealed cover.
Subsequently, the Government of Punjab took a decision on 2442002 for restructuring of all the departments.
On the basis of the aforesaid decision, the Punjab Government issued Circular No. 10/1352002.
On the basis of the aforesaid Circular, a complete ban was imposed on the recruitment to the posts lying vacant at that time and likely to fall vacant due to retirement or any other reason.
It was also directed that the posts lying vacant would be deemed to have been abolished and a post thus abolished can only be revived with the prior approval of the Council of Ministers and after seeking advice of the Finance Department.
It was also directed that the budgetary provision made for the vacant posts during the current year may also be considered as dropped.
Punjab Public Service Commission and Subordinate Services Selection Board as well as the Departmental Promotion Committee were directed not to consider the requests which had already been placed before them and the requisition shall be deemed to have been immediately withdrawn.
It was further directed that where any process of recruitment had been initiated i.e. recruitment conducted or interviews held, further process should be stopped forthwith.
On 472001, when Civil Writ Petition No 19267 of 2001 came up for hearing, the counsel for the parties produced Circular No. 10/1352002 in Court.
Consequently, the writ petition was disposed of.
The Circular No. 10/1352002 was taken on record.
It was stated by the Additional Advocate General, Punjab that the posts which had been advertised are not being filled.
It was also stated that the posts are deemed to have been abolished.
When the exercise for restructing was not undertaken by the respondents, the petitioners sent a legal notice on 182002 asking the respondents to revive the 53 posts of the Excise and Taxation Inspectors in accordance with Circular No. 10/1352002.
This request was made on the ground that about 100 posts are lying vacant.
However, no response was received by the petitioners.
The petitioners, therefore, filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction to the respondents to restructure the cadre of the Excise and Taxation Inspectors in the department of Excise and Taxation, Punjab, in terms of the earlier decision and to make the appointments.
2.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents have advertised 130 posts by advertisement dated 2412003.
However, the zone of selection of the prospective candidates have been limited only to the surplus employees from the Irrigation Department and other departments of the Punjab Government.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
However, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
In the preliminary objections, the respondents have stated that since the results of the petitioners had not been declared, it could not be presumed that the petitioners would be selected on the post of ETI.
Furthermore, since Civil Writ Petition No 19267 of 2001 has been disposed of as having become infructuous, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
4.
Mr. Rajive Atma Ram, learned Sr.
Counsel appearing for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners have been denied the appointment arbitrarily and without any legal justification.
At the time when the petitioners had competed in the process of selection, the result was not declared due to the pendency of Civil Writ Petition No 19267 of 2001.
During the pendency of the aforesaid writ petition, the Circular No. 10/1352001 was produced before this Court.
On the basis of the aforesaid Circular, the writ petition was disposed of as having become infructuous.
The petitioners' claim has been denied by the respondents on the ground that there has been restructuring in the department.
However, in reality, there has been no restructuring.
The same posts which were deemed to have been abolished, have now been revived.
They are illegally now being offered to persons who have been rendered surplus in the other departments of the Government.
Learned Sr Counsel has submitted that Circular No. 10/1352001 could not have effected the selection process which had already been completed.
5.
We have anxiously considered the submissions made by the learned Sr.
Counsel for the petitioners and learned counsel for the respondents and perused the paper-book.
6.
We are of the considered opinion that the decision taken by the respondents cannot be said to be either arbitrary or unreasonable.
A complete explanation has been rendered with regard to the action taken by the respondents in the affidavit filed by KR Lakhanpal, IAS, Principal Secretary Finance on 1592003.
It is a settled proposition of law that mere selection on a post does not give any vested or indefeasible rights to the selected candidates to claim appointment.
We are of the considered opinion that no legal right of the petitioners has been infringed.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.