JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 12681, 20036 and 20145 of 2003, 3766 and 6500 of 2004, as common questions of law have been raised and that the relief claimed is also common except for the additional relief of regularisation claimed in Civil Writ Petition No. 12681 and 20145 of 2003.
For brevity, the facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 12681 of 2003.
2.
The petitioners applied for the concerned posts pursuant to the advertisement dated April 21, 1998, copy Annexure P-1.
The posts were to be filled purely on temporary and contract basis for a period of six months or till a candidate recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as "the Board"), whichever is earlier.
The candidates including the petitioners were duly interviewed by the committee constituted for the said purpose.
The details of the petitioners having been appointed on the respective posts against the salary prescribed in the advertisement have been mentioned in the body of the petition respectively.
Initially, the contract was for a period of six months but subsequently, the time was extended from time to time.
A copy of such renewal/extension of the contract has been appended as Annexure P-3 dated April 28, 2003.
Pursuant to the said document, the period was extended from April 1, 2003 to September 30, 2003 at a consolidated salary mentioned against each official.
It is obvious that the petitioners have been working upon their respective posts for a good number of years and are presently also working upon the said posts.
The nature of work and duties performed are the same in quality, quantity and in terms of responsibility by the persons working regularly in the defined pay scale.
Some representations had been made to the concerned quarters for seeking regularisation and also for payment of regular pay scale instead of consolidated salary.
One such sample representation has been annexed as Annexure P-4.
It is also the claim of the petitioners that pursuant to the selection, the petitioners had been posted against the duly sanctioned posts.
The respondents have not taken any decision upon the representations of the petitioners.
Resultantly, the present petition has been filed for seeking the grant of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the condition in the letters of appointment issued to the petitioners for paying consolidated salary per month as the said act is violative of Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
Issuance of a writ of mandamus has also been prayed for to the effect that the respondents should pay the petitioners the salaries in the regular pay scales from the date of their respective appointments along with all other consequential benefits.
Further, they have prayed for regularisation of their services as well.
3.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated August 14, 2003.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioners inter alia on various grounds as have been set out in the written statement.
The stand of the Government is that the petitioners are not entitled to the relief of regularisation and consequentially placing them in the regular pay scale.
It is also the case that the petitioners have accepted the contractual appointment as had been specifically specified in the advertisement published by the respondents.
It is the settled principle that once having accepted the terms of appointment, the petitioners are not entitled to seek any relief under any regulations as the same are not applicable to such situated persons.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners have rendered services for more than six years and that there is no complaint against the petitioners of any nature or kind.
The posts against which the petitioners had been asked to work on contractual basis are duly sanctioned posts and are in existence.
It is nowhere the claim of the respondents that any process for selection of the persons against the sanctioned posts has been commenced or is in the process.
Thus, the plea that the petitioners had been appointed and were asked to continue to work till a candidate is recommended by the Board joins, is of no consequence and in fact has been rendered nugatory.
Thus, the petitioners are entitled to regularisation and are also entitled to be placed in the regular pay scale of such similarly situated persons.
Though, those persons had not been appointed on contractual basis and on a consolidated salary but the services rendered are similar and perhaps all other service conditions are also similar.
Learned counsel has placed reliance upon various judgments of this Court rendered from time to time which are noticed as under :-  1.
Polu Ram v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(4) RSJ 152; 2.
Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) RSJ 708; 3.
Anmol Rattan and others v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 15116 of 1998, decided on March 12, 2001; 4.
Hassan Mohd.
and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2004(2) SCT 505 (P&H).
5.
Ms. Maninder Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(3) SCT 655 (P&H) : 2003(4) SLR 771; and 6.
Tirlochan Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 2005(1) SCT 109 (P&H) : 2004(6) SLR 291.
Learned counsel has also made reference to the policy of regularisation dated January 23, 2001, copy Annexure P-7, issued by the State of Punjab and also the policy dated March 28, 2003, copy Annexure P-8.
Pursuant to these policies, the petitioners are entitled to be absorbed regularly against the sanctioned posts and further are entitled to be placed in the regular pay scale.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Behl, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, has argued that the petitioners have been appointed on contractual basis and that the terms of appointment specifically provide that they shall continue to work on consolidated salary till the regularly selected person from the Board joins the post.
This term had been categorically accepted by the appointees and that now they cannot turn about and claim regularisation and also the regular pay scale.
The regularisation policies dated 2312001 and March 28, 2003, do not include the contractual employees.
Therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to seek the regularisation on the basis of the said policies.
It has been further argued that the judgments referred to and relied upon are not applicable to the facts of the present case, in those cases the persons had been appointed on ad hoc or temporary basis and some of them had been placed in the pay scale as well at the time of appointment.
Whereas, the case of the petitioners is absolutely distinct because all of them have been appointed on contractual basis and at a consolidated salary.
Thus, the petitioners shall remain governed by their terms of contract.
Therefore, the question of regularisation or placing them in regular pay scale would not arise.
It has also been mentioned that in Ms. Maninder Kaur's case (supra), the State has filed Special Leave Petition, which is pending final disposal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
He fairly states that the operation of the judgment has not been stayed.
However, the contempt proceedings initiated against the State officials have been stayed.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book and have also examined the respective pleadings along with the annexures appended therewith and have also perused the judgments relied upon and referred to by the parties.
7.
We are of the considered opinion that the petitioners are entitled to the relief of being considered for regularisation.
Perusal of the regularisation policies appended as Annexures P-7 and P-8 shows that the same have been issued consciously and conscientiously by the Government while reviewing the policy of regularisation.
The policy dated January 23, 2001 categorically mentions the regularisation of work-charged/daily-wage and other categories of employees could not be regularised according to the period given in the circular letter dated 2312001, all such cases should be considered for regularisation by June 30, 2003 by all means.
It has also been clarified that further time limit will not be extended.
A pre-emptory observation had also been made that if during the extended time limit regularisation is not completed, then the Administrative Secretary/head of Departments will be responsible.
It is obvious that the Government had clearly expressed its mind that the workers who are working with the Government for the last so many years, they ought to be regularised because if new persons are inducted they may take their own time to enrich themselves in experience and that if the persons who have already gained experience are asked to go, this may not be in the interest of the Government itself.
Perhaps, it is because of this, the Government was prompted in issuing the instructions to regularise the workers.
If that be so, it is definitely correct and positive approach.
8.
There is no doubt that the advertisement issued by the Government specifically provided the nature of the appointment being offered and also the remunerations which shall be payable to the applicants but the said information and ingredient provided was with the sole purpose that for taking the persons for employment regularly may take some time.
It is for this reason, the appointment was offered for a period of six months in the first instance.
However, this appointment was continued even after the expiry of the period of six months.
Resultantly, the incumbents gained experience at a remuneration which ordinarily would not have been paid to a regularly selected person.
It is nowhere the stand of the Government that the selection process for appointing commenced or even has commenced now.
It is obvious that the Government is wanting to continue with the services of the present incumbents.
If that be so, it shall be absolutely unfair on the part of the Government to have appointed the workers against sanctioned posts on contractual basis and on a consolidated salary.
Such appointees have correctly termed such act of the Government as unfair trade practice and this should not be allowed to continue for years and years.
In all fairness, such incumbents deserve to be regularised.
So far as placing them in the regular pay scale is concerned that would be a natural consequence but, of course, with the constraint that they may not be entitled to claim the placement at a place in the scale by counting all the service.
If upon consideration, the petitioners are granted the regularisation pursuant to the observation of this Court, they shall deserve to be placed at the basic pay scale applicable accordingly.
So far as the earlier service is concerned, the benefit may also be granted in accordance with law, rules and regulations applicable and, of course, the view expressed by this Court and so also the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India from time to time.
In view of the above, the petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the petitioners for regularisation de hors of the contractual clause indicated in the advertisement and also the same having been mentioned in the terms of appointment.
If regularised, they shall also be considered for being placed in the regular pay scale with the initial pay payable accordingly.
This entire exercise be carried out by the respondents within three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this judgment.
It may be clarified that in view of the fact that the State has filed Special Leave Petition against the judgment rendered in Ms. Maninder Kaur's case (supra), the result thereof shall also affect the consideration and the relief grantable and granted to the petitioners.
This fact may be specifically mentioned in the orders which may be passed by the concerned authorities.
The cases where the regularisation has already been granted pursuant to the aforestated policies of the Government or as the case may be, they shall be considered for being placed in the respective pay scales applicable accordingly and shall be placed at the initial stage in accordance with the provisions of law.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.