KS Garewal, J - Ganesh Bahadur was recruited as a Driver in the Indian Army on March 14, 1963 and retired in November 1978, whereafter he was granted military pension.
The petitioner was thereafter appointed as a Driver by the Punjab National Fertilizer and Chemicals Limited, Naya Nangal (hereinafter referred to as PNFC) on June 20, 1983 and worked with the said Company till September 1997.
According to the petitioner the Company had started incurring losses and decided not to grant dearness relief.
However, when the respondents herein, without issuing any show-cause notice or providing the petitioner with an opportunity of being heard, decided to recover the payment of dearness relief granted to the petitioner along with the military pension for the period July 1983 to September 2001 on the ground of over payment of dearness relief, the petitioner filed a representation against this action of the respondents but without considering the facts and the representation of the petitioner, the impugned orders of recovery dated January 23, 2003 and February 18, 2003, Annexures P-6 and P-7, respectively were passed for recovery of Rs. 19,572/- consisting of the over payment of the dearness relief to him.
The recovery was to be effected from the pension of the petitioner.
The petitioner has filed this petition for quashing the impugned orders Annexures P-6 and P-7 which were passed without affording him an opportunity of hearing and were violative of principles of natural justice.
Reliance was placed on Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) Service Cases Today 668.
2.
In the written statement filed by the respondents it was pleaded that the competent authority had rightly deducted the amount of dearness allowance from the pension because the petitioner had been re-employed with PNFC with effect from May 18, 1983.
It was submitted by the respondents that since the petitioner got re-employment, he became disentitled for dearness allowance on pension and this issue had already been decided by the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Vasudevan Pillay and others etc. etc., 1995(2) Services Law Reporter 21.
Therefore, the impugned orders had been justifiably passed and the petitioner was not entitled to dearness allowance on his pension which was required to be recovered from him.
3.
Sahib Ram's case (supra) did not deal with Dearness allowance on pension being received by a pensioner after his re-employment but it was a case of release of pay scale on misinterpretation of a relaxation clause where the upgraded pay had been released to the petitioner by mistake.
There had been no misrepresentation or fraud by the petitioner.
Therefore, the court had held that he amount may not be recovered from the employee but he would not be entitled to draw the upgraded scale any further.
4.
The present case is not even covered by Union of India v. Vasudevan Pillay and others (supra) wherein the Supreme Court of India held that even if dearness relief was integral part of pension, there was no inhibition in disallowing the same in cases of those pensioners who get themselves re- employed after retirement.
The rationale was that the salary paid to the pensioners on re-employment took care of the erosion in the value of money because of rise in prices.
They got dearness allowance on their pension and this allowance was not available to those who did not get re-employment.
However, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India had only debarred those ex- servicemen from dearness relief on their pensions who had got themselves re- employed to any civil post under the Government of India.
5.
This is the point of distinction because the petitioner was not re-employed to a civil post.
He had secured a driver's job with PNFC.
This company was a public limited company in which Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation held only 4613% shares.
The company was not even a Government Company within the definition given in Section 617 of the Companies Act.
Furthermore, according to the petitioner, the company had been incurring losses and was closed since September, 1997.
The petitioner had not received any salary since 1999.
The company had been ordered to be wound up under orders of this Court dated July 27, 2001 passed in CP No. 71 of 2000 (reference is made to the certificate of the Official Liquidator dated August 23, 2001 (Annexure P-2).
6.
Therefore, by no stretch of imagination could the petitioner be said to be holding a civil post under the Government of India or the Government of Punjab if he was employed as a driver with the aforementioned company, now in liquidation.
7.
Employees of a public limited company are not holders of civil posts under the State.
There is no master and servant relationship between the State and the Company employees, such as the petitioner.
The decision of Vasudevan Pillay's case is only restricted to those pensioners who are re-employed against a civil post.
The petitioner is clearly outside the scope of this judgment.
8.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition deserves to be allowed and it is ordered accordingly.
The respondents are henceforth prohibited from withholding dearness relief from the petitioner.
In case any amount has been recovered the same shall be refunded to the petitioner forthwith.
The petitioner shall be entitled to Rs. 5,000/- as costs.
Petition allowed.