Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition, 18 petitioners have approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a direction to the respondents to admit them in the respondent's College-Sri Guru Ramdas Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar to which they have been allocated in order of their merit obtained by them in P.M.E.T.
test 2004 upon payment of fee fixed by the Committee constituted by the Supreme Court in terms of the judgment of Supreme Court in Islamic Academy of Education v. State of Karnataka, 2004(1) SCT 714 (SC) : JT 2003(7) SC 1.
2.
There is no dispute to the fact before is that all petitioners have qualified PMET test, 2004 and are entitled to be admitted to the said Institute as per their own merit.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent College-Institute submitted that they are quite willing to give admissions to the petitioners in their College but they are unable to do so because of non- fixation of fee which the College would be entitled to charge for admitting the students for the professional Course of M.B.B.S.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the State as well as the University contends that provisional fee has already been fixed at Rs. 75,000/- by the Committee, which has been approved by the Govt. and thus, there should be no difficulty in admitting the petitioners on that basis.
In view of above undisputed position of facts, it is not necessary for us to refer to the detailed facts giving rise to this petition and suffice to note the findings recorded by the Majithia Committee, the relevant part of which reads as under :  "The Committee is therefore of the view that as an interim arrangement the fee structure as provided for the year 2004-05 should be applicable to the students admitted in the year 2003-2004 in the second year of their study i.e. 2004-05.
This is purely an interim arrangement and the final fee structure shall be fixed soon after scrutinising the accounts and infrastructure facilities of the institutions.
To summarise the Committee orders what the private unaided medical institutions in the State of Punjab -  (i) will charge from the students admitted in the year 2003-2004, fee for the second year of their study i.e. year 2004-05 equivalent to the provisional fee as indicated in the government notification dated 1762004 for the year 2004-05 i.e. the students admitted in the year 2003-04 will pay fee for the second year of their study of Rs. 75,000/- for MBBS, Rs. 55,000/- for BDS and Rs. 35,000/- for BAMS/BHMS course.
The institutions can take a fresh undertaking from the students that they would pay the difference as and when the final fee structure is approved by the Committee; (ii) will not charge as security, hostel charges etc. in excess of what has been provided in government notification dated 25.7.2003.
The excess amount if charged by them as explained above would be refunded forthwith."
4.
From the above, it is clear that proposed fee of Rs. 75,000/- in the brochure has provisionally been approved by the Majithia Committee and thus, there should be no difficulty with the College to admit the students on such basis but it is equally true that a College is entitled to know what they can charge from the students as they have to carry out the professional Course which pre-supposes adequate infrastructure, teaching faculty as well as proper means to ensure that education of the students is not adversely effected for lack of funds.
It will always be in the interest of all concerned that proper fee is declared at the beginning of the academic session so as to put at rest all such controversies which are likely to arise in future.
The students should also know what amount they are supposed to pay on account of fee and should not be put to any inconvenience or uncertainty during the currency of their professional Course.
5.
In the circumstances, it has been noticed in the report of the Committee that they have heard the representatives of the College/Institute.
Whatever be the status, we are of the firm view that unnecessary delay in this regard is likely to serve no end.
The determination of this matter at the earliest would put at rest unnecessary controversies and would help in achieving the object of adequate and proper professional education.
Thus, we dispose of this petition with a direction to the College to admit the petitioners in any case not later than cut of date of 3092004 by accepting the provisional fee, which has been fixed provisionally and if such fee has already been deposited with the University the same shall be transmitted to the College/Institute forthwith.
We further direct the College to appear through its representative and produce all the relevant records and accounts in terms of the previous directions of the Committee on 4102004 and the hearing shall go on day-to- day and final order will be passed by the Committee fixing the final fee payable in regard to the College/Institution in question by 11102004.
6.
We make it clear that no further time would be allowed to any of the parties of lis as well as the Committee to comply with the direction of this Court.
It is also made clear that the students, who will be admitted in furtherance to the order of this Court, shall be obliged to pay the balance fee, if any amount in excess of Rs. 75,000/- is fixed by the Committee, within one week from the date of demand.
The petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Copy of the order be given dasti.
Order accordingly.