Rajive Bhalla, J - The petitioner has filed the present application praying therein that the writ petition be disposed of, in terms of the judgment, rendered by a Division Bench of this Court, in CWP No. 1921 of 1998, dated 341998, Annexure A-1, annexed with the application.
2.
Notice of the application was issued to the respondents.
3.
Counsel for the respondents states that in view the fact that the liability, fastened upon the petitioner, has been ordered to be paid, without holding any inquiry or issuing any show-cause notice, the present writ petition can be disposed of, in terms of the aforementioned judgment of this Court.
4.
Counsel for the parties pray that the writ petition be taken up for final disposal.
5.
Consequently, the present writ petition is taken up for disposal.
6.
The petitioner, who is working as a Constable in the Punjab Police, was implicated in an accident.
It is alleged that the Canter, being driven by the petitioner, had met with an accident, causing the death of one Darshan Singh.
The legal representatives of Darshan Singh, deceased, filed a petition under Section 166 read with Section 140 of the Motor Vehicles Act, seeking grant of compensation.
In the said petition, filed before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Muktsar, the petitioner was arrayed as respondent No. 2.
The aforementioned Tribunal, vide Award dated 1122000, granted compensation of Rs. 350 lacs to the claimants.
The petitioner impugned the aforementioned Award before this Court in first appeal, which is stated to be pending.
7.
The petitioner also states that pursuant to the aforementioned accident, an FIR was lodged under Sections 279 and 304-A IPC and he has been acquitted in those proceedings.
8.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Distt.
Faridkot, vide order dated 19.5.2001, ordered that 20% of the amount, awarded by the M.A.C.T., Muktsar, be recovered from the petitioner.
It is this order, which has been impugned in the present writ petition, on the ground that recovery from the pay of an employee, of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the government by negligence or breach of order, is one of the minor penalties, which can only be imposed by following the procedure, prescribed under Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
9.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that the procedure, envisaged in Rule 10 of the aforesaid Rules, has not been followed and an order has been issued fastening the liability of 20% amount awarded by the M.A.C.T., Muktsar, upon him.
It is further argued that this Court, in a judgment, rendered in CWP No. 1921 of 1998, dated 341998, Hardip Singh v. State of Punjab and another, has held as follows :-  "An analysis of the rules quoted above, shows, that the recovery from the pay of an employee of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the government by negligence or breach of orders is one of the minor penalties which can be imposed by the competent authority.
The procedure for imposing minor penalties is contained in Rule 10.
It lays down that no order imposing any of the penalties specified in rule 5(i) to (iv) can be passed except after informing the employee concerned of the proposal to take action against him and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making representation.
The representation submitted by the Government employee and the enquiry, if any, held under Rule 10(1)(b) has to be considered by the government and then appropriate punishment can be awarded after recording a finding on each imputation of misconduct on misbehaviour.
In the present case, neither any notice was served upon the petitioner proposing imposition of minor penalty nor any enquiry was held.
It must, therefore, be held that the impugned action is violative of the Rule of 1970."
10.
Learned counsel for the parties, as recorded earlier, agree that the present writ petition is fully covered by the aforementioned judgment of this Court and that the present writ petition be disposed of, in terms thereof.
11.
Admittedly, the order, Annexure P-3, has been passed, without serving any notice proposing imposition of minor penalty nor has any inquiry been held.
It is, therefore, apparent that the impugned action is violative of the aforementioned Rules and the controversy in the present writ petition is fully covered by the aforementioned judgment.
12.
Consequently, the present writ petition is allowed and order, Annexure P- 3, dated 19.5.2001 is quashed.
However, the respondents shall be at liberty to proceed against the petitioner, in accordance with law.
The amount, if any, recovered from the petitioner, shall be refunded to him, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
It is made clear that if the petitioner is found guilty, he shall deposit the entire amount found due from him.
Petition allowed.