Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner by this writ petition seeks a writ of mandamus to respondent No. 1 to reimburse the cost of the hearing aid of Rs. 6,450/- as prescribed by the E & T Specialist of the empanelled hospital during petitioner's hospitalization.
Petitioner also seeks direction for uniform application of the Medical Health Scheme, without discrimination, to serving and retired employees.
2.
Petitioner, aged 64 years, retired as Deputy General Manager (Quality Control) from respondent No. 1, w.e.f.
30th April, 1997.
Respondent No. 1 Food Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as 'Corporation', for short) introduced a Health Scheme for retiring employees.
The Medical Health Scheme is a contributory Scheme, where contribution equal to basic pay and dearness allowance drawn by the employee on the date of superannuation, subject to a minimum of Rs. 3500/-, as life-time subscription is required to be made.
Retired employees as well as serving employees including their spouses as of 31 July, 1979, were eligible to become members of the Scheme.
3.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner sought membership of the Scheme upon payment of requisite subscription and was issued an identity card.
The members of the Scheme are eligible for reimbursement of indoor medical expenses, incurred either for self or spouse or both upto an annual ceiling of Rs. 50,000/-.
In case benefit is not availed of during a financial year, a sum of Rs. 25,000/- is allowed to be carried forward raising the maximum reimbursable amount to Rs. 75,000/- for the next financial year.
For claiming reimbursement an employee is required to register itself with the nearest office of the Corporation and submit bills from hospital together with supporting vouchers.
4.
Petitioner was admitted at the Mata Chanan Devi Hospital, Janakpuri, New Delhi, which is an empanelled hospital for the purpose of the Scheme, on 27th July, 2000, and continued there as an indoor patient till 29th July, 2000.
Petitioner was found to be suffering from diabetes, impaired hearing, insomnia, etc.
The discharge certificate issued for the petitioner gives the following summary :  SUMMARY Patient was admitted with C/O B/L Hearing Loss of Ventyd.
He had the history of diabetes for which he was taking treatment.
Following tests and PTA shows B/L moderate to severe S/N loss with mild East Tube dysfunction in impedance Audiogram.
- He was given medical TR and Adviced Hearing Aid R/E.
- ALPS CB-650 S. NO. 093042 BTE type hearing aid was advised to be used in R/E.
- Pt.
Discharged with medical advice and to attend ENT OPD on Wednesday/Saturday day 900 am R/x -  1.
Tab SIZON - 1 O.D.
X 7 2.
Tab CINZON - 1 SOS 3.
Cap.
ZAST - 1 OD x 2 4.
Inj.
NEUROBION 1 Dose x 7 5.
Fu ENT OPD Wed/Sat.
PTA - B/L moderate/to severe S/N Loss.
Impedense Audiogram B/L Dysfunction EUST, Tube.
Sd/- Signature of the Sr. Resident RMO.
That as per the treatment prescribed during hospitalization, petitioner purchased the specified hearing aid from M/s. Alps International and submitted bill for reimbursement.
5.
The Corporation reimbursed the hospitalization charges and cost of medicines etc., except the cost of hearing aid leading to filing of the present writ petition.
Notice in the petition was issued.
Counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondent.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the petitioner having contracted to receive benefits as per the Scheme cannot claim reimbursement to which he is not entitled.
It is claimed that the remedy of the petitioner would be in the civil forum, in accordance with the law and not by way of writ petition.
It is averred in the counter-affidavit that the Scheme does not form part of retiral benefits and hence is not justiciable.
Petitioner relies on the reimbursement of the cost of hearing aid, to one Shri SK Sharma, and accuses the Corporation of applying the Medical Health Scheme in a discriminatory manner.
Respondents explained that said Mr. Sharma was a serving employee of the Respondent-Corporation and a different set of Scheme/Rules for reimbursement applied to him.
It is claimed for serving employees Corporation was following Civil Service Medical Attendance Rules, 1944, applicable to the Central Government employees.
Reimbursement of cost of hearing aid is specifically provided therein.
Lastly it is contended that the entitlement is for reimbursement of "indoor hospital expenses" under the Scheme and not for the cost of reimbursement of equipment/aids/external prosthesis.
It is urged that this was neither the object nor the purpose of the Scheme.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner in support of the petition, who claims that the Petitioner per force had to file this writ petition when representations made were found to be of no avail.
Review appeal to the Chairman also brought forth no relief.
It is urged that denial of the benefit to petitioner after 37 years of dedicated service amounted to negation of the respondent's fundamental duty and obligation to protect the health of its serving and retired employees.
Learned counsel for the respondent in reply reiterated the contentions, as noted above and raised in the counter-affidavit.
7.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the documents on record, let us first consider whether the petitioner is eligible for the cost of hearing aid.
The Medical Health Scheme is contained in Circular No. 48/99 dated 16-12-1999 (Annexure P-1).
Clause 3, relevant for our purpose, is reproduced for facility of reference :-  "3.
The Scheme would be a reimbursement scheme of actual expenses incurred by the retired employee/spouse in any hospital in India for indoor treatment within the ceiling amount prescribed and subject to production of original vouchers/cash memos for the admissible items only.
The retired employees/workers as well as serving employees/workers including surviving spouse of deceased/retired employee on date i.e. 31-7-99 would be eligible to become a member of the Scheme.
He/She is required to make a contribution equivalent to Basic Pay and DA, drawn by them on the date of superannuation subject to a minimum of Rs. 3,500/- as a life time subscription towards the Medical Assistance Fund.
From the serving employees, the subscription would be recovered in equal monthly instalments from their pay during the last 3 years or left-over service whichever is less."
Relying on clause 3 above, learned counsel for the respondent urged that the claim for hearing aid cannot be considered as part of indoor treatment and an admissible item.
I am unable to accept this contention for the reasons to follow.
8.
Petitioner admittedly was hospitalised.
During his hospitalisation various tests were carried out such as PTA and Audiogram which revealed moderate to severe S/N loss with mild Eustician Tube dysfunction.
The Specialist prescribed, as noted in the discharge summary, a specific hearing aid.
Petitioner was thereafter discharged with medical advice to attend the E & T OPD.
The diagnosis of the ailment and its treatment was prescribed during his hospitalisation.
It would not be material or of any consequence that the hearing aid was not supplied by the hospital and was purchased through the dealer.
The senior consultant of E & T has duly endorsed the bill and recommended for payment.
The purchase was made on 28th July, 2000, while the petitioner was hospitalised.
It would, in my view, thus form part of the indoor treatment given to the petitioner by the hospital.
Clause 3 of the Scheme mentions admissible items.
There are no rules/guidelines or list of admissible items prepared by respondent No. 1.
In the absence of these, it is not open to the respondent to urge that hearing aid would be an excluded item.
Moreover, a perusal of Civil Service Medical Attendance Rules, 1944, and Schedule thereto, which the respondent No. 1 claim to be for serving employees show that the hearing aid is one of the items available for reimbursement.
Thus even if the analogy of the Medical Attendance Rules was to be applied, reimbursement of hearing aid is provided for.
As noted earlier, in the instant case, there is no exclusionary clause.
Even if a doubt is sought to be raised by the respondent, the principle of Contra Proferentum would apply and the same has to be interpreted against the author of the Scheme.
9.
There is yet another aspect.
It is the approach to be adopted by State- owned or Statutory Corporations with regard to the provision of medical facilities to its existing or retired employees.
Reference may usefully be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Kirloskar Brothers Ltd v. Employees' State Insurance Corporation, 1996(2) SCT 199 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 3261.
The Court while considering the question of applicability of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 noted the Object of the said Act.
While noting the provision of Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 as also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the preamble of the Constitution and the Directive Principles, Court observed as under : (Paras 6 and 8).
"The Preamble of the Constitution of India, the Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles constituting trinity, assure to every person in a welfare State, social and economic democracy with equality of status and dignity of person.
Political democracy without social and economic democracy would always remain unstable.
Social democracy must become a way of life in an egalitarian social order.
Economic democracy aids consolidation of social stability and smooth working of political democracy.
For welfare of the employee, the employer should provide facilities and opportunities to make their life meaningful.
The employer Trust be an equal participant in evolving and implementing welfare schemes.
Article 39(c) of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to secure health and strength of the workers and directs that the operation of the law is that the citizens are not forced by economic necessity to work under forced labour or unfavourable and unconstitutional conditions of work.
It should, therefore, be the duty of the State to consider that welfare measures are implemented effectively and efficaciously.
Article 42, therefore, enjoins the State to make provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief.
Article 47 imposes a duty on the State to improve public health."
The Court further observed :  "Health is thus a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and right to health, therefore, is a fundamental and human right to the workmen.
"The maintenance of health is the most imperative constitutional goal whose realisation requires interaction of many social and economic factors.
Just and favourable condition of work implies to ensure safe and healthy working conditions to the workmen.
The periodical medical treatment invigorates the health of the workmen and harnesses their human resources.
Prevention of occupational disabilities generates devotion and dedication to duty and enthuses the workmen to render efficient service which is a valuable asset for greater productivity to the employer and national production to the State."
Interpreting the provisions of the Act in para 33, it was held that the Act aims at relieving the employees from health and occupational hazards.
The legal interpretation is to ensure social order and human relations."
10.
Keeping in mind the aforesaid observation of the Supreme Court and considering that, infirmity, sickness generally engulf a person not in his prime but in his old age, when health is frail, resources are meagre, a person needs the assistance which ought not to be denied to him after dedicated service over the years.
A person with impaired hearing is handicapped and is unable to communicate and relate with others.
It renders him an incomplete person.
Thus for his mental and physical well-being it is an essential part of his treatment.
Under the Scheme, the maximum reimbursement in a year could be Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 75,000/-.
Here the cost of the hearing aid is a mere Rs. 6,450/-.
Leaving aside the cost, this is a case which requires a beneficial interpretation of the Scheme.
Respondents would be well-advised to review all aspects of their medical health Scheme and then frame rules and guidelines providing for coverage and exclusions, etc.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondents are directed to reimburse the cost of the hearing aid to the petitioner within two weeks from today.
Writ petition is accordingly allowed with cost of Rs. 1000/- to be paid to the petitioner by the respondent.
Petition allowed.