JS Khehar, J - The petitioner alleges to have been inducted into the service of the Punjab State Seeds Corporation Limited as a daily-wager on 2641993.
It is also the case of the petitioner that his services were dispensed with on 191997.
At the time of his retrenchment, the petitioner was, undisputedly paid a sum of Rs. 5,229/-.
Dissatisfied with his termination from the employment of the respondent-Management, the petitioner in the first instance issued a demand notice.
On the failure of conciliation proceedings, the appropriate Government referred the dispute for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bathinda (hereinafter referred to as the Labour Court).
By an award dated 1492001 the Labour Court finding no force in the claim of the petitioner, dismissed the reference made to it.
2.
The instance writ petition has been filed in order to impugn the award of the Labour Court dated 1492001.
3.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner advanced two contentions.
Firstly, that he was not paid adequate compensation in terms of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputed Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
Secondly, that there was adequate work available with the respondent-Management and yet the services of the petitioner were terminated without any justification whatsoever.
4.
In so far as the first contention noticed above is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the claim statement appended to this petition as Annexure P-3, a perusal of which reveals that the petitioner was drawing emoluments at the rate of Rs. 1,580/- per month.
Under Section 25-F of the Act, a retrenched employee is entitled to compensation at the rate of 15 days wages for every completed year of service.
Even if the factual position narrated by the workman himself depicting the date of entry into service as well as the date of his retrenchment is accepted as a gospel truth, the petitioner would be entitled to 15 days wages for three completed years of service.
Thus, the petitioner would be entitled to a sum of Rs. 2,370/- (790x3).
In addition to retrenchment compensation as noticed above, the petitioner would also be entitled to one month's salary in lieu of notice.
In other words, he would be entitled to a further amount of Rs. 1,580/- in addition to the amount of Rs. 2,370/-.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not indicated any further amount which should have been paid to the petitioner at the time of his retrenchment.
As already noticed above, the petitioner was paid a sum of Rs. 5,229/- at the time of his retrenchment.
The amount paid to the petitioner being in excess of the amount shown to be due to him under the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, we are satisfied that there was no infirmity in the petitioner's retrenchment in the background of Section 25-F of the Act.
5.
In so far as the second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned, we are satisfied that a private Management cannot be compelled to continue a workman in its employment against its will.
No statutory provision has been brought to our notice on the basis of which the second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner can be supported, namely, that in case of availability of work, an industrial establishment can not order retrenchment.
The scheme of the Act vests rights in workmen.
Since the petitioner fulfilled the conditions envisaged under Section 25-F of the Act, he was paid retrenchment compensation and wages in lieu of the notice period when his services were dispensed with.
In case the respondent- Management desires to execute available work (as alleged) by engaging staff; the petitioner's claim will have to be considered under Section 25-H of the Act.
If he has a preferential right from amongst the retrenched employees, he will have to be re-engaged.
The instant contention is clearly devoid of any legal backing.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, we find no merit in the second contention as well.
No other submission was advanced.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.