SS Saron, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for quashing the order dated 522001 (Annexure P-13) whereby their claim for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers (Civil) after consideration of their case on the directions of this Court Writ Petition No. 12116 of 1998 has been rejected by the Chief Administrator, Haryana Urban Development Authority (HUDA for short).
Besides, for quashing the order dated 2731998 (Annexure P-7) and 2062000 (Annexure P-10) in terms of which, it is alleged that ineligible persons have been given current duty charge of the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) against the promotion quota posts of diploma holders.
The petitioners also seek a directions against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider their claim for promotion to the posts of Junior engineer (Civil) in accordance with the provisions of the Haryana Public Works Department Public Health Branch Junior Engineers, Group 'C' Service Rules, 1986 (1986 Rules - for short) with effect from the date the promotion quota posts of Diploma Holders were filled by promoting non-diploma holder private-respondents.
2.
The petitioners are working as Surveyor in regular capacity with the Haryana Urban Development Authority (respondent No. 1).
They seek promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) against the posts lying vacant in the promotion quota.
All the three petitioners have the qualifications of three years Diploma in Civil Engineering.
Gian Chand (petitioner No. 1) joined HUDA on 1881987 and was regularised in service w.e.f.
381993, Subhash Chander (petitioner No. 2) and Rajesh Chauhan (petitioner No. 3) joined on 2681988 and 17.1.1993 respectively and their date of regularisation is 1931997.
3.
Notice in the case was issued.
The Secretary, HUDA, has filed reply on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It is stated that the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) has already been considered by HUDA by passing a speaking order dated 522001 (Annexure P-13).
Therefore, claim is stated to be baseless.
It is further stated that the claim of the petitioners that HUDA has not framed service rules for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers is incorrect.
In fact HUDA has framed its own service Rules known as HUDA Service Regulations, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as HUDA Regulations), which were duly approved by the Haryana State Government as conveyed vide their memo No. 10/188/ITCP dated 1781989.
In this view of the matter, it was wrong to allege that the recruitment/promotions in HUDA are made in accordance with the provisions of the 1986 PWD Rules.
In fact the provisions of the HUDA Regulations provide for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers.
4.
The respondents No. 9 to 11 have also filed their written statement in which it is stated that their category and that of the petitioners are separates and therefore, the petitioners are not eligible for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers as there is no quota for promotion from the post of Surveyor to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil).
It is further stated that from the category of respondent Nos. 9 to 11 only three persons have been promoted as Junior Engineers whereas from the category of Road Inspectors etc. more than 20 persons have already been promoted as Junior Engineers.
Therefore, the vacancies are of quota of the category of respondent Nos. 9 to 11 i.e. Foreman/Assistant Foreman/Inspector Water Works/Chargeman/Electrician etc.
Except for the respondent Nos. 9 to 11 none else has been promoted as Junior Engineer till date.
It is also stated that Ram Dutt Sharma, Foreman (respondent No. 8) was also given current duty charge vide order dated 2831988, however his category is separate from that of Junior Engineers Electrical.
Besides, respondent Nos. 9 to 11 have rendered more regular service than the petitioners.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the records of the case.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has contended that the consideration of the case for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) is to be done in accordance with the provisions of the 1986 Rules, which are applicable in the case and that HUDA Regulations are only draft Rules which have no force of law.
Therefore, the petitioners are liable to be considered and promoted to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) by applying 1986 Rules.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has placed reliance upon a decision by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Gulshan Nanda v. State of Haryana, 1997(4) Service Cases Today 459.
It is also contended that the current duty charge given to the private respondents to the posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) is without any basis inasmuch as the petitioners are senior and are liable to be considered and promoted.
6.
In response learned counsel appearing for the respondent HUDA contends that the claim of the petitioners is absolutely baseless and the 1986 Rules are in no way applicable to the services of the petitioner and rather the HUDA Regulations are applicable, in accordance with which the petitioners have no claim.
7.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 9 to 11 contends that the said respondents belong to a separate and distinct category from that of the petitioners and that the petitioners are not entitled for promotion to the posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) in accordance with the HUDA Regulations which provide the mode of appointment to the post of Junior Engineers.
8.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties, it would be appropriate to note that the claim of the petitioners in the present petition is primarily for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil).
The cadre strength of Junior Engineer (Civil) in the HUDA comprises of 257 posts.
Besides, there are 40 sanctioned posts of Junior Engineers (Electrical).
The grievances of the petitioner is that despite there being so many posts no surveyor till date has been promoted as Junior Engineer (Civil) even though a 10% quota is provided for them in terms the 1986 Rules.
In this manner, the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) is based on the 1986 Rules.
However, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have taken a clear and specific stand in their written statement that the HUDA Regulations govern the service conditions of the employees of HUDA for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers and that these Regulations were approved by the Haryana State Government which was conveyed vide its memo dated 1781989.
The said assertion is not controverted by the petitioners by way of replication nor is it otherwise shown to be incorrect.
The petitioners are admittedly employees of the HUDA.
The HUDA having taken a clear stand that HUDA Regulations are applicable for promotion to the post of Junior Engineers, it cannot be said that the petitioners are entitled for consideration for promotion to the posts of Junior Engineers (Civil) in accordance with 1986 Rules.
The HUDA Regulations provide the mode of recruitment for the posts of Junior Engineers as follows :  "90% posts shall be filled up by direct recruitment and 5% from Road Inspectors/Work Inspectors having 5 years experience and qualifications as prescribed for direct recruitment and 5% from Road Inspectors/Work Inspectors having 12 years experience.
Out of a circle of 20 vacancies, the 10th vacancy shall go to the officials promoted for against 5 years experience as Road Inspector/Work Inspectors and 20th vacancy shall go to a Road Inspector/Work Inspector having 12 years experience."
9.
Therefore, evidently 90% of the posts are to be filled by direct recruitment and 5% from Road Inspectors/Work Inspectors having five years experience and qualifications as prescribed for direct recruitment and 5% from Road Inspectors/Work Inspectors having 12 years experience.
Besides, out of a circle of 20 vacancies, the 10th vacancy is to go to the officials promoted for against five years experience as Road Inspector/Work Inspector and 20th vacancy is to go to a Road Inspector/Work Inspectors having 12 years experience.
There is no provision in the HUDA Regulations for consideration for promotion of Surveyors i.e. the category of the petitioners, to the posts of Junior Engineers (Civil).
As already noticed there are 257 sanctioned posts of Junior Engineers (Civil) and 5% of these posts works out to 13 posts which fall to the share of Road Inspectors/Work Inspectors, who are diploma holders.
Out of these 13 posts two posts have been filled up by promotion on regular basis and 9 posts have been filed up by assigning current duty charge to non-diploma holder employees on the basis of seniority.
However, this has been done only as a stop gap arrangement, keeping in view the fact that the eligible diploma holders are not available for the said  10.
There is no challenge by the petitioners to the HUDA Regulations to the effect that the HUDA Regulations are in any manner arbitrary or unjust to the extent that Surveyors have been excluded for being appointed as Junior Engineers (Civil).
The official respondents have stated that certain amendments in the HUDA Regulations are under process and the case of the Surveyors and certain other categories would also be considered for making them eligible for the post of Junior Engineers.
11.
Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances, it is evident that the statutory HUDA Regulations do not provide for promotion to the posts of Junior Engineers (Civil) from amongst Surveyors.
In this situation, the Court cannot direct the respondents to consider and promote the petitioners to the posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) de hors the statutory rules.
It is for the authorities and the Government to provide for channel of promotions for various categories of the employees to the posts of Junior Engineers (Civil).
The respondents have already indicated that certain amendments to the HUDA Regulations are in process and the case of Surveyors and certain other categories would also be considered.
It is hoped that the necessary amendments are made by HUDA.
However, this Court cannot give directions in this regard.
12.
The ratio of the judgment in Gulshan Nanda's case (supra), cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners, is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
In the said case HUDA had itself taken the stand that draft rules as framed by it were approved by the State Government.
However, it was not shown that the said draft rules had been enforced.
The same is not the position in the case in hand, as it is not a case of draft rules being applicable.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2, as already noticed, have taken a clear stand that HUDA Regulations applied to the case of the petitioners.
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment in Gulshan Nanda's case (supra) is inapplicable.
Even otherwise, it is not shown by the petitioner as to how the 1986 Rules would apply to them as they are admittedly not employees of the State Government in the PWD Public Health Department to whom they apply.
The petitioners are employees of the HUDA.
As such the petitioners are not entitled for consideration for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) on the basis of the 1986 Rules and neither are they entitled for promotion under the HUDA Regulations as they are.
In the circumstances there is no error of jurisdiction in the order dated 522001 (Annexure P-13) impugned by the petitioners.
13.
The claim of the petitioners, therefore, for quashing the orders dated 2731998 (Annexure P-7) and 2062000 (Annexure P-10), whereby current duty charge of Junior Engineer has been assigned to Road Inspectors/Foreman vide order dated 2731998 (Annexure P-7) to some Foreman/Chargeman vide order dated 2062000 (Annexure P-10) is also without any basis as they do not belong to the category of the petitioners for whom there is no quota for promotion to the posts of Junior Engineer (Civil).
14.
There is, thus no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.