Viney Mittal, J - The defendant-State of Punjab and another are in appeal.
A suit for declaration was filed by the plaintiff challenging the order dated November 4, 1992 whereby the punishment of withholding of one increment and an amount of Rs. 56,87735 was ordered to be recovered from him.
The plaintiff's appeal against the aforesaid punishment order also failed.
Accordingly, the plaintiff challenged the aforesaid order of punishment and dismissal of his appeal.
2.
The plaintiff maintained that he was served memorandum of chargesheet under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rule, 1970.
An enquiry was conducted.
As per the aforesaid enquiry, the plaintiff was found to be not guilty for charge No. 1 and plaintiff was exonerated for charges No. 2 and 3.
However, the disciplinary authority held him guilty for both the charges, disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
The plaintiff maintained that in fact no formal show cause notice was issued to him after disagreeing with the said enquiry report.
Accordingly, the order of punishment passed by the punishing authority, upheld in appeal, was challenged on that ground as well.
3.
The defendants contested the suit.
They defended the punishment order as well as appellate order.
It has been contended that the rule has been properly followed as the plaintiff has been given an opportunity of hearing.
4.
The learned trial court, after perusing the evidence on record, dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
It was held that in fact the procedure had been duly followed by the punishing authority.
The plaintiff took up the matter in appeal.
The learned first appellate Court re-apprised the entire evidence on record.
On such reappraisal, the learned first appellate Court found that the punishing authority had failed to afford an opportunity to the plaintiff by furnishing him a copy of the note of disagreement apprising him the reasons.
Accordingly, it was held that the defence of the plaintiff has been prejudiced.
It was also held that the aforesaid violation was a glaring violation of the principles of natural justice.
Accordingly the punishment order as well as the appellate order was held to be illegal and bad.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff was allowed.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
5.
Nothing has been shown that the findings recorded by the learned first appellate Court suffer from any infirmity or are contrary to the record in any manner.
6.
No question of law, much less any substantial question of law, arises in this appeal.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed