Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - The appellant filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 29.3.1979 reverting him from the post of Clerk to the post of Bill Distributor, was void.
2.
Case of the plaintiff is that he joined service as Clerk in the scale of Rs. 60-4-100 w.e.f.
9.12.1964 and was confirmed on 761965.
He was placed under suspension on 2681976 and after enquiry, he was reverted to the post of Bill Distributor in the same scale of pay and period of suspension was ordered to be treated as leave of the kind due.
Challenge was based on the contention that proper opportunity was not given in the departmental enquiry.
3.
The suit was contested and it was stated that the plaintiff had been given due opportunity.
4.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
It was held that the plaintiff was charge-sheeted for harassing the public visiting the cash window for making payments and there were irregularities in the deposit of payments which charges were admitted in the reply of the plaintiff with the only explanation that he had removed the discrepancies.
The Enquiry Officer held the charges to be proved.
The trial court held that the plaintiff was not able to prove that he had not been given due opportunity in the course of enquiry.
5.
On appeal, the findings of the trial court were affirmed.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant contended that punishment of reversion could be imposed if a person had been earlier promoted from a lower post and the same could not be imposed on a person directly recruited to the post which he was holding.
He also submitted that suspension period has been treated as leave of the kind due without giving any opportunity to the appellant.
Learned counsel for the appellant relied on judgments of the Apex Court in State of UP and others v. Smt. Jaya Quddusi, 1994(1) SCT 698 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2254, Nyadar Singh v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 1979, Hussain Sasansaheb Kaladgi v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1987 SC 1627 and a judgment of this court in Shri Nand Kishore v. The State of Punjab and others, 1983(1) SLR 207.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the appellant having been found guilty of the misconduct was rightly reverted to a lower post.
8.
Concept of `reversion' implies that a person is working on a higher post as a result of promotion from a lower post.
In the present case, the petitioner was directly recruited as clerk.
He could not have been reverted to a post which was never held by him.
The decisions relied upon by the counsel for the appellant support his submission.
Even if the post on which the appellant is reverted, is in the same pay scale, reversion is not justified.
However, there is no error in order directing that period of suspension be treated as leave of the kind due as the petitioner has not been exonerated.
9.
For the above reasons, order of reversion to the post of Bill Clerk is set aside and it is declared that the appellant continued to work as Clerk.
This will be without prejudice to any other punishment which may be imposed for the misconduct which has been established in accordance with law.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal allowed.