Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - The respondent was employed as a Constable in Punjab Police.
He joined service in the year 1957.
Vide order dated 4121979, he was dismissed from service on the allegation that on 5111978, while on duty, he was found drunk and when Inspector Krishan Kumar prepared a docket for his medical examination, he slipped away and absented himself from duty.
Order of dismissal was upheld in appeal and revision.
He filed a suit for declaring order or dismissal from service to be void on the ground that enquiry was not in accordance with Rule 1625 of the Punjab Police Rules and the order of punishment was not in accordance with Rule 1622 as the length of service of the plaintiff was not considered before the order was passed and opportunity for personal hearing was not given.
2.
The suit was contested.
3.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
It was held that reasonable opportunity was given to the plaintiff in the course of enquiry.
As regards his contention that he was not allowed to examine defence witnesses.
It was held that he examined one defence witness and was directed to produce his second witness on 2211979 but plaintiff gave in writing that he did not want to examine the said second witness.
Subsequently, the word `not' was obliterated from the order dated 2211979 which was at Page 6 of the enquiry file Ex. P7.
As regards the contention that length of service was not taken into account and personal hearing was not given, it was observed that the plaintiff was called for personal hearing as reflected in the impugned order and his reply was duly considered.
Contention that the misconduct did not fall in the definition of `gravest acts' of misconduct on which order of dismissal could be passed under Rule 162, it was held that the contention had no merit.
4.
On appeal, the view taken by the trial court was reversed on the ground that plaintiff wanted to examine one more defence witness but he was not given opportunity and the trial court erred in holding that the word `not' was subsequently obliterated.
It was also held that plaintiff was not proved to have been given personal hearing though it was so recited in the order of dismissal.
5.
When this second appeal came up for hearing on 18.7.1984, execution of decree of the lower appellate court was stayed which was continued by order dated 22101984 subject to payment of arrears of pay, allowances etc. on filing of Indemnity bond.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that due opportunity was given to the plaintiff and even if there was deficiency, the respondent could not be reinstated.
At best, direction for fresh enquiry or giving further hearing could have been given.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent-defendant states that now 24 years have passed from the date of the order of dismissal and 20 years have passed since the date of reinstatement and respondent has already attained the age of superannuation.
He submits that amounts already withdrawn should not be interfered with and in the interest of justice, either the appeal should be dismissed or the impugned order may be suitably modified.
He submits that having regard to the fact that the appellant served for 22 years before being dismissed, he should not be deprived of pension.
Reliance is placed on a judgment of this court in Narinder Kaur v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) SLR 76 wherein it was held that the authorities ought to consider whether lesser punishment like compulsory retirement could be justified for the misconduct having regard to length of service.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that reasonable opportunity had been given to the plaintiff and he had also been given personal hearing.
However, nothing is mentioned in the impugned order as to whether dismissal was justified when the respondent had already rendered 22 years of service.
In these circumstances, the impugned order is converted into order of compulsory retirement from the date of order.
The respondent- plaintiff will be entitled to appropriate benefits on the footing that he was compulsorily retired from the date of the passing of the impugned order, adjusting the amount already paid.
Necessary calculation will be made and payments due will be released to the respondent-plaintiff within six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by the concerned authorities.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal partly allowed.