SS Saron, J - The petitioner in the present case joined the office of the Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation respondent No. 1 as Junior Auditor on 1941974, which post was redesignated as Senior Assistant Accountant.
He was promoted as Senior Auditor on 9.3.1981 and he worked as such till 1988.
During this period, the petitioner was directed to look after the work of Deputy District Manager (Accounts), PUNSUP, Kapurthala, in his own pay scale in pursuance of order dated 29.10.1988 (Annexure P-2).
After joining at Kapurthala, the petitioner worked as Deputy District Manager at different places till 2881997, when he was formally promoted and asked to join the new place of posting at Ludhiana.
The copy of the order dated 2881997 promoting the petitioner and other Senior Auditors as Assistant Manager (Accounts)/Senior Deputy District Manager (Accounts) is appended with the writ petition as Annexure P-3.
The said order contained the condition that the promotees would be on probation initially for a period of one year as provided by the PUNSUP Service Regulations, 1985.
2.
The period of probation of the petitioner was to be expire on 31.8.1998.
However, the same was extended with retrospective effect in terms of order dated 29.4.1999 (Annexure P-5).
The period of probation of the petitioner was thus, extended from 191998 to 31.8.1999.
The petitioner contends that the service rendered by him was good and to the satisfaction of the higher officers and there were no adverse remarks against him during the period of probation.
However, without giving any reason, his probation period was extended for a period of one year.
The petitioner made a representation to the Managing Director praying that the probation period which had been extended is illegal and that the same cannot be extended with retrospective effect.
The copy of the representation made by the petitioner is on record as Annexure P-6.
No order was passed by the respondent No. 1 on his representation.
However, without giving any reasons, the petitioner was reverted vide impugned order dated 2781999 (Annexure P-1), which was communicated to him by respondent No. 2 District Manager PUNSUP, Patiala, on 1091999.
He was reverted three days prior to the date his probation period was to come to an end.
3.
The petitioner has thus filed the present writ petition challenging his reversion in pursuance of the impugned order dated 2681999 issued on 2781999 (Annexure P-1) whereby he has been reverted.
Besides, he has prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay all the allowances along with pay etc. to him for the period he officiated/performed the duties of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) i.e. from 27101988 to 2881997.
4.
Notice was issued in the case and the respondents No. 1 and 2 have filed their written statement.
The material aspects of the case of the petitioner are admitted.
His joining as Junior Auditor to 1941974 on adhoc basis is admitted.
It is stated that his services were regularised w.e.f.
1.11.1974 and that the nomenclature of the post of Junior Auditor was changed to Senior Assistant, which is a separate cadre from that of the Senior Auditor.
It is, however, accepted that the petitioner was promoted as Senior Auditor on 6.3.1981 and he joined on 9.3.1981 at Ferozepur.
The petitioner was asked to look after the work of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in his own pay scale vide order dated 27/29101988 (Annexure P- 2).
It has been denied that the petitioner joined at Kapurthala, as Deputy District Manager (Accounts) by way of promotion.
Rather he was only asked to look after the work of the said post in his own pay scale.
The regular promotion of the petitioner as Deputy District Manager (Accounts) on 2881997 and his joining at Ludhiana on 191997 has been admitted.
With regard to probation period, it has been stated that the case of the petitioner was considered for clearing his probation period.
However, the position of cadre strength was changed as persons as Sr. No. 4 and 7 of the seniority list dated 1591989 also became eligible for promotion, at that stage.
The petitioner being on probation was reverted being the last promotee and the reversion order was passed by the respondent-Corporation.
In these circumstances, it was as per the rules and bye-laws.
It is also denied that the petitioner rendered his services to the satisfaction of the higher officers.
Some cases of disciplinary action were pending against the petitioner and at one stage, he was not found fit for promotion.
In substance the reason for not confirming the petitioner when his probationary period was about to end is that the position of the cadre strength was changed and at this juncture, the petitioner being the last promotee was reverted.
The reversion order was passed to accommodate those who were seniors to the petitioner.
It is admitted by the respondents that the requisite experience for promotion to the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) is seven years and the petitioner fulfilled the said requirement.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and given our thoughtful consideration to their respective submissions.
6.
The primary grievance of the petitioner is for quashing the order Annexure P-1 whereby he has been reverted from the post of Deputy District Manager.
Besides, the petitioner claims for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay all allowances along with pay etc. to him during the period he officiated/performed the duties of Deputy District Manager from 27101988 to 2881997.
7.
Insofar as the first grievance of the petitioner is concerned, it may be noticed that the Regulations known as Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation (Revised Service) Regulation 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations) govern the service conditions of the petitioner.
Regulation 10 of the Regulations deals with method of appointment to the post in the service i.e. the service of the Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd Regulation 10 reads as under :-  "10.
Method of appointment.
- Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made by any or all the modes in their respective order indicated below :-  (I) by direct recruitment which also includes/appointment -  a) by deputation; b) by absorption into service of the employees taken on deputation; c) by transfer, if a suitable candidate is not available by the aforementioned methods; Provided that filling up of any post on absorption/transfer shall be made with the prior approval of the Board of Directors;  (II) by promotion from amongst eligible candidates of employees.
NOTE (1).
The appointing authority may prescribe a test both written and oral for the purpose of determining the suitability of candidates for direct appointment."
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was promoted as Deputy District Manager (Accounts) on regular basis alongwith other Senior Auditors vide order dated 2881997 (Annexure P-3).
The said order indicates that the promoted officer would be on probation initially for a period of one year as provided by the Regulations.
Regulation 11 deals with period of probation of the members of service.
The same reads as under :-  "11.
Probation of Members of Service.
- (I) Persons appointed to the Service shall remain on probation :- (i) for a period of two years, if recruited by direct appointment; (ii) for a period of one year if recruited by promotion or transfer.
The appointing authority may in its discretion extend the probation period of employees recruited directly as well as by promotion or by transfer by six months at a time subject to total extension of one year in each individual case provided that :-  (2).
If, during the period of probation the work or conduct of a person appointed to the service is, in the opinion of the appointing authority, not satisfactory it may :- (a) dispense with his services, if he has been recruited by direct appointment, or (b) (i) revert him to his former post, (ii) deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment permit."
8.
Regulation 11(I)(ii) of the above Regulations shows that the person appointed to the Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd Service, is to remain on probation for a period of one year if recruited by promotion.
Besides, the appointing authority may in its discretion extend the probation period of employees recruited directly as well as by promotion or by transfer by six months at a time subject to the total extension of one year in each individual case.
The proviso thereto enjoins that if during the period of probation the work and conduct of the persons appointed to the service is in the opinion of the appointing authority not satisfactory, it may in the case of promotion revert him to his former post or deal with him in such a manner as the terms and conditions of the previous appointment permit.
The petitioner has submitted that there is nothing against him with regard to his work and conduct.
This in fact is not even the case of the respondents that the petitioner has been reverted during the period of probation on the ground that there is anything disparaging against him.
The reason given for reversion is that the petitioner was promoted to the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) on 2881997 and it is vide order dated 29.4.1999 (Annexure P-5) that the probation period was extended from 191998 to 31.8.1999.
In other words it was extended with retrospective effect from 191998 vide order dated 29.4.1999.
Though there is nothing in the order that it was being extended on account of cadre strength being changed.
However the reason for reverting the petitioner is that the cadre strength was changed as persons at Sr. No. 4 and 7 of the seniority list dated 1591989 also became eligible for promotion.
The petitioner being the last promotee was reverted.
The promotion order of the petitioner dated 2881997 (Annexure P-3) does not provide for reversion of any of the employee on the basis of the change of the cadre position.
Besides, it is ununderstandable as what would be the change in the cadre position when the petitioner has been working in his own pay scale on the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) for the period from 27101988 to 2881997 i.e. for a period of nine years.
The petitioner has placed on record the final seniority list that was circulated vide letter dated 1591989 (Annexure P-7).
The persons mentioned at Sr. No. 12, 13 and 14 of the said list were promoted earlier, though they were junior to the petitioner and were working on the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) and had officiated on the said post for a lesser period as compared to the petitioner.
It has, however, been contended by the respondents that the persons mentioned at Sr. No. 12 to 14 of the aforesaid seniority list earned their promotion as per rule.
The case of the petitioner was also considered.
However, he was denied promotion as he could not fulfill the requirement under the rule and that cases of disciplinary action were pending against the petitioner and his record was not clear.
It has, however, not been made clear as to which requirement of any rule, the petitioner did not fulfill.
Insofar as the disciplinary cases are concerned, it is to be noticed that the respondents has not indicated anything with regard to any penalty or punishment having been imposed on the petitioner which would disentitle him for promotion to the post of Deputy District Manger (Accounts) or for reverting him during the period of probation.
In other words, there is no material on record and neither has any been shown from which it can be said that the petitioner was not entitled to be considered for promotion.
On one hand, the respondents have taken the stand that the reversion of the petitioner is on account of change of the cadre position and the petitioner being the junior-most has been reverted.
However, at the same time, it is urged that cases of disciplinary action were pending against him.
Both the stands are not only inconsistent but are even otherwise not substantiated.
Therefore, the action of the respondents in reverting the petitioner from the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in terms of the impugned order dated 2781999 (Annexure P-1), in our view is wholly illegal and is liable to be quashed.
9.
Coming to the second grievance of the petitioner with regard to claim to pay and allowances during the period the petitioner officiated/performed the duties of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) from 27101988 to 2881997 may be considered.
In support of this contention the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon two judgments of this Court in the case of Tarsem Singh C.W.P.
No. 17902 of 1996 decided on 3031998 and the case of Jagdish Singh CWP No. 13120 of 1997 decided on 5121997.
In Tarsem Singh's case, the petitioner sought the pay scale admissible to Deputy District Manager (Accounts) for the period he worked on the post.
The petitioner in that case, was asked to look after the work of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in his own scale.
The Division Bench allowed the said claim of the petitioner and granted him the pay scale of Deputy District Manager (Accounts).
In S Jagdish Singh's case also this Court came to the conclusion that merely because the petitioner had agreed to work as an officiating Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in his own pay scale, would not preclude him from raising a claim for being paid the salary of the higher post.
The petitioner was held entitled to the pay scale of Deputy District Manager (Accounts).
However, the payment of arrears were restricted to three years two months prior to the date of the filing of the petition.
The said cases are distinguishable and not applicable to present case as may be noticed hereinafter.
10.
The claim of the petitioner is belated.
A Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of OP Kumar v. Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation and others, C.W.P.
No. 9650 of 1998 decided on 161999, declined the plea of the petitioner therein for salary of the post of Deputy District Manager, PUNSUP, on which he had actually performed duties from 26.5.1992 to 2151998 on ground of laches.
The ratio of the judgment in OP Kumar's case (supra) applies to the case in hand.
11.
The grievances of the petitioner for paying him the salary for the period he worked as Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in his own pay scale is highly belated and barred by laches.
The petitioner was admittedly working as Senior Auditor and vide order dated 29101983 (Annexure P-2).
He was merely deputed to look after the work of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) PUNSUP, in his own pay scale.
The order admittedly was passed on 29.10.1988 and he continued to work on the higher post till his regular promotion on 2881997 (Annexure P-3).
Therefore, the claim of the petitioner is highly belated as he has accepted this condition as far back in October, 1988 and he has approached this Court by way of the present writ petition in September 1999.
During all this period, the petitioner did not raise any objection with regard to the grant of pay for the higher post.
He accepted the condition to look after the work of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) in his own pay scale.
It is only after the reversion order was passed on 2681999 (Annexure P-1) that he has while assailing the said order also made a grievance for the grant of higher pay scale of the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) for the period from 27101988 to 2081997.
Following the rule laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, we decline to interfere in the matter of pay for the higher post on the ground of laches.
12.
In view of the above the writ petition is partly allowed.
The impugned order dated 2781999 (Annexure P-1) whereby the petitioner has been reverted is quashed.
However, the claim of the petitioner for the grant of pay scale and arrears of pay for the period he had worked on the post of Deputy District Manager (Accounts) i.e. from 27.8.1988 to 2881997 in his own pay scale is declined.
However, there shall no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.