Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner who was appointed as Sepoy in the Indian Army on 9111971 took voluntary retirement in the year 1989 and was lateron on 10111989 appointed as constable in the Punjab Police and posted at Sangrur.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on the ground of allegation of unauthorised absence on 10111998 after conducting a departmental enquiry.
Against the order of punishment of dismissal, the petitioner preferred an appeal vide order dated 23.3.1999 and representation against that order was also dismissed by the DGP Punjab Police on 2992000.
The contention of the petitioner is that order of dismissal is in violation of principles of natural justice.
He had been granted commendation certificates and had put in substantial number of years and as such should have been considered by the competent authority at the time of imposing the punishment.
On these premises the petitioner challenges the impugned order of punishment in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The respondents upon notice filed a written statement.
The facts are hardly in dispute, but it is stated that the enquiry has been initiated against the petitioner in furtherance to the DDR No. 16 dated 21.10.1995 when he failed to report for duty and remained unauthorisedly absent from 25101995 to 24.5.1996.
Despite notice the petitioner did not participate in the departmental enquiry, which the conducted exparte in accordance with law and thereafter a show cause notice was served upon the petitioner to which he neither filed a reply nor he appeared before the competent authority.
Resultantly, the impugned order of punishment was passed.
3.
We heard the learned counsel for the parties at considerable length.
The enquiry officer submitted his report dated 8101998 where findings were recorded against the petitioner.
A notice to show cause was served upon the petitioner to which, as already notice, he did not file any reply.
The petitioner has been unauthorisedly absent for 235 days.
It is clear from the record that the petitioner was found absent on two different occasions.
Once he was absent for 212 days, while on the other occasion, he was absent for the remaining period.
However, in the earlier period of absence no serious punishment was inflicted upon the petitioner, thus, he had adequate opportunity to mend his ways being the member of disciplined force.
The issuance of commendation certificate is an appreciation of his work, but no way endorse patent indiscipline repeatedly shown by the petitioner.
The appellate authority as well as the revisional authority have carefully examined the entire record and have passed reasoned orders.
The callousness of the petitioner in pursuing his remedies is even clear from the fact that the appeal against the impugned order of dismissal was barred by time considerably and there is hardly any explanation for such inordinate delay before us.
4.
It is a settled principle of law that the Courts would not normally interfere in the orders of punishment passed by the disciplinary authority after compliance with the procedure prescribed.
The impugned orders do not offend any of the regulations of the Punjab Police Rules nor are they violative of principles of natural justice.
Imposing a punishment is a matter which primarily falls in the domain of disciplinary authority.
Unless imposing of such punishment is patently unconscionable and is opposed to basic rule of law, the Court would not interfere in the quantum of punishment.
Reliance in this regard is made to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of UP and others v. Ashok Singh and another, (1996) 1 Supreme Court Cases 302 : 1996(2) SCT 139 (SC) and to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ex. Constable Satnam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) RSJ 353 : 1997(4) SCT 475 (P&H).
5.
The reasons afore-stated and in consonance with the law enunciated in the above judgements, we find no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.