GS Singhvi, J - Feeling threatened with the termination of their services during the impending vacations of 1994, the petitioners, who had been appointed as Social Studies Teachers on purely temporary basis though after due selection by the Selection Committee which had considered the names of candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange, have approached this Court for restraining the respondents from discontinuing their services.
2.
A perusal of the averments contained in the writ petition which have remained uncontroverted due to non-filing of the written statement by the respondents shows that the petitioners were appointed as Social Studies Teachers through employment exchange and after being interviewed by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
The posts against which they were appointed were regular posts.
However, they felt that the State Government is likely to terminate their services during the vacation and with a view to save their source of livelihood, the petitioners sought intervention of the Court by filing this petition.
They achieved their immediate object because while issuing notice of motion, the Court directed the respondents to maintain status quo till further orders.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
In my opinion, the petitioners' case is fully covered by the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) SCT 714 (P&H) : 1995(4) RSJ 329 in which, after an indepth analysis of the mechanism of ad hoc appointments, the Court laid down the following propositions:-  "Where an ad hoc or temporary appointment is made after consideration of the candidature of all eligible persons in accordance with the equality clause, the action of the employer in limiting the appointment upto a particular date with a stipulation of automatic termination of service, even though the post is not abolished and a regularly selected person is not available, will have to be treated as wholly arbitrary, irrational, unjust, oppressive and unconscionable and the same is liable to be struck down being contrary to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It may be a different situation where an appointment is given for a specified work and the post is created only for that work and the service of the employee is terminated due to the cessation of work or where a condition is incorporated in the contract of employment that the service of the employee will stand terminated on the availability of selected candidate.
However, there cannot be any justification to limit the appointment to a particular date merely because the employer chooses to describe the employment as ad hoc.
In our opinion, the employer cannot use his prerogative to lay down the terms and conditions of employment by incorporating a condition that the service of the employee will stand terminated on a particular date even though the post continues to remain available and the employer requires man power for doing the work in relation to that post.
Such condition in the order/letter of appointment in case of the teachers cannot but be termed as unreasonable and contrary to public interest.
The student community as a whole is the worst sufferer on account of non-availability of teachers and the executive authorities cannot be permitted to act arbitrarily by incorporation wholly unreasonable conditions of employment in the order of appointment of the teachers."
4.
By applying the ratio of the aforesaid decision to the facts of this case, I hold that the petitioners are entitled to continue in service without interruption till they are replaced by the persons selected by the recruiting agency, like the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
If the posts have been taken out from the purview of the Board, then they shall be entitled to continue in service till the availability of candidates selected by the competent authority.
If during the pendency of the writ petition, the State Government has framed any policy for regularising the services of persons, like the petitioners, then the competent authority shall consider their cases for regularisation and pass appropriate orders.
The writ petition is disposed of in the matter indicated above.
Petition allowed.