Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner-Ramesh Singh Rawat have approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India with a prayer that the Court may issue a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the impugned order dated 24th January, 2003 passed by the Executive Engineer, Electrical Division PWD (B&R), Hisar, Haryana, Annexure P/3 to the writ petition, being contrary to the record and the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Hon'ble Court in the case of Tek Chand v. State of Haryana and others, 2001(3) RSJ 640 : 2002(1) SCT 308 (P&H) with a further prayer for issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner with effect from 1.2.1996 with all consequential benefits.
2.
Necessary facts are :- that the petitioner was engaged as a daily wager on the post of Helper on 19th October, 1992.
The State of Haryana on 7.3.1996 declared a policy for regularisation of services of daily wagers.
This policy was modified on 18th March, 1996 and it was provided that a person who has put in three years of service and fulfils other conditions under the policy, his/her services would be regularised.
The case of the petitioner was forwarded by respondent No. 2, but was declined by the competent authority on the ground that the petitioner has the break of more than one month for the period 12.4.1994 to 13.5.1994 and, as such, he does not satisfy the conditions stated in the policy and was not entitled to regularisation.
The petitioner having received the said letter, served a notice dated 1412003 upon the respondents through his counsel, but the claim of the petitioner was rejected, giving rise to the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents have filed the written statement.
The facts are not much in controversy and the respondents have stated that there is break of more than one month (32 days) within one year and, as such, the petitioner does not satisfy the essential conditions of the policy and is not entitled to regularisation.
It is also stated that the petitioner was not engaged through employment exchange and, as such, was not entitled to be regularised, in terms of the judgment of this Court in the case of Balwinder Singh v. State of Punjab, 1998(4) SLR 35 : 1998(2) SCT 149 (P&H).
According to the respondents, the petitioner has not been working continuously and as per the documents annexed to the reply.
The petitioner does not satisfy the conditions of regularisation prescribed under the policy.
4.
Along with the reply, the respondents have annexed the policy framed by the State for regularisation of service of such person dated 7th March, 1996.
Relevant clause relating to casual and daily rated employees of the said policy reads as under :-  "The casual and daily rated employees who have completed five years service on 31st January, 1966 and were in service on 31st January, 1966 shall be regularised provided they have worked for a minimum period of 240 days in each year and the break in service in any year is not more than one month at a time.
Such employees who have worked on different posts having different designations in the same Government shall also be regularised if they fulfil other conditions.
On regularisation they shall be put in the time scale of pay applicable to the lowest group `D' cadre in the Government and they would be entitled to all other allowance and benefit available to regular servants of the corresponding grade."
5.
The bare reading of the above clause of the policy of the State, clearly shows that the workmen who have worked for 240 days and the break in service in any year is not more than one month at a time shall be entitled to regularisation.
The expression `one month at a time', is relatable to any year of service.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that one month has to be one calender month and the period of one month cannot be bifurcated into two different calendar months.
7.
We find this submission without any merit.
The expression `one month' is controlled by the expression at a time and thus relatable to one calender month.
As per the copy of the muster roll annexed to the reply, as Annexure R/3, the petitioner had worked for more than 240 days in the years 1993-1994 to 1995-1996.
However, there was clear break of (32) days in one year ie in the year 1993-1994.
The period of break was stated to be 12th April, 1994 to 13th May, 1994.
In this view of the matter and keeping in mind the plain reading of the clause, referred to above, we were constrained to hold that the petitioner did not satisfy the second condition postulated in the clause for regularisation of his services.
8.
The judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Tek Chand (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.
The principle laid down by the Full Bench was that the benefit of regularisation can be denied only in a case where the break is attributable to the employee and not in a case where the employer has caused the break i.e. not the case pleaded by the petitioner-workman.
Admittedly period to 12th April, 1994 and after 13th May, 1994, the petitioner was in employment.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated, we are unable to find any error in the order of the respondent No. 2 dated 24th January, 2003.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel of the respondent upon the case of Balwinder Singh (supra) is also of no consequence in the present case.
That is not the reason for which the petitioner has been denied the regularisation of services, as such, it is not necessary for us to deliberate on that issue at all.
10.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.