Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
The petitioner who joined as a driver with the respondent-department on 1121988 was served with a charge sheet under Rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
On 26th July, 1999, the petitioner was placed under suspension and subsequently reinstated pending inquiry vide order dated 2011991.
The departmental inquiry was conducted and the Inquiry Officer, vide his report dated 1771995 submitted his report and found that the charge against the petitioner was not proved.
Relevant findings recorded by the inquiry Officer reads as under :-  ".....The employee submitted in the form of the proof out door patient slip issued by the Government Hospital dated 2671990.
It is clear from this that driver was ill because of his illness he could not ply the bus at scheduled time whereas he requested for leave also.
Therefore, he is not at all guilty.
Therefore, in the end I have come to this conclusion that allegations charge levelled against Sh. Suresh Kumar driver No. 328 is not proved."
3.
Thereafter, the petitioner was served with notice and the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sonepat, found as if the charge levelled against the petitioner has already been proved and formed the opinion that strong warning should be issued to the petitioner to be careful in future and the suspension period to be restricted to subsistence allowance already paid.
Against this order, the petitioner submitted a representation, which was declined.
4.
A short question that arises for consideration is whether the disciplinary authority could award any punishment to the petitioner upon conclusion of the departmental inquiry, without expressing any opinion or reason for differing with the report of the Inquiry Officer ?
This question is no more res-integra and has been settled by a catena of judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The disciplinary authority, where wishes to differ with the opinion/findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer, is obliged to issue notice to the delinquent official in that regard.
The authority is also under obligation to record reasons for recording a finding contrary to the one recorded by the Inquiry Officer in his final report.
Reference can be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this cases of State Bank of India and Ors. v. KP Narayanan Kutty, JT 2003(1) SC 479 : 2003(3) SCT 743 (SC) and Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behri Mishra, AIR 1998 Supreme Court 2713 : 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC).
5.
Admittedly, nothing of the kind was done in the present case.
It is clear that complete record of this case had been produced in Court.
It shows that neither such notice was issued to the petitioner nor any reason for differing with the inquiry report was furnished to the delinquent official by the concerned disciplinary authority before passing the impugned order of punishment and as such, the impugned order cannot stand the scrutiny of law.
Prejudice to the petitioner is apparent as he got no opportunity to put forward his case before the competent authority.
6.
We are of the considered view that there has been violation of the principles of natural justice and settled principles governing the conduct of the departmental inquiry.
These violations are patent on the face of this record.
Persuaded by this undisputed position of facts and law, we are compelled to recall our order dated 2812001, which was passed in absence of the counsel for the petitioner.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders are set aside, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
We also grant liberty to the department to proceed in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.