Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
Both the petitioners before us passed their ETT Course from Union Territory, Chandigarh after qualifying 10+2 examination.
On 4th December, 2001, the State of Punjab issued an advertisement expressing the intention to appoint 3311 ETT Teachers in various district of the State of Punjab.
The petitioners being qualified submitted their applications.
On 26th December, 2001, letters of appointment were issued to the petitioners.
On 1st January, 2002, when they went to join their respective place of posting, they were not permitted to join on the pretext that they have qualified the ETT Course from Union Territory, Chandigarh.
Against this the petitioners made several representations to the competent authority, but to no avail, compelling them to approach this Court by way of filing the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to permit the petitioners to join in pursuance of their selection and appointment letters.
The letters of appointment are alleged to have been issued to the petitioners posting at Government Primary School, Puhali, Block Nathana, District Bathinda and Government Primary School Chowke, District Bathinda respectively.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed written statement.
It has been stated therein that the writ petition filed by the petitioners is liable to be dismissed as the petitioners are not entitled to any relief.
The basic reason in support thereof stated to be is that the petitioners have passed their ETT Course from Chandigarh, which is not recognsied by the State of Punjab.
Moreover, this qualification varies from State to State and language of teaching is also different.
The qualification acquired by the petitioners is not valid and, therefore, they have rightly been denied the appointment.
It is also stated that the State of Punjab has not recognised the ETT Course of Union Territory Chandigarh.
4.
In order to examine the merits or otherwise of the submissions raised before us, we consider it appropriate to refer to the relevant rules at the very outset.
The prescribed qualification for JBT/ETT Teacher under the Punjab State Education Class-III (Primary Schools Cadre) Service Rules, 1972 reads as under :-  "4.
Junior Basic Trained Teacher/Elementary 100% Direcgtor Appointment (i) Matric/10+2 Trained Teacher.
(II) Trained Elementary Teachers Training Two years course from Punjab State or any other State or UT declared equivalent & recognised by the Punjab Govt." 5.
On the basis of the above rules, the respondents have issued an advertisement for employing 3311 teachers, as already noticed.
The said advertisement contained the following clause in regard to qualifications :-  "xx xx xx 2.
Candidate must have passed Punjabi of Matric level.
Pref.
Qualifications : The candidate must have passed Elementary Teachers Training two years course from Punjab State or Union Territory, Chandigarh or from any State or UT which is recognised by the Punjab State.
3.
Besides this, for these posts those petitioners or non- petitioners having following qualifications regarding whom CWP No. 16436/98 Kuldeep Kaur v. Punjab State and Civil Writ Petition No. 15581/98 Harpreet Kaur v. Punjab State and others concerned Civil Writ Petitions, which were decided on 2522000, can apply.
These persons shall be given upper age relaxation as per orders of the Court."
6.
The candidature of an applicant, therefore, has to be considered in terms of the above clause.
A plain reading of the above clause clearly suggests that it can be split into the following categories :-  (a) the applicants who have passed their ETT two years Course from the State of Punjab; (b) the applicants, who have done that course from Union Territory, Chandigarh; and (c) from any State or Union Territory, which is recognised by the State of Punjab.
7.
Learned counsel appearing for the State contended that the expression "which is recognised by the Punjab State" would be applicable to all the above three clauses and not only to clause (a) and (b) supra.
In other words, to satisfy the condition of eligibility, the applicant who has done ETT Course from Chandigarh shall also have to satisfy the condition that such Course is recognised by the State of Punjab.
8.
We are of the considered view that such interpretation would patently frustrate the very purpose and object sought to be achieved by the clauses inserted in the advertisement, afore-noticed.
The expression must be read as ad jure jesus only to from any other State or Union Territory, but has no relevancy to the earlier part of the rules, as the intent of the rule making authority to provide such classifications is clear on the bare reading of the rule.
To wipe out such intention by interpretation suggested on behalf of the State would amount to doing complete violation of the settled rules of interpretation.
The above interpretation of the clauses would be fully supported even by the earlier practice of the State itself.
9.
It is not disputed before us and, in fact, stand admitted in the pleadings of the parties is that earlier on 2nd of April, 2001, 7230 posts of ETT teachers were advertised by the State of Punjab and a corrigendum thereto was issued which specifically provided that the persons who had done ETT Course from Chandigarh would be eligible to be appointed in various parts of the State.
This practice appears to have been also adopted in relation to the advertisement of 4th December, 2001.
This practice of the State in the past had given a clear impression to the candidates at large that applicants/candidates, who have done their ETT Course from Chandigarh were eligible and would be appointed to the post in question.
This was put into practice by issuance of letters of appointment to the candidates including the petitioners.
The action of the respondents in acting contrary to the spirits of the rule is not even supported by the plea of public interest.
Whereas on the one hand, it would be unjust and unfair to permit the respondents to dispense with the serivces of the petitioners in the above manner, and the action of the respondents would also suffer from the vice of discrimination.
They have given appointment to the candidates who have done their ETT Course from Chandigarh but had sought appointment in Ropar and Patiala district.
In fact, the petitioners have specifically pleaded and placed an appointment letter on record to show that one applicant has been appointed in district Sangrur.
The cumulative effect of this reasoning and conduct of the respondents is that the action of the respondents is not sustainable.
10.
Today during the course of hearing, learned counsel for the State has produced an order dated 21st March, 2003, which reads as under :-  "The Governor of Punjab is pleased not to recognise the ETT Course of UT Chandigarh as equivalent to the ETT Course of Punjab State."
11.
This has further worsened the stand taken the State.
We are surprised to read the language of the letter which suggests as if the Governor of the State of Punjab has personally passed that order.
While admittedly, the file from which this order emanates has not even been put up to the Governor formally in its normal course of business.
12.
We do not consider it necessary to go into the ancillary question arising therefrom.
Suffice it to say that even the directive of that letter must take effect prospectively and not retrospectively.
Consequently, it cannot divest the right which the petitioners have acquired in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Reference in this regard can be made to the case of Daljit Singh Narula and others v. The State of Haryana and otehrs, 1979(1) S.L.R.
420.
13.
Moreover, the advertisement nowhere offends the recruitment rules, referred to above.
The contention of the learned counsel for the State that such appointments are violative of the rules and as such no right much less legal right accrued in favour of the petitioners.
This argument is self- destructive inasmuch as in the counter-affidavit and even in the additional affidavit dated 472003, no such suggestion has been made.
14.
At this stage, we must notice that we were compelled to pass the order requiring presence of the concerned officer of the State Government.
In pursuance of the directions, Mrs. Tejinder Kaur, Principal Secretary School Education, Punjab, appeared and we passed the following order :-  "Mrs. Tejinder Kaur, Principal Secretary, School Education, Punjab, is present in Court, in furtherance to the earlier orders passed by the Court.
Her presence was necessitated, in view of the contradictory practice adopted by the government in relation to the appointment to the post in question as well as vague affidavits being filed from time to time.
The last affidavit was filed on 472003, which again was vague and it was nowhere stated that there was any mistake committed by any person in regard to issuance of letters of appointment to the persons/applicants, who had done their ETT Course from Union Territory, Chandigarh and were requesting for posting in Ropar, Fatehgarh Sahib and Patiala i.e. the three districts adjacent to the Chandigarh.
She has no record to show that any mistake was traced out, responsibility was fixed, or any action taken against the erring officials/officers.
She has clearly stated that even in the year 2000, same advertisement was issued containing specific clause in relation to applicants, who had done their ETT Course from Chandigarh and they required their appointments in these areas and were so appointed.
This practice appears to have been adopted till 2001 but probably erroneously.
She has also stated that so far no action has been taken in this regard by the concerned department.
We have noticed this stand of the government as it is necessary for the purpose of determining the necessary question involved in the present case with clarity and definiteness, which we will take into consideration what she has stated in Court today, while finally disposing of the writ petition."
15.
In view of the specific stand even now taken, we are of the considered view that the action of the respondents in not permitting the petitioners to join their duties in pursuance of their appointment letters is not sustainable, as the State is not correct in its action/submission that the ETT qualification acquired by the petitioners from Chandigarh was not in consonance with the advertisement issued on 4th December, 2001.
16.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and command the respondents to permit the petitioners to join their respective place of posting as mentioned in their appointment letters dated 7122001 and 26.12.2001 Annexures P/5 and P/7 respectively.
The order shall be complied within two weeks from today.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
17.
At this stage, it is not disputed before us, of course, without prejudice to the rights of the State, that the seniority and appointment of the petitioners will be governed by the order of merit prepared by the Selection Committee at the relevant time.
Petition allowed.