Viney Mittal, J - The plaintiff is in appeal.
He had filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he was entitled to all post retirement benefits such as gratuity, leave encashment, GPF etc. with effect from February 1, 1970 along with 12 percent interest on the arrears till realisation.
2.
It is averred by the plaintiff that he had joined Revenue Department of the State of Punjab as Patwari on August 20, 1954.
In the year 1970 he requested the State Government to allow him voluntary retirement.
The request of the plaintiff was accepted and vide order dated March 11, 1970, the Collector, Gurdaspur allowed the plaintiff to retire voluntarily with effect from February 1, 1970.
The plaintiff claimed that he had completed 16 years of service and was 37 years of age when he was retired from the service.
However, although he has been claiming his retiral benefits since thereafter but the aforesaid retiral benefits such as pension, leave encashment, GPF were not given to him.
In the year 1989-90, the Collector, Gurdaspur informed him that since at the time of retirement, the plaintiff had neither completed the required qualifying service of 25 years nor had attained the age of 55 years, he could not be given pensionary benefits.
The plaintiff claimed that the aforesaid rejection of the claim of the plaintiff was totally illegal and as such he filed the suit was aforesaid.
3.
The suit filed by the plaintiff was contested by the defendants.
Separate but identical written statements were filed by the two defendants.
The maintainability of the suit was challenged.
It was also maintained that the suit was barred by limitation.
The factum of the appointment of the plaintiff and the order of his retirement passed by the Collector, Gurdaspur on March 11, 1970 was not disputed.
However, the claim of the plaintiff was contested on the ground that he had merely completed 15 years 5 months and 15 days of service.
He had sought voluntary retirement.
At that time, he was only 36 years and 6 months of age.
Therefore, he was not entitled to any pensionary benefits.
In fact that application filed by the plaintiff for voluntary retirement was considered as resignation and the same was accepted as such by the competent authority.
The defendants relied upon the provisions of rules 532 (a) (b) (c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (Revised Edition) (Correct upto 31st January, 1969) (hereinafter referred as the "Rules") pertaining to voluntary retirement.
It was maintained that on the aforesaid date, the plaintiff had not completed 25 years of qualifying service and neither had attained the age of 55 years as required under the rules and, therefore, his representation dated February 21, 1987 had been rejected.
4.
The learned trial Court on the basis of the pleas taken by the respective parties and the interpretation of the Rules, dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff.
Even an appeal filed by him before the learned first appellate Court failed.
5.
I have heard Shri Bhagwan Singh, Advocate appearing for the appellant and Shri Rakesh Verma, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of he case.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the following substantial questions of law are involved in the present appeal :  (a) as to whether it could be held that the claim of the plaintiff was not maintainable in view of Rule 532 (a) (b) (c) of the Rules ?
(b) As to whether the case of the plaintiff was to be covered under the aforesaid rule 532(a) (b) (c) of the Rules or Rule 612 of the Rules ?
(c) As to whether it could be held that the suit filed by the plaintiff was barred by limitation ?
7.
At this stage, it may be relevant to reproduce rule 532(a) (b) and (c) as well as rule 612 of the Rules for retiring persons as under :  532 (a) A retiring pension is granted to a Government employee who is permitted to retire from service after completing qualifying service for twenty-five years or such less time as may for any special class of Government employees be prescribed.
(b) A retiring pension is also granted to a Government employee who is required by Government to retire after completing twenty-five years qualifying service or more and who has not attained the age of fifty-five years.
(c) A retiring pension is also granted to a Government employee other than a Class IV Government employee -  (i) who is retired by the appointing authority on or after he attains the age of 55 years, by giving him not less than three months notice; (ii) who retires on or after attaining the age of 55 years by giving not less than three months notice of his intention to retire to the appointing authority : Provided that where the notice is given before the age of fifty-five years is attained, it shall be given effect to from a date not earlier than the date on which the age of fifty-five years is attained.
612(1) After a service of not less than ten years, a pension may be granted not exceeding the following amounts :- (a) For retiring pensions :- -------------------- (As tabulated)----------- (b) For other pensions :- Up to 24 years of completed service, as in clause (a) above, and after 25 years of completed service or above 30/60th of average emoluments subject to a maximum of Rs. 5,000 a year or Rs. 416.2/3 per mensem (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), in respect of officers retiring from service on or after the 5th January, 1961, the amount of pension shall be regulated as follows :- After a service of not less than ten years a pension not exceeding the following amounts :- (a) for retiring pensions :- -----------------(As tabulated)-------------- (b) For other pensions :- Up to 49 completed six-monthly periods of qualifying service - as in clause (i) above and after 50 completed six-monthly periods of qualifying service or above - 30/60th of average emoluments subject to a maximum of Rs. 5,000 a year or Rs. 416 per mensem.
8.
The case set up by the plaintiff, as proved by him in evidence, is that he had joined the service of the Revenue Department of the State of Punjab as a Patwari on August 20, 1954.
He sought voluntary retirement in the year 1970.
At the time of making of the aforesaid request he had put in more than 15 years of service.
The request of the plaintiff was allowed and an other dated March 11, 1970 was passed by the Collector, Gurdaspur retiring the plaintiff voluntarily with effect from February 1, 1970.
At the time of his voluntary retirement, the plaintiff had put in 15 years 5 months and 15 days of service.
The order of voluntary retirement is Ex.P2 on the record.
These facts are not disputed by the defendants in their written statement.
9.
The defendants have merely maintained that the request of the plaintiff seeking voluntary retirement was, in fact, treated as a resignation letter and was processed on the basis.
In fact, the request was granted accepting the aforesaid resignation.
10.
I am afraid this contention of the defendants is not born out from the record of the case.
A perusal of the order Ex.P2 shows that it was the request of the plaintiff for seeking voluntary retirement which was accepted and he was, accordingly, allowed to voluntarily retire with effect from February 1, 1970.
The contention raised by the defendants in the written statement cannot be accepted being contrary to record.
11.
The learned Court below have held that the case of the plaintiff was covered under Rule 532(a)(b)(c) of the Rules and, therefore, since he had not completed 25 years of qualifying service, therefore, he was not entitled to any retiral benefits.
However, if we advert to Rule 612 of the Rules (reproduced above) then it is apparent that a person retiring after 10 years of service was also entitled to pension.
The entitlement of pension has been tabulated as per the completed years of service.
As per the table, if a person is retired after completing 10 years of service then scale of pension admissible to him was 10/60 with a maximum limit of Rs. 2000/- a year or Rs. 166-2/3 a month.
Similarly, a person who had completed 15 years of service was entitled to a scale of pension 15/60 with a maximum limit of Rs. 3000/- a year or Rs. 250/- a month.
For a person who had completed 16 years of service, the scale admissible was 16/60.
The maximum limit of pension in such a case is Rs. 3200/- a year or Rs. 266-2/3 a month.
12.
From the conjoint reading of the two rules reproduced above, it is apparent that whereas Rule 532 of the Rules was general in nature, Rule 612 of the Rules dealt with such a situation where a person had retired after completion of 10 years of service.
The case of the plaintiff-appellant is squarely covered under Rule 612 of the Rules.
Even otherwise, it is well settled rule of construction that when a special rule or legislation governs a particular situation then the same shall prevail over and above the general law applicable.
In almost identical situation, this court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2730 of 1994 titled Jagdish Mitter v. State of Punjab and another, 1998(4) S.C.T.
157, decided on August 4, 1998 had accepted the claim of a person who had sought voluntary retirement after putting in more than 10 years of service.
The relevant portion of the judgment in Jagdish Mitter's case may be noticed with advantage as follows :  "There cannot be any denial of the fact that a person who had put in more than 10 years of service, is entitled to the pension even though he took voluntarily retirement or resigned voluntarily.
The pension is a right accrued to the employees of the State Govt. and earned by them because of their services.
There cannot also be any dispute that the right to get pension is a continuing and recurring right which furnishes a recurring cause of action.
In these circumstances, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to the pensionary benefits for the service of more than 22 years as he has rendered.
The petitioner is now aged 73 years and any delay in releasing the pension is inexcusable.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to fix the pension of the petitioner in accordance with the rules and pay the arrears of the pension for a period of three years two months prior to the date of the filing of the writ petition i.e. February 28, 1994.
This exercise shall be done within a period of two months positively.
The Chief Secretary of the State of Punjab is directed to place this order complying the direction of this Court on 7101998.
This office is directed to list this case for being mentioned on that day."
Under these circumstances, the aforesaid judgment is fully applicable to the facts of the present case.
Accordingly, I answer the questions (a) and (b) in favour of the plaintiff-appellant and hold that the judgments of the learned courts below are contrary to law and based upon misrepresentation of the rules.
13.
Faced with this situation, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab has raised the question of limitation.
It is argued that the suit filed by the plaintiff was barred by limitation.
14.
I have given my thoughtful consideration of the aforesaid contention raised by the learned state counsel appearing for the defendants.
In my considered view, the claim of pensionary benefits is a recurring cause of action.
According, it could not be held that the suit filed by the plaintiff could be dismissed as barred by limitation.
The said question (c) as such is also answered in favour of the plaintiff.
15.
At this stage, it may be relevant to notice that on July 11, 2003, during the course of hearing of the appeal, the present appellant who was present in person, had made a statement forgoing his claim with regard to pensionary benefits for a period more than 3 years 2 months prior to the filing of the present suit.
The statement of the appellant was separately recorded on the aforesaid date.
16.
Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed.
The judgments of the learned Courts below are set aside.
It is declared that the plaintiff would be entitled to the fixation of his pension, in accordance with rules, and also the arrears of his pension for a period of three years two months prior to the date of filing of the suit which was filed on October 12, 1993.
It is further directed that the defendant-respondent would process the case of the plaintiff and make the necessary payments to him within a period of three months from the date certified copy of this order is received by them.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.