SS Saron, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner, is aggrieved against the inaction of the respondents in not releasing his pensionary benefits consequent to his seeking voluntary premature retirement.
He prays for quashing the order dated 2892000 (Annexure P-1), as conveyed to him vide letter dated 8122002 (Annexure P-2), which has been passed on his justice demand notice declining the release of pension despite his request for premature retirement being accepted.
2.
Notice was issued to the respondents.
The respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed their written statement through the Deputy Director, Local Government, Ferozepur and respondent No. 4 Executive Officer, Municipal Council, Faridkot has filed its separate reply.
The reason, given for declining the benefit of pension to the petitioner is, that he does not have the requisite `qualifying service' to be counted from 1.6.1979 i.e. the date the petitioner started making contributions towards Contributory Provident Fund (CP Fund - for short) to the date of his retirement i.e. 4101998.
In short the stand of the respondents is that the period of service during which an employee was not contributing towards CP Fund is not to be reckoned as service qualifying for pension.
The petitioner, therefore, it is stated does not have qualifying service of 20 years to be counted from the date he started making contributions to the CP Fund.
Therefore, it is the stand of the respondents that the petitioners is not entitled for the grant of pension.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
4.
The facts which are not in dispute between the parties are that the petitioner joined the Municipal Council Faridkot on 2981977.
He served as an Octroi Clerk and was confirmed on 26.5.1979.
He started making contributions towards the CP Fund and deductions were made for the same from 1.6.1979 onwards.
Due to domestic circumstances, the petitioner sought premature retirement from service w.e.f.
4101998 vide an application dated 371998 (Annexure P-3).
The Municipal Council (respondent No. 4) vide its resolution No. 275 dated 2591998 accepted the request of the petitioner for premature retirement, which was conveyed to him vide letter dated 2991998 (Annexure P-4).
5.
Despite the acceptance of the request of the petitioner for premature retirement, he has not been given his pensionary benefits.
On the representations and justice demand notice dated 862000 made by the petitioner, this Court, in the earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 9551 of 2000 filed by the petitioner, on 2672000 (Annexure P-5) directed the Municipal Council Faridkot (respondent No. 4) to consider and take action in accordance with law on the aforesaid justice demand notice.
It was also indicated that it would be appreciated if a reasoned order is passed.
Thereafter, there was some correspondence between the petitioner and Municipal Council (respondent No. 4).
Ultimately the Executive Officer, Municipal Council Faridkot (respondent No. 4) passed the impugned order on 2892000 (Annexure P-1), which was conveyed to the petitioner 8122000 (Annexure P-2) indicating therein that the petitioner started depositing CP Fund with effect from 1.6.1979 and that he retired on 4101998.
The period required for `qualifying service' for pension is twenty years, whereas the petitioner had service of 19 years 4 months and 3 days with effect from 1.6.1979 to 4101998.
Therefore, he was found to be not entitled for pension.
6.
The question on the basis of contentions urged by the respective counsel appearing for the parties is whether the petitioner is entitled to pension on his seeking premature retirement from service in accordance with provisions of the Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994 (as amended) (hereinafter referred to as the Pension Rules) and also whether the petitioner has the necessary `qualifying service' in order to be eligible for the grant of pension.
7.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties, the provisions of Rule 1(3) and (4) of the relevant provisions of the Pension Rules may be noticed, which read as under :-  "1.
Short title, commencement and application.
- (1) These rules may be called the Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994.
(2) They shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the first day of April, 1990 in the case of employees who are members of the provincialised service of a committee, and in the case of employees who are members of a non-provincialised service of a committee, they shall come into force from such date, as the committee may determine, by a resolution passed in this behalf.
(3) They shall apply to the employees of the Committees, - (i) who are appointed on or after the first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis; and  (ii) who were working immediately before the first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis and out (sic.
- opt) for these rules.
Provided that xx xx xx xx (4) They shall not apply to the employees, who, - (a) opt out of these rules; (b) are members of All India Service of the Punjab Civil Service; (c) are paid out of contingencies; (d) are work-charged employees; (e) are employed after superannuation; (f) are employed on contract basis, except when the contract provides otherwise; and (g) are specifically excluded wholly or partly from the operation of these rules; The perusal of the above Rule 1(3), shows that the Pension Rules apply to the employees of the committee who were working immediately before 1.4.1990 on whole time regular basis and who opt for these Pension Rules.
The exercise of option is to be doe in accordance with Rule 3, which provides that option under Rule 1(3)(ii) to elect to be governed by these Pension Rules so as to reach the competent authority within a period of four months from the date of publication of the said Pension Rules.
"Committee" has been defined in Section 3(4) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 to mean a Municipal Council or Nagar Panchayat, as the case may be, constituted under Section 12 of the said Act.
In the present case it would be the Municipal Council.
8.
It is not the case of the respondents, that the petitioner did not opt for the Pension Rules.
Besides, Rule 1(4) provides for the categories of employees who are not entitled for the benefit of pension under the Pension Rules.
The case of the respondents, as already noticed above, is that the petitioner did not have the requisite 20 years of `qualifying service' for the grant of pension from the date he started contributing towards CP Fund till his retirement.
Therefore, it is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner falls in any one of the excepted categories as provided for in Rule 1(4).
9.
The question that is to be seen is whether the petitioner has the necessary `qualifying service' so as to be eligible of the grant of pension and whether the `qualifying service' is to be counted from the date an employee makes contributions towards CP Fund.
`Qualifying Service' has been defined in Rule 2(j) of the Pension Rules as follows :-  2.
Definitions.
- In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, -  (j) `Qualifying service' means the service, rendered under a committee for which an employee is paid from the municipal fund and shall include any service rendered under the Government of Punjab, an Improvement Trust, a Corporation or any other Public Sector Undertaking immediately before joining the service; `Qualifying service' has been defined to mean the service, rendered by an employee under a Committee for which an employee is paid from the Municipal Fund.
Besides, `Service' has been defined in rule 2(1) to mean the service rendered under the control of a Committee.
A reading of the above definition of `qualifying service' does not any where indicate that `qualifying service' is to be calculated from the date an employee makes contributions or deductions are made towards CP Fund, which is the case set up by the Municipal Council Faridkot (respondent No. 4).
Rather it is the service rendered under a Committee i.e. the Municipal Council in the present case, when read with reference to the definition of "Committee" as defined in Rule 3(4) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as referred to above, for which an employee is paid from the Municipal Fund that is to be taken as `qualifying service' under the Pension Rules for the purpose of grant of pension.
`Municipal Fund' has been defined in Rule 2(h) to mean the fund constituted under section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
Section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 reads as under :- "51.
Constitution of Municipal Fund.
- There shall be formed for each municipality a municipal fund, and there shall be placed to the credit thereof - (a) all sums received by, or on behalf of the committee under this Act or otherwise; and (b) the balance (if any) standing at the credit of the municipal fund of the municipality at the commencement of this Act."
10.
It is also not in dispute that for the service rendered, the petitioner has been paid from the `Municipal Fund.'
In the impugned order dated 2892000 (Annexure P-1) the specific reason taken by the respondent No. 4 for declining the benefit of pension is, that the Pension Rules and instructions provide that the period during which the employee was not contributing towards CP Fund, whereby the employer also did not make matching contribution cannot be treated as `qualifying service.'
A reference has also been made, in the impugned order, to memo No. PEN-POL-98/63-218 dated 811998 from the Director Local Government Punjab Chandigarh wherein, the Director while interpreting the Pension Rules issued the following instructions :-  "Under the CPF rules applicable to these employees before the commencement of these pension rules and employee started contributing to his CPF only when his order for his confirmation or in other words order for his regular appointment were issued.
Since the pension rules have been made applicable in lieu of PCF, the period to be considered as qualifying for pension has to be restricted to the period for which the employee was contributing to his CPF.
The period during which the employee was not contributing to his CPF, whereby the employer also did not make matching contribution cannot be treated as service qualifying for pension.
Clause (4) of rules 8 ibid very clearly lays down that while sanctioning pension, the sanctioning authority shall ensure that the contribution of the employee for the period reckoned for pension have been duly credited to the fund.
The words "contribution of the employee" are very significant as much as the employees contributions in the CPF of the employees were his property and this could be deposited into the pension fund with his sole consent.
The provisions contained in the above said clause are further supported by clause (3)(1) and (11) of rule ibid which makes "appointed on regular basis" as a basic condition for eligibility of an employee under the pension scheme."
(Emphasis added) The above instructions issued by the Director Local Government purporting to interpret the Pension Rules, are in fact contrary to the same.
Besides, the said instructions cannot substitute or supplant the substantive provisions of the Pension Rules.
However, as already noticed above, there is nothing in the Pension Rules which requires the `qualifying service' to be computed from the date the employee makes contribution towards CP Fund or from the date of his confirmation.
Rather the position is that the `qualifying service' is to be counted in terms of Rule 2(j) for the period of service rendered by the employee for which he is paid from the Municipal Funds which is the fund constituted under Section 51 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
The emphasis on the words "appointed on regular basis" in the above memo.
on the basis of Rule 1(3)(ii) of the Pension Rules is also misplaced.
Rule 1(3)(ii) of the Pension Rules, in fact provides that the Pension Rules shall apply to the employees of the Committee who are appointed on or after he first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis; and who were working immediately before the first day of April, 1990 on whole time regular basis and opt for the said rules.
The petitioner was admittedly confirmed in service on 26.5.1979.
Therefore, he was evidently a confirmed regular employee of the Municipal Council (respondent No. 4) before 1.4.1990 and is, therefore, entitled to the application of the Pension Rules as also the pensionary benefits.
11.
Another circumstance taken into account for not granting the pension is the provision of Rule 8(4), which reads as under :-  8.
"General Provisions relating to grant of Pension.
- (1) For the purpose of grant of pension to the employees, the rules relating to pension as contained in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the committees also and for that purpose the terms and expressions not otherwise defined in these rules, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I.
(2) xx xx xx xx  (3) xx xx xx xx  (4) While sanctioning pension, the sanctioning authority shall ensure that the Contribution of the employees for the period reckoned for pension, has been duly credited to the Fund."
A reading of Rule 8(1) of the Pension Rules shows that it provides that for the purpose of grant of pension to the employees, the rules relating to pension as contained in the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the Committees also.
Nothing is pointed out by the respondents that the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II in any way debar the grant of pension.
12.
The emphasis laid on Rule 8(4) of the Pension Rules is also misplaced.
The said rule merely enjoins that while sanctioning pension, the sanctioning authority is to ensure that contribution of the employee for the period reckoned for pension has been duly credited to the fund.
This cannot be interpreted to mean that `qualifying service' is to be reckoned from the date contributions are made by the employee towards CP Fund.
13.
The definition of `qualifying service' as contained in Rule 2(j) of the Pension Rules is clear and unambiguous.
It is settled principle of law that where the language of the statute are clear, the same are to be interpreted in the manner as they are without adding or subtracting anything from the same.
The language of definition of `qualifying service' as contained in Rule 2(j) of the Pension Rules is clear and the same is to be taken into account for the service rendered under a Committee for which an employee is paid from the fund.
The same cannot be interpreted to mean the period of service rendered from the date the employee starts making contribution towards CP Fund.
14.
The petitioner admittedly joined the service of the Municipal Council Faridkot on 2981977 and he retired on 24101998.
For this period of service rendered by the petitioner, it is not the case of the respondents that he was not paid from the Municipal Fund.
Therefore, this period of service from 2981977 to 4101998 which the petitioner served with the Municipal Council Faridkot, is to be counted as `qualifying service' as he was paid out of the Municipal Fund.
15.
Division Bench of this Court in the case of Kasturi Lal Khurana and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(4) S.C.T.
462, Civil Writ Petition No. 5661 of 1999 decided on 3042000, considered the question of grant of pension to the employees of the Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
The grievance of the employees in the said case who were employees of the Municipal Corporation Jalandhar was that the service rendered by them was not taken into account in toto i.e. from the date of initial appointments for the purposes of calculating their `qualifying service'.
The State of Punjab and the Municipal Corporation Jalandhar in the said case declined the entitlement of the employees to be paid pension by stating that as per the Pension Rules framed in 1994, the services rendered by the employees from the date they were admitted to Contributory Provident Fund are only to be taken into consideration for determination of Pension etc.
This Court negatived the stand of the respondents in the said case and held tha the plea of the respondents No. 1 and 2 therein was based on a misconceived assumption.
The said writ petition was allowed and the respondents therein were directed to re-count the `qualifying service' of the employees therein by taking into consideration the total service rendered by those employees from the dates of their initial appointments in the Corporation.
It was also held that the amount of contribution of Provident Fund which the employees were required to deposit may be adjusted from out of the amount which they may be found entitled to get as a result of recalculation of the retiral benefits payable to them.
16.
Appeal Civil No. 1069 of 2001 against the order dated 3042000 passed by this Court in Kasturi Lal Khurana's case (supra) was dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 632002 and the following order was passed :-  "We do not think it is a fit case for our interference under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
The appeal is dismissed accordingly."
17.
Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances, it is evident that the stand of the respondents that the `qualifying service' of the petitioner is to be counted from the date he started making contributions to the CP Fund is absolutely misconceived and baseless.
The same is not supported by the Pension Rules applicable in respect of the petitioner.
The petitioner, therefore, has been unnecessarily denied the benefit of pension, which as per the settled law, is not a bounty or a matter of grace nor an ex gratia payment payable at the sweet will and pleasure of the Municipal Council (respondent No. 4).
It is a payment for the past service rendered and is a social welfare measure to those who in the heyday of their life rendered service on an assurance that in their old age they would not be left in the lunch.
The payment of pension is governed by the Pension Rules governing the grant of pension to the employees of the Municipal Council.
It is the liability undertaken by the Municipal Council under the Pension Rules and whenever it becomes due and payable, it is to be paid.
18.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed and the order dated 2892000 (Annexure P-1) as conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 8122000 (Annexure P-2) is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to calculate and pay the pension due to the petitioner by taking into account the `qualifying service' he rendered under the Municipal Council, Faridkot from 2981977 to 4101998 and for which he was paid from the `Municipal Fund' and make payment to the petitioner in accordance with Rule 9 of the Pension Rules.
Besides, as directed in Kasturi Lal Khurana's case (supra), the amount of contribution of Provident Fund which the petitioner was required to deposit may be adjusted from out of the amount which he may be found entitled to get as a result of recalculation of the retiral benefits payable to him.
On the arrears of pension payable to the petitioner, he shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 9% pa from the date the pension, for each month, became due and payable from 4101998 onwards to the date of payment.
There shall however be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.