Viney Mittal, J - This order of ours shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 7049 of 2000 and Civil Writ Petition No. 13800 of 1999 as the similar questions of fact and law are involved.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 7049 of 2000.
2.
The petitioners have filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of an appropriate writ directing the respondents to allow them to exercise fresh option for switching over to the revised scales of pay enforced with effect from January 1, 1986 with all consequential benefits.
3.
The petitioners are working as teachers with the Education Department, State Government of Haryana.
On completion of 18 years service, they were granted the selection grade in view of the instructions issued by the State Government.
Their pay scales were revised and pay was re-fixed in the year 1991-92 retrospectively from the dates falling much prior to the enforcement of the revised scales of Pay Rules notified with effect from January 1, 1996.
In terms of the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pay Scales) Rules, 1987, the petitioners had earlier given their option for the new pay scales from a date suiting them at that time.
However, subsequently, the selection grade was given to them from a date much prior to the date of enforcement of the aforesaid Rules of 1987 i.e. much prior to January 1, 1986.
4.
After enforcement of the aforesaid Rules of 1987, an opportunity of giving fresh option was provided to the teachers vide instructions dated November 15, 1994 but the period of revision was restricted from April 1, 1987 to December 31, 1987.
The petitioners have averred that since the cut off date fixed in the said instructions was not beneficial to them, therefore, none of them exercised any fresh option.
5.
The petitioners have averred that many persons, such as petitioners, had been afforded a fresh opportunity of changing their option from a later date i.e. much beyond the cut off date.
Even such persons who had approached the Court earlier for such change of option had been granted an opportunity of exercising fresh options.
6.
The petitioners also wanted that after the grant of selection grade retrospectively from a date much prior to January 1, 1986 they be also granted a right, of exercising fresh option.
Since the respondents did not offer them any such opportunity on their representation, therefore, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
7.
The claim made by the petitioners has been contested by the respondents.
In the written statement, the main stand taken by the respondents is that option once exercised by the petitioners was final and could not be later on changed.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have also gone through the relevant record.
8.
In our view, the writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is admitted case between the parties that the petitioners had been granted the selection grade in the year 1991-92 and the date from which the aforesaid selection grade was awarded, was much prior to January 1, 1996.
The aforesaid relief was granted much after the petitioners had exercised their option in terms of 1987 Rules.
In these circumstances, we find that, once through a subsequent order passed.
by the Government itself or on the basis of a Court judgment, if the pay scale of a particular individual is revised, the earlier options which might have been given by a particular individual would lose its significance and such a person would be entitled to give a fresh option by which he could get the maximum advantage.
Since the pay scale of the petitioners was revised much after the exercise of their options, therefore, they would have another right to give their options for the revision of the pay scales.
9.
A similar view had been taken by two Division Benches of this Court in Des Raj and others v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 17996 of 1997, decided on March 12, 1988 and Sita Ram etc. v. State of Haryana etc., CWP No. 14188 of 1997, decided on March 24, 1998.
10.
As a result of above discussion, we allow the present petitions and permit the petitioners to give fresh options within one month from the date, certified copy of the order is received by the respondents for the revision of their pay scales and if the petitioners offer any such fresh options then their pay scales shall be accordingly revised.
However, the petitioners would be entitled to the arrears so calculated only for a period of three years and two months prior to the filing of the present petition.
If any such fresh option is offered by the petitioners, then the respondents will consider the case of the revision of their pay accordingly within a period of six months of the receipt of the options.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.