Mehtab S Gill, J- Petitioner has prayed for passing a writ in the nature of certiorari for setting aside award dated June 1511988 (Annexure P-1) passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bathinda and further to reinstate the petitioner with full back wages and all other consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he worked with respondent No. 2 for five years.
He was charge-sheeted on May 9, 1982.
The allegation against the petitioner was that he did not issue tickets to six passengers, while working as a Conductor on bus of the Punjab Roadways, which was going from Chandigarh to Sri Ganga Nagar.
He has further averred that the checking party did not check the cash, nor did they record the statements of the passengers.
3.
The petitioner had issued six tickets.
After the passengers had left, the petitioner, on checking of bus, found six tickets lying on the bus floor, of the denomination of 90 paisa each.
These tickets were mentioned in the way bill.
4.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted and an enquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer, after considering the reply of the petitioner, exonerated him.
5.
Notice of motion was issued.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated, that tickets were issued to six passengers.
This was incorporated in the way bill.
The way bill should have been checked by the raiding party.
Learned counsel has further stated that the Enquiry Officer, after holding an enquiry and following a proper procedure, exonerated the petitioner.
7.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has stated that the petitioner committed a fraud by not issuing tickets to the passengers, after charging the fare.
The fare, which he had charged, was embezzled by the petitioner.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for respondent No. 2.
Gone through the award and the relavant documents, which are attached with the petition.
9.
After issuing the tickets, this was incorporated in the way bill.
The way bill contained the number of tickets issued from the place of starting till the end of journey.
Denomination of tickets was entered in the way bill by giving the closing number.
10.
It was incumbent upon the Inspector, who has checked the bus, that he should also have checked the way bill to make himself sure that the tickets have not been issued to the passengers, but this, he did not do so.
11.
The Enquiry Officer, after following the proper procedure laid down, exonerated the petitioner and came to the conclusion, which is reproduced as under:-  "..........
I have come to the conclusion that the conductor had issued tickets to the passengers, but the passengers had lost them due to their fault.
Therefore, giving him the benefit of doubt, I do not find the conductor guilty of the allegations levelled in the charge-sheet."
12.
Tickets were produced by the petitioner before the Inspector at Ludhiana.
At that stage, the Inspector should have matched the tickets with the way bill, as the way bill showed that tickets had been sold.
13.
Learned Industrial Tribunal has placed much reliance on this aspect, that the passengers had stated at that time, that the amount of fare had been charged by the petitioner, but no tickets were issued to them.
No passenger was produced before the Tribunal, to support the case of the respondents.
14.
Learned Industrial Tribunal has given an erroneous finding, which is reproduced as under :-  "......Even if it is assumed that two views were possible on the evidence on record the punishing authority was perfectly right in electing the view against the workman as long as it was founded on incriminating evidence and it is not for the court to adopt for him the other view."
It is settled law, that if there are two views, than one, which is favourable to the delinquent is the one, which has got to be taken.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, who, after consulting the petitioner, who is present in Court, has made a statement, that if the Court takes a favourable view in his favour, the petitioner is ready to forego his back wages.
Petition is allowed with all consequential benefits.
The petitioner, as he has made a statement that he is ready to forego his back wages, no back wages shall be paid to him.
Petition allowed.