Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the award dated 1242002 vide which petition of the workman under Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act was allowed and the respondent-Society therein was directed to pay a sum of Rs. 24035/- to the workman.
The claim was allowed with 6% interest per annum from the date of filing of the application till the payment.
According to the petitioner the said award is liable to be set aside as it is based upon misappreciation of evidence and is contrary to the record.
It is stated that in the written statement filed on behalf of the petitioner herein, the workman had embezzled certain amounts and a case under Sections 409/420 IPC was registered against the workman, resultant to which services of the petitioner were terminated.
The matter which regard to embezzlement was also referred to the arbitrator and the workman had taken time to deposit the money before the arbitrator.
On these premises it is submitted that the workman was entitled to the salary for the period 291982 to 2071984.
2.
As already noticed, the Learned Labour Court after considering the contentions raised held as under :-  "Development (Developing ?)
his submission further, representative of applicant has submitted that Baljit Singh Secretary of respondent society while appearing as RW/1 has admitted during cross-examination that he known that a criminal case was registered against the workman and he stands acquitted therein.
He also has admitted that workman has not been paid the amount which has been claimed.
He has also admitted that workman was getting Rs. 1070/- per month as wages.
Coming to objections raised regarding maintainability of the claim application, representative of workman has submitted that provisions of Limitation Act are not applicable to an application filed under Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Principle of the res-judicata as well is not attracted to the facts of the present case since no copy of the order has been placed on record by the management in support of its case.
Claim under Section 33C(2) is maintainable in the instant case as per averments made in the application.
Findings accordingly on both these issues may be recorded in favour of applicant and against the respondent.
In support of his contention he has referred to AIR 1968 SC 218, Chief Mining Engineer M/s East India Coal Co Ltd; Bararee Colliery Dhanbad v. Rameshwar and others."
3.
The learned Labour Court further held that legal remedy is available to the management to which it could take recourse for recovery of the amount if any payable.
As it appears from the record before us that the alleged award of the arbitrator or the admission of the workman to pay the amount was never placed before the Labour Court nor have been placed before us.
The onus to prove such issue even if of some consequence was upon the management and the management has failed to discharge such onus.
Once the services of the workman were terminated without following the prescribed procedure without any notice, the said illegally cannot be cured merely on the ground that there was an allegation of embezzlement against the workman, particularly when the management had taken the stand that services of the workman have not been terminated, but he is not entitled to salary because of the allegations of the management.
In the circumstances afore-stated we see no reason to interfere in the impugned award.
The petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.