Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India 1950, the petitioners pray for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction quashing the impugned order dated 712000 and further, that proficiency step up increments on completion of 8 and 18 years of service be granted to the petitioners in accordance with law.
They have also claimed interest on the consequential relief.
2.
The petitioners joined the service with the Education Department of the respondent-State.
On 1121988, in furtherance to the recommendations of Third Pay Commission, State of Punjab decided to grant and, upon enquiries, when they were not give this benefit, they filed Civil Writ Petition No. 18831 of 1998 in this Court which was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for grant of proficiency step up increments.
The claim of the petitioners was rejected by the respondents vide order dated 712000, copy of that order is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P-2.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents have failed written statement stating that the petitioners have no cause of action and that the petitioners had not availed of the promotional avenues when offered and, as a result thereto, they cannot claim the proficiency step up.
Their own conduct disentitles them from claiming this benefit.
We are afraid, the only contention raised and reasons given for declining the relief to the petitioners have already been clearly dealt with by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 6049 of 1997 (Tipan Chand Sharma and another v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 651998, where the Court held as under :  "The question then emerges for consideration is that whether the non-availing of the promotion, as alleged by the respondents, can mar the right of the petitioners from getting the benefit of the Notification.
It is not specifically mentioned in the circular letter that a person who does not avail the promotional opportunity shall not be entitled to the benefit of proficiency step up.
The relevant sub-para of the circular letter is reproduced as below : "(7) For reckoning the period of 8 and 18 years, the entire service in the time scale, senior scale and selection grade (of mere placement and not involving fixation of pay at higher level) etc., wherever available in a cadre, shall be counted.
If an employee joins a scale at a stage higher than the minimum as a result of promotion or otherwise, his proficiency step up(s) would stand postponed by a number of years equal to the number of increments already covered by him from the minimum of the scale at the time of initial fixation of pay in the scale.
That the step-up is related to the number of years of service in a particular scale and if an employee's pay is fixed by process of promotion at the sixth stage of a scale, he will be entitled to earn a step-up in that scale only after 8 years if an employee serves in a scale of pay for more than 18 years and is not promoted to a higher scale on account of lack of promotional opportunities or non-availability of a vacancy in the promotional scale, he would be granted two step-up(s) in his emoluments."
So far as the case of the present petitioners is concerned, it can be found that none of the petitioners can be punished for alleged non-availing of the promotions before the appointed date.
Both the petitioners had completed 8/18 years on the appointed date.
Therefore, even if the petitioners had not availed of the promotional avenues as alleged, their right to get the proficiency step up on their appointed date cannot be washed away.
We, therefore, do not want to go into discussion of the question to the effect of not availing the promotional avenues in case 8 and 18 years service is not completed by any of the petitioners on the appointed date.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the reasons for not granting the proficiency step-up to the petitioners are not justified.
We, therefore, allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to grant proficiency step up increments to the petitioners on the completion of 8 and 18 years of service.
However, the arrears so calculated shall be restricted for a period of three years and two months prior to the filing of the writ petition which was filed on 351997."
4.
The basic contention raised before us is that the respondents had foregone their promotions as lecturers with effect from 111986 and consequently they would be debarred from claiming the proficiency step up.
The respondents claim to have taken this action in furtherance to paragraph No. 9 of the Punjab Government instructions dated 191989.
It is difficult for this Court to hold that the petitioners would be debarred from claiming the proficiency step up in the circumstances of the case.
The petitioners were offered the promotions in September, 1998 and thereafter.
By that time the petitioners had completed more than eight years of service as they were appointed on ad hoc basis in the year 1975 and regularly appointed to the same posts in the year 1977 onwards.
Thus, in any circumstances and whatever be the interpretation given to the instructions of the Government, the petitioners cannot be denied the eight years proficiency step up increment.
5.
In view of the above reasoning and while following the view taken by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Tipan Chand Sharma (supra), we allow this writ petition to the limited extent that the petitioners would be entitled to get the proficiency step up increment after eight years of service in accordance with rules.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.