ML Singhal, J - Lal Singh was Forester in the State of Punjab.
Vide order Nos. 12, 13 and 14 dated 15121995 punishment was imposed upon him by the Divisional Forest Officer, IWDP (Hills) Balachaur burdening him with penalty of Rs. 14782/-.
He challenged those orders by means of suit for declaration filed against the State of Punjab to the effect that those orders are illegal, null and void and that he was entitled to the refund of Rs. 14782/- with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
He further sought direction to the defendants to dispose of his appeal.
He had been in service with the State of Punjab and retired as Forester on 3061994 on the advice of the Divisional Forest Officer, IWDP (Hills) Balachaur defendant No. 4, defendant No. 3 Divisional Forest Officer, Sangrur did not make him payment of gratuity and ultimately recovered a sum of Rs. 14782/- from his gratuity amount.
The Divisional Forest Officer IWDP (Hills) Balachaur defendant No. 4 did not adhere to the prescribed procedure and rules before passing these orders.
He was on deputation with defendant No. 4.
As such, he was not competent to pass an order of punishment against him.
Those orders were passed upon him after his retirement.
Appeal dated 2941996 preferred by him was not disposed of by the Conservator of Forests, South Circle Patiala (Defendant No. 2).
He was not afforded any opportunity of personal hearing.
No notice was served upon him as per the prescribed procedure.
No formality as per Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules was complied with.
No recovery could have been made from him after his retirement.
2.
Defendants contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that the plaintiff should have gone in appeal on the departmental side.
It was urged that the penalty was imposed upon him as he had committed financial embezzlement.
Penalty was imposed upon him on the basis of the enquiry initiated against him while he was in service.
Appeal dated 2941996 was not received through proper channel.
Appeal was yet to be finalised by the Conservator of Forests, South Circle, Patiala (defendant No. 2).
Suit is premature.
He was afforded all the possible opportunities of personal hearing but he did not avail as the registered letters sent to him were received back undelivered.
Impugned orders were passed after following the due procedure.
He had been charge- sheeted under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal), Rules 1970 for being absent from duty w.e.f.
1691993 to 3111994 and the enquiry was finalised by the Conservator of Forests vide order No. 40 dated 1751996 and subsequently the payment was made to the plaintiff.
Impugned orders were passed by the competent authority.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, issues were framed.
4.
Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Patiala dismissed the plaintiff's suit, in view of his finding, that the suit was premature, plaintiff should have waited for decision on his appeal on the departmental side.
Defendant No. 2 Conservator of Forests, South Circle, Patiala was directed to decide the appeal within four months.
It was found that Civil Court at Patiala had no jurisdiction to decide this suit.
It was found that order Nos. 12, 13 and 14 were legal and valid as the enquiry which gave rise to these orders was initiated against him while he was in service.
5.
Plaintiff went in appeal which was dismissed by the Addl.
District Judge, Patiala vide order dated 22122000, who also held that the suit was premature.
Plaintiff should have waited for the disposal of the departmental appeal, and it was only after the disposal of that appeal that he could knock the door of the Court.
6.
Still not satisfied, the plaintiff has come up in further appeal to this Court.
7.
In this Regular Second Appeal, following questions of law arise for the consideration of this Court :-  "(i) Whether the provision of Rule 2.2(b)(i) are mandatory in nature ?
(2) If answer to the aforesaid question is in the affirmative in nature, whether the impugned orders in the instant case are void ab initio ?
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab.
It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the enquiry was initiated against him after he had retired.
He had retired on 3061994.
Notices Exhibit Nos. D- 14, D-16 and D-18 for the recovery of Rs. 7390/-, 6218/- and 1174/- respectively, were issued on 1871994.
In support of his submission, he drew my attention to Gulzar Singh Khokhai v. State of Punjab, 1995(1) SCT 381 where it was held that the departmental proceedings cannot be said to have been initiated against an employee under the relevant Punishment and Appeal Rules as also under Rule 2.2.
(b) of the Rules till the issue of the charge-sheet.
9.
Suffice it to say departmental proceedings if not instituted while he was in service whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall not be instituted in respect of an event which took place more than four years before such institution, save with the sanction of the Government.
It was submitted that in this case, no sanction of the Government was taken before initiating departmental proceedings against him although he had retired earlier.
10.
It was submitted that pension/gratuity could not be withheld when no enquiry was pending on the date of retirement.
Pension/gratuity could be with held only if there was enquiry pending on the date of retirement.
In support of this submission, he cited LR Dhawan v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) SCT 11 where it was held that gratuity cannot be withheld by initiating enquiry under Rule 2.2(b) after retirement of an employee.
Pension, gratuity can be withheld only if there is an enquiry pending on the date of retirement.
Gratuity due to an employee is payable to him on the date of retirement.
Payment of gratuity can be deferred in a case where the employee is under cloud at the time of retirement, namely, in a case where he is facing departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings.
If no inquiry or judicial proceeding is pending on the date of retirement of the employee, the Government/employer does not have any authority to withhold the payment of gratuity.
Similarly, full pension payable to an employee can be withheld during the pendency of the departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings.
The Government is also possessed with the power to withhold pension or a part thereof or recover any pecuniary loss caused to the Government from the pension payable to an employee in case such Government servant is found guilty of grave mis-conduct or negligence in discharge of his duties during the course of service.
Deduction from pension can be made even on the basis of an enquiry which may be initiated against the employee after his retirement but subject to the fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in proviso to Rule 2.2(b).
11.
It was submitted that no departmental inquiry was conducted in which any evidence was recorded.
Cross examination was conducted and defence witnesses were examined and documents were exhibited by the enquiry officer.
Some preliminary enquiry was conducted for initiating the case and that was wholly ex parte and it cannot be termed as inquiry.
12.
In this case, for the loss alleged to have been caused by the appellant to the Government, enquiry could have been started either while he was in service or after he had retired but with the sanction of the Government.
Further, the amount of penalty could not be recovered out of the gratuity amount when no enquiry was pending against him on the date when he retired.
Pension and gratuity etc. became due to him as soon as he retired.
13.
For the reasons given above, I am of the opinion that this appeal should succeed and that both the questions of law should be returned in favour of the appellant.
It is ordered accordingly.
Appeal is allowed.
In consequence, the judgments and decrees passed by the Court below are set aside and the appellant's suit is decreed and it is declared that the imposition of penalty vide orders 12, 13 and 14 dated 15121995 along with office order No. 82 dated 1041996, is illegal, null and void and against the provisions of rule 2.2.
(b) of the Punjab civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Ruled, 1970.
Hhe will be entitled to the refund of the amount of Rs. 14782/- with interest @ 12% per annum.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.