ML Singhal, J - This is regular second appeal filed by Jarnail Singh, Sub Inspector in the Department of Food & Supplies Punjab against the judgement and decree dated 1842001 of Additional District Judge, Sangrur, reversing that of Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division) Sangrur, dated 20121995, who had decreed his suit for declaration that the order dated 2191988 passed by the Director, Food and Supplies/Special Secretary to Government of Punjab, Chandigarh by which he had brought him down to the basic pay of Sub Inspector permanently and also had burdened him with penalty to the tune of Rs. 96154/- for the loss which he had caused to the State, recoverable in monthly installments of Rs. 1000/-, was illegal, void and not binding upon him and for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from implementing the said order and from recovering the amount from his pay.
2.
Facts :  Jarnail Singh filed suit for declaration against the State of Punjab whereby he challenged order dated 2191988 ibid being illegal, null and void and not binding on him and for permanent injunction restraining the State of Punjab from implementing the said order as if that order had never been passed at all.
He was Sub Inspector, Food & Supplies Department and was posted at PR Centre Sherpur in the year, 1983-84.
In that year, wheat was stored in the godowns of Food and Supplies Department at Sherpur.
Wheat was disposed of during 4/84 to 11/84.
Arjan Singh, Inspector, Food and Supplies was incharge of PR Centre, Sherpur.
Plaintiff was working as Sub Inspector under him.
On disposal of aforesaid wheat shortage to the extent of 8579 quintals of wheat was found.
Its value was assessed at Rs. 1,66,70550 paise.
Food Corporation of India also rejected 21708 bags of wheat of Sherpur Centre and its loss was assessed at Rs. 73,680/-.
Charge sheet was served upon him (plaintiff) on the allegation that on account of his collusion shortage took place in the stock of wheat and thereby Government was put to a loss of Rs. 1,66,70550 paise and he was responsible for that loss.
He submitted reply to the charge sheet, controverting the allegations and submitted that Arjan Singh was Inspector Incharge of PR Centre, Sherpur and he was mostly absent.
There was double lock system applicable to the said godowns.
One key of each of the godowns used to remain with Arjan Singh.
The godowns could only be opened if he and Arjan Singh had joined and applied both the keys.
In the absence of Arjan Singh, godown could not be opened.
For that reason, proper attention could not be paid to the health of the stock of wheat grains.
Officers of the department visited and this matter was brought to their notice.
Sh. Santokh Singh, Additional District Food and Supplies Controller, Sangrur also informed the Joint Director, Food and Supplies Department, Punjab, Chandigarh that this loss was caused on account that of negligence and carelessness of Arjan Singh.
District Food and Supplies Controller, Sangrur also informed the Director Food and Supplies, Chandigarh that Arjan Singh, Inspector was responsible for the aforesaid loss.
Director, Food and Supplies Punjab, Chandigarh appointed Sh Charan Pal Singh Deputy Director (Fields) Patiala as Enquiry Officer, who found that on account of the absence of Arjan Singh, Inspector, wheat was not properly treated nor aired and no proper care was taken for the protection of the health of the wheat stock and Arjan Singh was responsible for not giving treatment to the wheat stock.
He was only to assist Arjan Singh, Inspector.
Since there was double lock system and Arjan Singh remained absent, he was not responsible for the loss caused to the Government.
Arjan Singh was responsible for the loss caused to the Government.
Director, Food and Supplies accepted the report of the Enquiry Officer and served show cause notice on Arjan Singh.
Show cause notice was also issued to him (Jarnail Singh), which he replied.
Director, Food and Supplies withdrew the said show cause notice.
He gave another show cause notice to him on 1431988 stating that he did not agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and he (Jarnail Singh) should show cause why he should not be dismissed from service.
He gave reply to that notice.
His reply was not duly considered nor was he personally heard and the impugned order was passed.
3.
Defendant-State of Punjab contested the suit of the plaintiff, urging that the impugned order was perfectly legal.
It was passed after giving full opportunity of being heard to the plaintiff.
Impugned order was appealable.
He did not avail the remedy of appeal in the departmental side and, as such, suit was not maintainable.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, issues were framed.
5.
Vide order dated 10121995, Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Sangrur decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2191998 of Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab was null and void and was not binding on him and further he was restrained from implementing the said order and recovering the amount from his pay, in view of his finding, that Arjan Singh, Inspector Food and Supplies, who was Incharge of the said PR Centre, Sherpur was squarely responsible for the proper maintenance of the health of the wheat stock.
It was found that the plaintiff who was Sub Inspector, Food and Supplies was not responsible for the up-keep and maintenance of the health of the wheat stock.
It was found that the punishing authority did not consider this part of his reply that he was not responsible for the proper up-keep and maintenance of the health of the wheat stock and Arjan Singh, Inspector, Food and Supplies was responsible.
It was found that the Civil Court could quash the order of the punishing authority if the order passed by the punishing authority was based on no evidence and the conclusion reached was perverse.
6.
State of Punjab went in appeal, which was allowed by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur vide order dated 1842001.
7.
Not satisfied with the decision of the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, Jarnail Singh has come up in appeal to this Court.
8.
It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that there was double lock system.
One key of the godown used to remain with Arjan Singh, Inspector and the other key remained with Jarnail Singh, who was Sub Inspector, Food and Supplies.
It was submitted that Arjan Singh remained mostly absent.
It was in the knowledge of the higher authorities including Additional District Food and Supplies Controller, Sangrur that Arjan Singh was mostly absent and not visiting the godowns, so that up-keep and maintenance of the health of the wheat stock in the godowns could be ensured.
9.
Since there was double lock system, the godowns could not be opened if the key retained by Jarnail Singh alone had been applied.
Godowns could only be opened if the one key retained by him and the other key retained by Arjan Singh, Inspector had been together applied.
It was submitted that in these circumstances, Enquiry Officer held Arjan Singh - Inspector, Food and Supplies responsible and liable for deterioration of the health of the wheat stock.
The disciplinary authority vide its order dated 3081987 agreed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in toto so far as they went against Arjan Singh Inspector, Food and Supplies, holding that stock and deteriorated as Arjan Singh, Inspector Food and Supplies used to remain absent and did not treat the wheat stock.
It was submitted that heaving accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer that Arjan Singh, Inspector Food and Supplies was responsible for deterioration in the health of the wheat stock, Director, Food and Supplies could not turn round and say that the exoneration of Jarnail Singh by the Enquiry Officer was perverse.
It was submitted that having accepted the findings against Arjan Singh, the disciplinary authority had no evidence to hold him (Jarnail Singh) guilty of the charge.
It was submitted that there are instructions dated 14011983 Ex.P-10 which have specifically provided as under :  "1 and 2 XXX XXX XXX 3.
The physical charge of stocks and fumigants will remain with the Inspector concerned as before.
4.
The duties of fumigation work being performed by the Inspectors/AFSOs at present will be performed by the Junior Analysts.
The Head Analysts will be over-all responsible for the health of grains in supervisory capacity.
5.
XXX XXX 6.
However, the ultimate responsibility for proper maintenance of stocks will be of the Incharge/AFSO concerned as per present practice.
7.
The decision will come into force from 04.02.1983.
10.
It was submitted that in view of these instructions, the Enquiry Officer held that Arjan Singh, Inspector was squarely responsible for the deterioration in the health of wheat stock.
It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that if Director Food and Supplies (punishing authority) were to disagree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, he should have given reason for his disagreement plus the opportunity to represent to the delinquent, why he be not nailed on the basis of the material produced in the enquiry before the Enquiry Officer.
11.
Learned Additional AG for the State of Punjab, on the other hand, submitted that the Enquiry Officer no where gave clean chit to Jarnail Singh.
He found both Arjan Singh and Jarnail Singh liable.
It was submitted that the Enquiry Officer has clearly written that he (Jarnail Singh) was also responsible, that he should have taken care of, for the proper up-keep and health of the stock of wheat lying stocked in the godowns in conjunction with Arjan Singh.
Enquiry Officer found in his enquiry report that Jarnail Singh used to be present at the godowns and he was found present by the Supervisory Officer at the godown whenever he came on tour.
The health of the wheat stock could be maintained if both Arjan Singh and Jarnail Singh had been present as there was double lock system.
Because they were never present together, the godowns could not be opened.
There could be no up-keep or maintenance of the health of the wheat stock.
He has written that in these circumstances, Sub Inspector could not be held much responsible.
It was submitted that if Jarnail Singh had been honest, he would have informed the higher authorities about the persistent and continued absence of Inspector Arjan Singh.
It was submitted that show cause notice was earlier issued to Jarnail Singh on 3081987 but the same was withdrawn without prejudice on 1431988 and fresh show cause notice was issued on 1431988 informing him (Jarnail Singh) that the punishing authority did not agree with the findings of the E/O and the punishing authority gave detailed reason for not agreeing with the report of EO and it was proposed that Jarnail Singh should be dismissed from service.
Jarnail Singh submitted reply to the show cause notice on 29.4.1988.
12.
Punishing authority (Director Food and Supplies/Special Secretary to Government Punjab), imposed 40% of the amount of loss upon Jarnail Singh and 60% upon Arjan Singh.
In addition, he imposed upon Jarnail Singh reduction in the basic pay, he was drawing then.
He brought him down to the initial basic pay of the Sub Inspector permanently.
13.
It was submitted that the appellant had not been exonerated by the Enquiry Officer.
Earlier show cause notice issued to him was defective.
It was withdrawn and fresh show cause notice was issued to him.
14.
In support of this submission that the disciplinary authority should have called upon Jarnail Singh to represent against his tentative view that he was not agreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, learned counsel drew my attention to Punjab National Bank and others v. Kunj Behari Misra, 1998(3) S.C.T.
833 : (1988)7 SCC 84, where it was held that when the Enquiry Officer, during the course of disciplinary proceedings, comes to a conclusion that all or some of the charges alleging misconduct against an official are not proved, if the disciplinary authority was to differ from all or some of the findings, the delinquent must be given an opportunity of being heard for otherwise he would be condemned un-heard.
In departmental proceedings, what is of ultimate importance is the finding of the disciplinary authority Hon'ble Supreme Court while holding so was concerned with Regulation 7(2) of the Punjab National Bank Officer Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1977 which says, "disciplinary authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the Inquiring Authority on any article of charge, record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
It was held that the principles of natural justice will have to be read into Regulation 7(2).
Whenever the disciplinary authority disagrees with the inquiring authority on any article of charge then before it records its findings on such charge, it must record its tentative reasons for such disagreement and give to the delinquent officer an opportunity to represent before it records its findings.
The report of the enquiry officer containing its findings will have to be conveyed and the delinquent officer will have an opportunity to persuade the disciplinary authority to accept the favourable conclusion of the enquiry officer.
The principles of natural justice require the authority which has to take a final decision and can impose a penalty, to give an opportunity to the officer charged of misconduct to file a representation before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charge framed against the officer."
15.
There can be no dispute that the disciplinary authority was not bound to agree with the findings of the enquiry officer.
If the enquiry officer has exonerated the delinquent, the punishing authority can disagree with his finding and say that there is case against the delinquent and he must be given show cause notice why the proposed penalty be not imposed upon him.
In the instant case, Inquiring authority no where exonerated the delinquent.
Inquiring authority found that the delinquent was liable but was not much liable.
Greater liability was that of Arjan Singh.
Punishing authority has stated in the impugned order that the first show cause notice served upon the delinquent was not worded correctly.
As soon as mistake/error was detected, the said show cause notice was withdrawn without prejudice.
It did not convey that punishing authority did not want to proceed against Sub Inspector.
Since both show cause notices proposed dismissal from service against the Sub Inspector, there was no prejudice to the delinquent by the issuance of later show cause notice.
Punishing authority has observed that the Enquiry Officer has not applied the principle of joint responsibility of two persons in charge of wheat and it is not correct to absolve the Sub Inspector or reduce his responsibility merely on the presumption that due to absence of FI, the wheat could not be looked after by the Sub Inspector.
This is a far fetched conclusion by the Enquiry Officer and he (punishing authority) is in full disagreement with the conclusions of the Enquiry Officer.
The evidence is common against the Sub Inspector and the Inspector and he (punishing authority) find that both are responsible and negligent in looking after the wheat stock duly entrusted to them.
Punishing authority, however, apportionated the loss between the delinquent and the inspector at 40% and 60% respectively.
16.
It is not a case where double punishment has been imposed.
Imposition of penalty in lieu of loss caused to the Government by the negligent or an un- becoming act of the delinquent, cannot be viewed as punishment as the Government was to reimburse to itself the loss caused to it by the delinquent.
Plaintiff has been punished with reduction in the pay he was drawing.
He was brought down to the minimum of the basic pay of a Sub Inspector which a Sub Inspector of the Food and Supplies was drawing as on 2191988.
It was ordered that he would be drawing annual increment after he puts in one year service from 2191988.
The effect of the impugned order is that for the purpose of salary, service previously put in by him has been taken away.
As per the delinquent, he had put in 13 years of service and the clock was ordered to be set back.
17.
Imposition of punishment was in the discretion of the punishing authority.
Court will not normally interfere with the imposition of punishment imposed by the punishing authority.
In this case also, there appears no reason, why the punishment imposed upon the delinquent be slashed.
18.
For the reasons given above, this appeal fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.