RL Anand, J - Smt. Kusam Gajri wife of late Shri Rakesh Kumar, Accountant, Municipal Council, Amloh has filed the present writ petition against the State of Punjab and Municipal Council, Amloh and it has been prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents to release the family pension to the petitioner which has not been allegedly released so far after the death of her husband, who died on 141998, alongwith interest @ 18% per annum.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that after the death of her husband Shri Rakesh Kumar she is not being released the family pension and other benefits such as gratuity, leave encashment, etc. As per the averments, the deceased joined as Clerk in Municipal Council, Sirhind in the year 1976.
He continued working there for a period of two years and thereafter he was transferred to Municipal Council, Mandi Gobindgarh.
He died on 141998.
The service of the deceased was governed by the pension scheme known as Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994.
These rules became enforceable w.e.f.
1.4.1990.
As per Rule 3, an employee is to exercise option within a period of four months from the date of publication of the rules.
But with regard to the employees who were on leave or were under suspension, four months have to be counted after their reinstatement.
The husband of the petitioner was placed under suspension in the year 1992 and remained under suspension till November, 1996.
Therefore, he could not give the option.
With this background the petitioner has made the aforesaid prayer.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The State of Punjab filed the written statement.
According to this respondent, the deceased employee was reinstated in November, 1996.
He did not exercise his option on reinstatement.
The option alleged to have been exercised in November, 1994 is concocted one inasmuch as the signatures of the deceased employee on it do not tally with the specimen signatures of the employee.
Further this option has been countersigned by the Executive Officer who is now officiating as Deputy Director, Local Government in the Directorate.
When the option was put up to him for identification of the signatures, he categorically stated that his signatures have been forged.
According to this respondent, the whole claim has been concocted with the employees of the Municipal Council.
As there was no valid option given by the deceased employee in November, 1994, therefore, the petitioner can not take the advantage of the family pension.
4.
Respondent No. 2 filed a separate written statement and the stand of this respondent is in contradiction with the stand of respondent No. 1.
According to respondent No. 2 the case of the petitioner for family pension was sent to the Director, Local Govt., Punjab on 2952000.
The Director pointed out a discrepancy that the signatures of the husband of the pensioner do not tally and the signatures of the Executive Officer also do not tally as given in the option form.
Shri Ashok Kumar, Executive Officer at the relevant time was asked to identify his signatures and he categorically stated that the signatures on the alleged option form was not his.
In these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to the family pension.
The amount of Contributory Provident Fund has already been paid to the petitioner and her family members on 16.5.2001.
It has been further averred that whatever dues were permissible have already been released to the petitioner.
5.
I have heard Mr. Namit Kumar, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
It was the specific case of the petitioner that her husband was placed under suspension in the year 1992 and this suspension remained in force up to November, 1996.
It is also pleaded by the petitioner in para No. 6 of the writ petition that her husband gave the option somewhere in the month of November, 1994 though he could give the option within four months from the date when the suspension ended i.e. November, 1996.
Since the husband of the petitioner exercised his alleged option in the month of November, 1994, now it is to be seen whether this option was valid one or not.
It is the stand of respondent No. 1 that the alleged option of November, 1994 was a forgery.
That option was allegedly countersigned by Shri Ashok Kumar, who was then posted as Executive Officer and now working as Deputy Director, Local Govt. in the Directorate.
When Shri Ashok Kumar was directed to certify his signatures on the option allegedly given by Rakesh Kumar, husband of the petitioner, he categorically stated that his signatures are forged.
Meaning thereby that the alleged option has been introduced in the records of the Municipal Council just for the reason that the alleged option has been found in the record of the Council which forwarded the same to the Government for approval.
The Government has the right to verify whether the alleged option is valid and has been given in accordance with law or not.
Once the Government has categorically taken a stand that the alleged option was forgery, in such a situation a serious disputed question of fact has arisen which can only be adjudicated by the competent court.
7.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is hereby dismissed by making observations that let the petitioner may file a civil suit in the competent court of jurisdiction challenging the action of the respondents.
However, this court cannot give any relief to the petitioner.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.