Amitava Lala, J - This writ petition is made basically on two points, viz, (a) Promotion; and (b) Seniority.
Both are to be governed by Sections 17 and 18 of the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority (Service) Regulations.
Section 17 of the said Regulation speaks that promotion to a higher post shall be based on merit, relative suitability of a candidate for a particular post and seniority wherein Section 18 of the said Regulation for seniority of employees within a cadre shall be determined in accordance with the principles to be laid down by the Authority.
2.
In the 64th Meeting of the Secretary of the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority it was decided that the Technical Assistants need not sit in any qualifying Examination for promotion to Assistant Engineer's post; promotion would be made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Merit will be determined on the basis of performance appraisal reports, as this would be promotion from Class-III to Class-II.
There cannot be any dispute in the preparation of the performance appraisal report that the service tenure will be appraised by the appropriate authority and such report will be given.
I do not find any statement as regards adverse report in the affidavit-in- opposition of the respondent authority.
Nobody appeared on behalf of the CMDA Therefore, this Court has no other alternative but to go on the basis of the favourable presumption as regards merit.
Therefore, the remaining question is seniority.
Such seniority has to be counted from the date of the appointment which was admittedly on 531971 afternoon when other candidates were appointed on 631971.
3.
The respondent authority has taken a peculiar stand in paragraph 6 of the affidavit-in-oppositiion by admitting that the petitioner joined in the service on 5th March, 1971 afternoon but the Gradation List of all Technical Assistants was prepared on the basis of the written test at later date on the basis of merit, i.e., marks obtained in the written test.
The position of the writ petitioner in the said Gradation List was 62.
This was all along the policy of the respondent No. 1 to fix the seniority of direct recruitment on the basis of merit in a particular Examination.
The date of joining in the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority was not a factor to decide the seniority of the selected candidates during 1971 and thereafter.
4.
According to the petitioner, there was no such policy before the 64th Meeting of the Secretary of the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority.
Therefore, if cannot be construed that there was a policy before.
In any event, the performance of the petitioner can be taken into account as regards service for the purpose of seniority during the tenure of service.
Accordingly, an appropriate weightage should be given in respect of such part to fit in three points, viz, (a) Merit; (b) Suitability for the post; and (c) Seniority.
5.
It is an admitted position that in the year 1986 the order of promotion was given.
But by the passage of time the petitioner's promotion has been superseded by the persons who had given appointments in the service on 631971 and subsequent thereto.
In any event, if there is a dispute as regards `merit-cum-seniority' as to why the seniority should not be taken into account from the date of initial appointment on 531971 afternoon which is not known to this Court.
For the purpose of releasing the salary, 631971 can be the date for all candidates but that does not necessarily mean that the petitioner, who joined on 531971 afternoon should not be counted as senior than the persons who joined in the service on 631971.
6.
Therefore, it appears to this Court that the petitioner will be entitled to get notional seniority from the date of joining prior to the provisional Gradation List which was published in the year 1981 and the subsequent promotion in the year 1997.
However, this Court has clarified the position that by passing such order, the promotional seniority already given to the other candidates will not be disturbed in any manner whatsoever.
Therefore, for the purpose of giving effectiveness as to the notional benefit with effect from 24.2.1981 and also increment and seniority from such period a departmental order is to be passed by the Chief Executive Officer, Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority upon completion of all formalities as per records within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
The Rule is made absolute.
There will be no order as to costs.
Since the original affidavit-in-opposition is not readily available in the record, a photocopy of the same filed in Court today be treated as original.
Let urgent xeroxed certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocate for the petitioner within two weeks from the date of submitting the requisites.
Order accordingly.