Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction for quashing the order dated 792001 and further for a direction to the respondents to grant salary to the petitioner in the pay scale of Institutional Officer in the Department of Agriculture, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh.
2.
The petitioner on 191994 was appointed as Agricultural Development Officer, upon his selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
According to the petitioner on 2541995, the petitioner was transferred against the vacant post of Institutional Officer under I.W.D.P.
Kandi Project.
The petitioner performed the duties and functions of that post and, thus, claims the salary in the pay scale of Rs. 8000-13500/- (revised).
The respondents were, however, paying to the petitioner salary of Agricultural Development Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2900/- (unrevised).
The petitioner moved a representation before the respondents vide order of a Division Bench of this Court passed in CWP No. 7190 of 2001.
On 792001 this request was declined by the respondents giving rise to the filing of the present petition.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Selva Raj v Lt.
Governor of Island, Port Blair 1999(2) SCT 286 (SC) : 1998(3) S.L.R.
770 to justify the prayer for grant of higher pay scale.
The order of the shifting the petitioner dated 431995 has been annexed to the petition as Annexure P/2, which reads as under :-  "The Headquarter of Shri Dalip Kumar Rohilla, Agricultural Development Officer working under Deputy Director of Agriculture, Rohtak at matanhail is hereby shifted under Kandi Project at Chandigarh against the vacant post of Institutional Officer on temporary basis.
No extra remuneration will be paid to the official."
4.
In furtherance to the above order, the petitioner was shifted to the Kandi Project and the petitioner joined not as Institutional Officer, but against the post of Institutional Officer.
The order clearly shows that the petitioner was only shifted.
He was neither called upon to perform the duties and functions of an Institutional Officer nor was granted an additional charge of that post.
A bare reading of the order clearly shows that the petitioner had been shifted in his own post, but against a vacant post.
The order specifically stated that the petitioner would not be entitled to any extra remuneration.
Vide the impugned order, the competent authority rejected the representation of the petitioner on the same premises.
The petitioner obviously could not derive any advantage of Rule 319 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-I Part-I as the basic ingredients thereof had not been satisfied in petitioner's case.
The petitioner has also not placed anything on record to show that he was performing his duties and functions of higher responsibilities.
There is no comparative table placed on record, which would show any markable difference in the performance of duties and functions of Agricultural Development Officer and Institutional Officer.
As the post was lying vacant and apparently no other post was available at that time, the petitioner was shifted against the vacant post.
There is no order explicit and there is nothing on record before us which could persuade the Court to infer compliance to the said provision.
5.
The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Selva Raj (supra) is completely distinguishable on facts, as in that case vide order dated 28.1.1992 the petitioner was called upon to look after the duties of the Secretary (Scouts) and it was not disputed that he was performing the functions of a higher post.
This is not the case herein.
Vide Annexure P14 the stand of the respondents is clear before the Court and is sustainable in law.
No merit.
Dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.