Pranab Kumar Chattopadhyay, J - The principal question involved in the instant Writ Petition is whether the candidates who have secured higher marks than the general candidates in the Selection Test on the basis of merit can be appointed against the unreserved vacancies even after filling up the entire vacancies reserved for the reserved category candidates.
In other words, if the candidates belonging to reserved category secure higher marks than the candidates of unreserved category then in such circumstances whether such reserved category candidates should be denied appointment on the ground that the total seats reserved for the reserved category candidates have already been filled up and inspite of showing better merit than the unreserved category candidates, appointment cannot be given on the ground that the appointment to the reserved category candidates must be confined amongst the reserved seats meant for them and inspite of showing better merits they cannot be accommodated against the seats which are not reserved for any category.
2.
In the present case the petitioner belongs to OBC category.
It has been mentioned in the Government Order being No. 735/BC/M-6/82(1) dated 8th April, 1999 issued by the Principal Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Backward Classes Welfare Department that by Order No. 1056/BCW/EC/MR/606 dated 6th April, 1997 the percentage of the vacancies to be reserved was raised from 5% to 7%.
The name of the petitioner was also sponsored by the Employment Exchange as an eligible candidate for the post of Assistant Teacher under the District Primary School Council, Hooghly.
By a written communication dated 27th October, 1998, the Secretary, District Hooghly Primary School Council informed the petitioner that his name has been sponsored by the Employment Exchange for the post of Assistant Teacher in the Primary School under the District School Council, Hooghly and the Writ Petitioner was requested to appear personally with all documents in original on 19th January, 1999 before the authority of the said Council and thereafter by a subsequent Memo dated 1st November, 1999 the said Secretary, Hooghly District Primary School Council informed the petitioner that his name has been selected after preliminary scrutiny as per Rules and the petitioner was directed to appear for a written test on 19th December, 1999.
The petitioner duly appeared at the said interview along with other eligible candidates selected by the District Primary School Council, Hooghly.
3.
Admittedly, the Writ petitioner herein secured 5022% marks.
The last appointed general category candidates against unreserved vacancies secured 4815% marks and the last appointed candidates against reserved category vacancies meant for the OBC candidates secured 5080% marks.
The petitioner herein was not appointed even after securing 5022% marks whereas the general category securing only 4815% marks was appointed against unreserved vacancies.
The petitioner challenged the validity and/or legality of the aforesaid decision of the respondent authorities in the matter of refusing appointment to the petitioner inspite of securing higher marks and showing better performance at the Selection Test than the general category candidates.
4.
The respondent, Hooghly District Primary School Council, however contended that the OBC candidates, whose names have been sponsored by the Employment Exchange in terms of Rule 8 of the Recruitment and Leave Rules, 1991 for the purpose of filling up vacancies of the reserved category superseding the candidates belonging to the general category, cannot take advantage of their performance in the Selection Test as those OBC candidates would not have come within the zone of consideration under normal circumstances.
The Employment Exchange sponsored the names of eligible candidates including OBC candidates for whom 5% was reserved on 1 : 20 basis and the Writ Petitioner was admittedly sponsored as an OBC candidate.
Since the petitioner was sponsored by the Employment Exchange for the purpose of consideration only against the 5% vacancies reserved for the OBC candidates, there can be valid reason for considering the case of any OBC candidate against unreserved category according to the learned Counsel for the respondent-Council.
It was further contended by the learned Counsel of the Hooghly District Primary School Council that the Employment Exchange gave priority and/or preference to the petitioner as OBC candidate over the general category candidates at the time of sponsoring the names for filling up the vacancies in the post of Primary School Teacher.
5.
According to the respondent-authorities, the OBC candidates including the petitioner whose names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange got precedence over the general category candidates enrolled at the same time in the Employment Exchange in order of seniority only for the purpose of maintaining the percentage of vacancies reserved for the OBC category.
The learned Counsel for the respondents further contended that reservation for the post of OBC candidates is an exception of equality clause and the same could not be extended beyond the statutory limit.
In the instant case, admittedly, all the reserved vacancies meant for the OBC candidates have been duly filled up by the OBC candidates on the basis of merit and the fast appointed candidate in the said category secured 5080% whereas the petitioner herein admittedly secured 5022% and as such, according to the learned Counsel for the respondent authorities, the petitioner was rightly denied appointment as Primary School Teacher in view of the aforesaid reasons.
6.
Mr. Dipak Banerjee, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner contended that as the petitioner secured higher marks than the selected candidates in the unreserved category, there can be no valid reason to deny appointment to the petitioner in the post of Assistant Teacher in Primary Schools under Hooghly District Primary School Council.
Mr. Banerjee submitted that the petitioner herein inspite of showing better merit than the candidates in the unreserved category was denied appointment to the post of Primary Teacher on the alleged ground that the claim of the petitioner cannot be considered against the vacancies meant for the unreserved category candidates.
According to Mr. Banerjee, the aforesaid stand taken by the respondent authorities is violative of the constitutional mandate as enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Mr. Sircar, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Hooghly District School raised an objection to the effect that the petitioner could not have come within the zone of consideration under normal circumstances and the name of the petitioner was sponsored by the Employment Exchange because the petitioner belongs to OBC category and the Employment Exchange authorities sponsored the name of the petitioner as OBC category candidate superseding the seniority of many eligible candidates of the unreserved category.
According to Mr. Sircar the case of the petitioner should be considered only against the vacancies meant for the reserved category candidates and not otherwise.
Mr. Sircar further contended that the petitioner along with other OBC candidates got precedence over the general candidates enrolled in the Employment Exchange in order of seniority as Employment Exchange was required to sponsor adequate number of candidates from the OBC category for the purpose of filling up the vacancies in the post of Assistant Teachers under the respondent-Hooghly District Primary School Council.
8.
According to the learned Counsel for the respondent, many of the OBC candidates like petitioner herein would not have come within the zone of consideration but their names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange only because they belonged to the OBC category and was registered in the Employment Exchange as such.
In any event, the petitioner has admittedly come within the zone of consideration and has shown better performance than many of the candidates of unreserved category.
In the aforesaid circumstances whether meritorious candidates can be denied benefit of selection as sought to have been done in the instant case.
The petitioner herein being a candidate of the OBC category has been denied the benefit of selection and was not appointed as an Assistant Teacher in the Primary School Council inspite of securing higher marks than the candidates in the unreserved category and thereby the petitioner has been virtually deprived of the benefit of reservation and as a matter of fact the policy of reservation has been applied against the interest of the petitioner herein which is not at all permissible.
Mr. Banerjee cited the following decision in support of his contention :  1.
Indira Sawhney v. Union of India, 1992 Supple (3) SCC Page-210.
2.
RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCC Page-745 : 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC)  3.
Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chohan, 1995(6) SCC Page-684 : 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC).
Now, from the aforesaid submissions of the respective parties it appears that the petitioner though belonged to OBC category but secured higher marks than the candidates of the unreserved category and inspite of securing higher marks, the name of the petitioner was not included in the merit list.
9.
Admittedly, the petitioner has established that his performance was better than many of the candidates in the unreserved category whose names were included in the merit list and were given appointment by the respondent, Hooghly District Primary School Council.
In the instant case, the respondent Hooghly District Primary School Council has denied appointment to the petitioner by not including the name of the petitioner in the list of selected candidate on the ground that OBC candidates cannot be considered for appointment in respect of the vacancies meant for the unreserved category candidates.
The petitioner herein being a candidate in the OBC category has been denied appointment on account of reservation of certain vacancies for the OBC category candidates.
The reservation, therefore, in the instant case has worked to the disadvantage of the reserved category candidate which was never the intention of the State Government.
The vacancies are reserved in order to ensure representation of the candidates belonging to the Schedule Caste and/or other backward classes but such reservation cannot work to the disadvantage of the reserved category candidates who inspite of showing better merit would be denied appointment on the ground of non-availability of vacancies in the reserved categories.
The vacancies meant for the unreserved category candidates must be filled up on the basis of merit only and if any unreserved category candidate shows better merit in the selection upon securing higher marks than the unreserved category candidates then such meritorious reserved category candidates cannot be denied selection in preference to the unreserved category candidates only on the ground that the vacancies are meant for the unreserved category candidates.
10.
In my view, vacancies meant for unreserved category candidates can be filled up even by the reserved category candidates in the event said reserved category candidates are found more meritorious than the candidates in the unreserved category.
The Supreme Court in the case of Indra Sahwney (supra) held in paragraph 811 as hereunder :  ".....In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a communal reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say Schedule Castes get selected in the open competition filed on the basis of their own merit; they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes; they will be treated as open competition candidates .......
In the case of RK Sabharwal (supra) the Supreme Court held at page 750 of the said decision as hereunder :  ".....When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicated the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shows at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserved posts.
On the other hand the reserve category candidate can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
Article 14(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any Backward Class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to reach a conclusion that the Backward Class/Classes for which the reservation is make is not adequately represented in the State Services.
While doing so the State Government may take the total population of a particular Backward Class and its representation in the State Services.
When the State Government after doing the necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved for the said Backward Class then the percentage has to be followed strictly.
The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of the Backward Class have already been appointed/promoted against the general seats.
As mentioned above the roster point which is reserved for a Backward Class has to be filled by way of appointment/promotion of the member of the said class.
No general category candidate can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the Backward Class.
The fact that considerable number of members of a Backward Class have been appointed/promoted against general seats in the State Services may be a relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing reservation for the said class but so long as the instructions/rules providing certain percentage of reservations for the Backward Classes are operative the same have to be followed.
Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the Backward Classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be provided in addition...."  In the case of Union of India v. Virpal Singh (supra) the Supreme Court held at page 705 as hereunder :  ".....While determining the said number, the candidates belonging to the.
reserved category but selected/promoted on their own merit (and not by virtue of rule of reservation) shall not be counted as reserved category candidates."
11.
In the case of Ritesh R Shah v. Dr. YL Yamul, reported in AIR 1996 page-1378 : 1996(2) SCT 525 (SC), the Supreme Court in paragraph 13 of the said judgment held as under :  ".......There cannot be any dispute with the proposition that if a candidate is entitled to be admitted on the basis of his own merit then such admission should not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or any other reserved category since that will be against the Constitutional mandate enshrined in Article 16(4) ........
The learned Counsel for the respondents though sought to distinguish the aforesaid decisions on the ground that the same are not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the case but I am unable to accept the same.
In my opinion, the principles decided in the aforesaid decision are very much relevant and applicable in the present case.
The learned Counsel of the respondents relying upon an unreported decision of this Court in the case of Chairman, Ad-hoc Committee v. Rabindra Nath Ghosh (MAT 1434 of 2000) submitted that the authorities are bound by the statutory rules which are in force for recruitment.
There is no dispute with regard to the aforesaid proposition.
Admittedly, it has not been provided in the Recruitment Rules that more meritorious candidates in the reserved categories would be denied appointment inspite of securing higher marks than the candidates in the unreserved category.
It has also not been mentioned in the Recruitment Rules that notwithstanding the better performance in the selection test, the reserved category candidates should be considered only against reserved vacancies and inspite of performing better in the selection test than the candidates of the unreserved category, the candidates of the reserved/OBC category would be deprived of the benefit of selection.
12.
In my opinion, the respondent authorities have wrongly interpreted the recruitment rules and the learned Counsel for the respondent authorities could not refer to any particular provision mentioned in the Recruitment Rules which can prevent appointment of the candidates in the OBC category (reserved category) against the vacancies meant for the unreserved category after securing higher marks showing better merits than the candidates in the unreserved category.
There cannot be any rule which can deprive superior meritorious candidates of the reserved category in the matter of selection and appointment to the posts on the ground that the reserved category candidates must stake their claim for appointment against the vacancies meant for the reserved category and not otherwise.
13.
For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the petitioner herein should have been appointed as an Assistant Teacher in the Primary School under the respondent-Hooghly District Primary School Council as the petitioner has admittedly secured higher marks and performed better in the selection test than the last selected candidate in the unreserved category.
In the circumstances mentioned hereinabove, the Writ Petition succeeds and the same is allowed.
The respondent authorities, particularly the authorities of the Hooghly District Primary School Council is directed to appoint the petitioner forthwith in the post of Assistant Teacher and formal letter of appointment should be issued within a period of four weeks positively from the date of communication of this order.
14.
In the fact and circumstances, there will, however, be no order as to costs.
The other Writ Petitions being WP No. 15319 (W) of 2000 (Sudipta Kumar Bank v. State of West Bengal and others) and WP No. 18659 (W) of 2000 (Anup Kumar Ghosh and another v. State of West Bengal and others) which were heard analogously with the present Writ Petition, should also be allowed as the facts are similar and the question of law involved in the said Writ Petitions are also identical.
Accordingly, the said Writ Petitions being WP No. 15319 (W) of 2000 and WP No. 18659 (W) of 2000 are allowed and the respondent-Hooghly District Primary School Council is therefore directed to issue letters of appointment in favour of the Petitioners, of the aforesaid Writ Petitions within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order for identical reasons mentioned hereinabove.
Later : Prayer for stay made on behalf of Respondent is considered and refused.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order be supplied to the Learned Advocate for the parties, if applied for, on urgent basis.
Petitions allowed.