Ashutosh Mohunta, J - Plaintiff Siri Ram Saini has filed this appeal against the judgment and decree dated April 17, 1985 passed by the Additional District Judge, Narnaul, whereby the judgment and decree dated February 5, 1984, passed by the learned Sub Judge Ist Class, Narnaul, was set aside, and the pay and allowances of the appellant for the period from February 2, 1973 to April 5, 1975 were ordered to be withheld.
2.
Briefly the facts are that the plaintiff-appellant was appointed as a Peon in the Election Branch on January 21, 1980 and was attached to Tehsildar, Narnaul.
On February 1, 1973 the plaintiff-appellant applied for a short leave, but instead of granting leave to him, the appellant was informed that he had been transferred to Ambala.
Instead of joining duty at Ambala, the appellant continued sending applications for grant of leave at his headquarters at Chandigarh, on the ground of illness of his wife.
The last application sent by the appellant was for the grant of leave upto April 22, 1975.
However, on April 5, 1975 the appellant received the impugned order dismissing him from service, with retrospective effect from February 2, 1973 on the ground of wilful absence from duty with effect from the said date and disobedience of the order of transfer to Ambala.
3.
The plaintiff filed a suit in the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Narnaul, seeking a declaration to the effect that he was entitled to the grant of pay and allowances with effect from February 2, 1973 upto April 5, 1975.
The trial Court vide judgment and decree dated February 5, 1983, allowed the suit of the plaintiff and the plaintiff was held entitled to the grant of full pay and allowances and the grade increments, falling due during the period in question.
In appeal, learned Additional District Judge, Narnaul, vide judgment and decree dated April 17, 1985 set aside the judgment and decree passed by the learned Sub Judge Ist Class and reversed the finding of the trial Judge on Issue No. 1.
It is against the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
4.
The short point that arises for consideration in this case is whether the appellant was given a show-cause notice before the payment of the pay and allowances for the period February 2, 1973 to April 5, 1975 was stopped.
5.
Mr. Mittal, learned counsel for the appellant, contends that the trial Court in para 6 of the judgment has held that no show-cause notice was given.
He has laid stress on the following observations of the trial Court :-  ".......It was not disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that the plaintiff was not given any show cause notice........"  6.
The plea of the learned counsel for the appellant has been controverted by Mr. Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana.
He has contended that the trial Court has completely misconstrued and misread the impugned order dated August 23, 1976 passed by the Joint Chief Electoral Officer, which reads as under :-  "I have gone through the appeal dated 18675 filed by Shri Siri Ram, Ex-Peon of this department, against the order dated 5475 of the JCEO (in his capacity as Head of Office) vide which the former was dismissed from the service with effect from 2.2.73 on the ground of disobedience of his transfer orders and wilful absence from duty, the details of which are fully given in the said order, and have also heard Shri Siri Ram personally on 30476 in the presence of Sh. Madan Lal, Superintendent, and Shri Gulzari Lal, Estt.
Assistant of this office.
Full proceedings of the personal hearing have also been recorded by me at pages 225-226 (N) of this file."
7.
Mr. Dahiya contends that a perusal of the aforesaid order clearly shows that the appellant was heard personally on April 30, 1976 in the presence of Shri Madan Lal, Superintendent, and Shri Gulzari Lal, Estt.
Assistant, in the office of the Chief Electoral Officer.
The entire proceedings of personal hearing were also recorded on the file at pages 225 and 226 of the file.
Thus, the pay and allowances of the appellant were stopped only after affording him full opportunity of hearing.
8.
I have considered the rival contentions of the parties and have perused the file.
The order dated August 23, 1976 clearly shows that the appellant was afforded full opportunity of hearing in the presence of other officials.
The entire proceedings had been recorded.
It is only after hearing the appellant that the impugned order of withholding of pay and allowances was passed.
In any case, it has clearly been established that the appellant remained absent from duty from February 2, 1974 to April 5, 1975, which was a serious lapse on his part.
9.
Consequently, I find no infirmity or illegality in the judgment and decree dated April 17, 1985 passed by the Additional District Judge, Narnaul.
Accordingly, the present appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.