Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioner prays for setting aside the order of dismissal dated December 23, 1996, Annexure P-7 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ambala and the order of the appellate authority dated April 21, 1997, Annexure P-10, affirming the order of dismissal.
2.
The principal ground of attack is that copy of the enquiry report was not given to the petitioner when the show cause notices of the intention of the authority for imposition of the punishment were served upon the petitioner on October 17, 1996 and November 26, 1996.
According to the petitioner, he got copy of the enquiry report after the order of dismissal had been passed by the competent authority and he intended to prefer an appeal.
These averments have been made in paragraph 9 of the writ petition and there is no definite denial.
However, it is stated that notice to show cause along with copy of the enquiry report was served upon the petitioner properly.
3.
Apparent result of the above pleadings is that copy of the show cause notice along with the enquiry report, even as per the respondents, was not served upon the petitioner personally.
Be that as it may, we do not propose to discuss this contention in any further elucidation, as we had directed the record to be produced in the Court.
The show cause notice dated October 17, 1996, Annexure P-5, does not indicate that copy of the enquiry report was annexed to the said notice, even if it is assumed that the same was validly served upon the petitioner or his brother.
The second notice was issued on November 26, 1996, Annexure P-6, giving seven days time to the petitioner to file reply where the petitioner had made note that he would like to appear personally before the disciplinary authority and made submissions in reply to the show cause notice.
This opportunity was, admittedly, not granted to the petitioner as no further notice was sent thereafter directing him to appear on a particular date.
4.
In view of the judgment passed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 471, wherein it was held that it is an obligation on the part of the disciplinary authority to show, that along with the show cause notice proposing to impose punishment upon the delinquent official, copy of the enquiry report was annexed and was duly served upon the petitioner.
Apparently, the petitioner would suffer prejudice to his right of defence as he would not be able to know as to on what ground the Enquiry Officer has recorded findings against him.
We are of the considered view that non-supply of the copy of the enquiry report, which is apparent from the record produced before us, the petitioner has suffered prejudice to his right of defence.
5.
In view of the facts and circumstances aforestated, we have no hesitation in setting aside the order of dismissal, but in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad etc. v B Karunakar, etc. etc., 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : AIR 1994 Supreme Court 1074, we do not direct the reinstatement of the petitioner and give liberty to the respondents to proceed with the enquiry from the stage of November 26, 1996.
The petitioner would submit his reply to the show cause notice, if any, within one month from today to the disciplinary authority, i.e., the Superintendent of Police, Ambala, who shall proceed with the matter as there is serious controversy that the petitioner has been avoiding service.
We, therefore, direct the petitioner to appear before the Superintendent of Police, Ambala on May 6, 2002 at 11.00 A.M.
In the event of non-appearance of the petitioner on that date, any benefit accruing to the petitioner from this judgment shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and the order passed would stand automatically revived.
The disciplinary authority while passing the final order shall also pass appropriate order in regard to the period in question.
6. with the above observations, this petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.