Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
The petitioner, who claims that he possesses higher qualifications, requested the respondents to give him JST Grade, which was denied to him.
He claims the relief on the basis of the judgment passed in the case of Saheb Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 18813 of 1996 decided on 1231993, reported as 1995(1) SCT 668 SC.
The arrears payable to the petitioners therein was limited to 3 years and 2 months from the date of filing of the said writ petition.
However, this benefit was withdrawn and vide order dated 30th June, 1999, the respondent directed that the amount paid should be recovered from the petitioner.
Copy of the impugned order is annexed to the petition as Annexure P/3.
Aggrieved from this action of the respondent, the petition has filed the present petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The short question that arises for consideration before this court is whether the respondents were justified in directing the recovery after the rights of the parties were fully determined vide judgment of Division Bench dated 12th March, 1997.
There can be no other answer to the question afore- stated than in the negative.
The rights of the parties were determined by the Division Bench of this Court.
The said judgment became final, as it was not assailed by the respondents before the Hon'ble Apex Court by way of filing Special Leave Petition.
Even if the principle enunciated was varied, the settled rights of the parties could not be disturbed except by filing proper review application or taking up the judgment of the Division Bench in appeal before the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Admittedly, none of these remedies were invoked by the State.
Settled right could not be unsettled by the respondents unilaterally and that too without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of TR Dhananjaya v. J Vasudevan, 1955(4) Recent Services Judgments 490 to contend that in fact the respondents have committed contempt by not adhering to the said orders.
There is merit in the submissions, but we are not concerned with this contention, as no contempt application is pending before this Bench.
However, in view of the principle enunciated in TR Dhananjaya's case (supra), we allow this writ petition.
The impugned order dated 30.6.1999, Annexure P/3 is set aside, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.