Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The short point that arises in the present appeal is whether the services of the probationer can be terminated, if he is absent from duty, without holding an enquiry.
2.
The brief facts are that the plaintiff Amarjeet Singh was appointed by the Punjab State Warehousing Corporation as Accounts Clerk on 6.7.1981.
He was transferred from the Samana to State Warehousing Corporation Ramana vide order dated 2261982.
The plaintiff-respondent joined his duties and immediately thereafter he fell ill and applied for leave from 3061982 upto 171982.
Thereafter again plaintiff-respondent could not re-join his duties and kept submitting certificates from the doctor which showed his inability to work because of his illness.
3.
Because of his continuous absence, his services were terminated vide order dated 1111983 w.e.f.
271982.
4.
The plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration that the order dated 1111983 with regard to termination of his services was null and void and the same was liable to be set-aside.
The trial court vide its judgment dated 1261985 decreed the suit by holding that it was mandatory for the appellants to hold an enquiry before terminating the services of the plaintiff.
The defendant filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Patiala who also vide his judgment and decree dated 19.9.1986 dismissed the appeal.
5.
Against the aforesaid judgments, the present appeal has been filed.
Sh. HS Mattewal has put in appearance on behalf of the appellant.
I have gone through the judgments of the courts below with the help of the learned counsel for the parties, a perusal of which clearly reveals that the services of the plaintiff-respondent were terminated not because of his performance was not up to the mark or that his performance was unsatisfactory, but were terminated because of his absence without reasonable cause or excuse.
In this regard evidence was led before the trial Court to show that respondent was ill with regard to which certificate from the Civil Surgeon, Patiala Exhibit P-4 had been submitted.
It is also worth noting that the Civil Surgeon, Patiala referred the plaintiff to the Professor of Medicines, Rajendra Hospital, Patiala who found him suffering from Peritable bowel syndrome and advised him rest for four weeks.
After that period was over, requisite certificates from the Expert Medical practitioners were submitted.
6.
In these circumstances, the absence of the plaintiff-respondent was not willful but was due to illness.
In any case, even if his absence was willful, there should have been an enquiry into the fact whether the same was willful or not.
The termination of services of the plaintiff was punitive in nature.
The rules of natural justice should have been adhered to and the plaintiff should have been associated into an enquiry to find out the real reasons for his absence.
7.
In Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, 1984(1) SLR 426 (SC), the Hon'ble Apex Court has held "that the order of discharge should fall to the ground as the appellant has not been afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend himself as provided in Article 311(2) of the Constitution".
In this case also the petitioner was a probationer, whose services have been terminated but no enquiry was held and he was not given any opportunity to defend himself.
To the similar effect is the judgment in Rajender Kaur v. Punjab State, 1980(3) SLR 78.
8.
The Additional District Judge, Patiala, while dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant had ordered that the plaintiff would be entitled to "all rights, benefits and privileges which he would have drawn but for the impugned order".
The services of the plaintiff-respondent were terminated w.e.f.
271982.
Almost twenty years have passed since then.
He cannot be given the benefit of 20 years, without working.
In these circumstances, I do not think it is a fit case where the respondent should be given benefit for the last twenty years.
Thus, it would be reasonable, if the plaintiff respondent is awarded 50% of all the pay and allowances, to be paid within a period of six months.
The plaintiff-respondent shall be taken back in service forthwith.
Under the circumstances, I see no illegality in the judgment of the lower appellate court.
Consequently, the present appeal is dismissed with the above said modification in the appellate court's order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.