Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2.
Challenge in this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the vires of Rule 9(1) of the Haryana Education Directorate (State Service Class III) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") as amended from time to time on the ground that it creates an in-built discrimination, which is not permissible in view of the constitutional provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
At the very outset, we may refer to the relevant rule 9(1) of the Rules, vires of which are being challenged before us, which reads as under :-  "9(1) Recruitment to the service shall be made : xx xx xx (d) In the case of Assistants :- (i) by promotion from amongst Clerks; or (ii) by promotion from amongst Junior Scale Stenographers or Steno Typists; or (iii) by direct recruitments; or (iv) by transfer of an official from other departments of the State Government.
(e) In the case of Statistical Assistant :- (i) by promotion from amongst computers or Clerks or (ii) by direct appointment; or (iii) by transfer of an official from other departments of the State Government.
xx xx (j) In case of Computers :- (i) by direct appointment; or (ii) by promotion from amongst clerks in the service ; or (iii) by transfer of an official from other departments of the State Government; xx xx xx (m) In the case of Clerks :- (i) by direct appointment; or (ii) by promotion from restorers or Gestetner Operators in the service and class IV employees working in the Directorate; or (iii) by transfer of an official from other departments of the State Government."
4.
Reference to the detailed facts would not be necessary as the petitioners are working as Computers in the Directorate of the Higher Education, Haryana, Sector 17, Chandigarh.
According to them the Clerks have been equated with the Computers for the purpose of promotion to the post of Statistical Assistant and they belong to different classes.
Their clubbing for the purpose of promotion vitiate the right of equality guaranteed to them as well as their chances for promotion.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the State contended that these rules do not create any parity between the persons of either of the cadres except that cadres of Clerks as well as Computers have been made eligible to seek promotion to the post of Statistical Assistant in accordance with rules.
For this purpose, the learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohd.
Usman and others v. The State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 1801.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon this judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in support of his contention.
5.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is entirely mis- conceived.
The principle of equality is to be applied amongst the equals where a rule postulates promotion for the two cadres jointly.
It per se cannot be said to be suffering from the vires of arbitrariness or discrimination.
It is not disputed before us that the Clerks and the Computers though constitute a different cadre, but have the same pay scales and are discharging their primary duties in the post of equal status.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on Mohd.
Usman's case (supra), in fact, no-where supports the case of the petitioner.
In that case, even the plea raised was that the Upper Division Clerks and Lower Division Clerks were being treated equally for the purpose of making promotions.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in that case clearly held that such recruitments to Grade-II Sub Registrars from amongst ministerial officials of Registration and Stamp Department did not violate Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
6.
Their Lordships of the Hon'ble Apex Court held that doctrine of equality is attracted only when equals are treated as unequal.
Providing promotion avenues to two different feeding cadres would not affect the principle of equality that is the situation in the present case.
Furthermore, equality is founded on a basic principle of advancement of justice and fair treatment to its employees by the employer.
Chances of promotion is a legistimage expectancy on the part of the employee.
Promotion to higher post is not absolute or indefeasible right vested in the employee.
However, right of consideration for promotion to the posts of computers as well as the Clerks are to be considered for the Statistical Assistant and would be promoted in accordance with the rules.
This does not in any way indicate any hostile discrimination towards the petitioner.
7.
We see no reason to interfere.
8.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.