Amitava Lala, J - By making this writ petition the Calcutta Port Trust Authority challenged an award passed by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), and Arbitrator dated 291288.
The two issues were there before the arbitrator which are as follows :-  "(i) Whether upward revision by 20% of the amount of Rs. 34/- paid to 'X category workers on roll as on 1979 for the purpose of revision of Equation Allowance w.e.f.
1.1.80 is justified ?
If so, whether the coal trimmers who also got equation Allowance be eligible for any such revision ?
(ii) Whether the amount of Rs. 34/- per month paid to the 'A' category workers in terms of Cl. 2 of the tripartite settlement dated 15.9.1979 should be admissible to `A' category workers recruited after 191979.
In the context of the Labour-Advisor & Industrial Relations Officer, Calcutta Port Trust's letter No. ID-VIII 112A/1591 dated 31101980 ?"
2.
Neither of the parties have filed their respective affidavits.
Union of India has already given effect and following such effect the Port Trust Authority is giving the benefit prospectively from the date of the award which has culminated to the settlement subsequently under which it would be given from 4289.
Therefore the matter is rested therein.
3.
Learned counsel for the Port Trust Authority, the petitioner herein, submitted that the order should have been made prospectively but not retrospectively with effect from 1.1.80 by holding the same to avoid future anomaly in the wage pattern of `A' category workers which is beyond the scope and jurisdiction of the Arbitrator.
Arbitrator can give only the prospective effect but not the retrospective effect unless the situation so permits on the basis of the references made before him.
It is further to be noted hereunder that fixation of Equation Allowance in respect of some of the workers similar to the other who has obtained, is a matter of policy.
Therefore the decision as given by the Arbitrator dated 291288 cannot in any manner give retrospective effect before the policy framed is accepted.
Moreover, the matters were brought before the appropriate authority or the Arbitrator by way of industrial dispute in the year 1986.
Under such circumstances, giving retrospective effect from 1980 will exceed the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator and therefore the same is not permissible.
4.
Learned counsel in support of the petitioner relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court of India reported in 1976(1) Lab LJ 86 : 1976 Lab IC 263, National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd v. Their Workmen wherein question of pay scales of master roll workmen was decided as a result of the settlement and that was not one of the questions referred to the Arbitration.
It was held therein that the Industrial Tribunal was, therefore, acting beyond its jurisdiction in allowing a 25% increase of the wages of the muster-roll workmen.
The only reason the Industrial Tribunal had given for holding the same is that the wages of the muster-roll workmen was also a matter referred to it.
The point under reference by itself does not exclude muster-roll workman and that it clearly maintains that the parties had agreed that the demands regarding revision of pay scale etc. of the workman should be referred to arbitration and no exception has been made against the muster-roll workman.
Therefore by such reason a reference cannot be exceeded increment of wages upto 25%.
5.
Under the aforesaid circumstances following the ratio of the Supreme Court judgment this Court has to hold that the eligibility equation Allowance of the coal trimmers which was referred before the Tribunal is not beyond the jurisdiction but giving effect of it retrospectively is beyond the scope of reference.
Thus, I allow the writ petition accordingly.
6.
However, no order is passed as to costs.
7.
Rule is modified and made absolute to the extent of clarification as given hereinabove.
8.
Let Xerox certified copy of this judgment be supplied to the parties by the department within seven days from the date of putting in the requisition for drawing up and completion of the order as well as the certified copy thereof.
9.
All parties are to act on a signed copy minutes of the operative part of this judgment upon usual undertaking and as per the satisfaction of the officer of this Court in respect as above.
Petition allowed.