Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - CM No. 2842 of 2002  Application is allowed subject to just exceptions.
Exemption, as prayed for, granted.
CM stands disposed of.
C.W.P.
No. 1603 of 2002  2.
Notice to show cause why the petition be not admitted.
3.
Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana accepts notices.
4.
The short grievance of the petitioner in this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is that he had submitted a notice of demand dated March 16, 2001 Annexure P-1 to the competent authority for making a reference to the Labour Court under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Joint Secretary, Haryana Government, Labour Department, Chandigarh instead of making the reference in accordance with law, decided the reference on the merit itself while passing the following order :-  "It is informed to you that the Government is of the view that your case is not fit to send to Labour Court for adjudication (decision) because it has come in the knowledge after inquiry that your services have been terminated according to terms and conditions of appointment letter.
This type of termination of service does not cover under the retirement.
It is in this situation your demand notice do not send for reference and is filed.
Rejected."
5.
A bare reading of the above order clearly shows that the Joint Secretary has exceeded his jurisdiction in entering upon the merits of the dispute intended to be referred which certainly falls outside the ambit of jurisdiction exercisable by such authority.
He has held the termination to be valid.
This is the patent transgression of his prescribed jurisdiction.
Reference can be to the judgment of a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Radhey Shyam and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(2) P.L.R.
1 : 1998(2) SCT 1 (P&H) (DB) and The Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co of India Private Limited v. The Management and others, AIR 1973 Supreme Court 1227.
6.
In the aforestated reasons and in consonance with the law settled, we have no hesitation to set aside the impugned order dated October 14, 2001 Annexure P-3, which we hereby do and direct the respondents to pass afresh order after hearing the parties, if necessary, and in accordance with law within a period of six months from the date on which a certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Order accordingly.