RN Prasad, J - The petitioner was an employee of the Bihar State Electricity Board.
He was posted as Personnel Officer.
He retired from service with effect from 31121996.
The petitioner filed a writ petition being C.W.J.C.
No. 6551/96 making prayer therein to grant him promotion on the post of Deputy Director (Personnel) as junior to him was granted promotion.
The said writ petition was disposed of on 2041998, Annexure-2.
The relevant portion of the order is quoted here-in-below :-  "This Court is of the view that if charge-sheet has been issued against an employee or the charge has been found against any such employees in any criminal Court, then in such cases the consideration of the case of an employees for his promotion can be deferred but not in any other case.
Here it is not the case of the respondent-Board that during the tenure of service of the petitioner, any charge-sheet was served upon him or any charge-sheet was found against him in a Court of law in any criminal proceeding.
Therefore, his case should have been considered along with his juniors.
The petitioner has, however, retired from service on 31121996.
Therefore, there is no question of grant of actual promotion to the petitioner even if the petitioner's case is considered and promotion is granted.
The petitioner will get notional benefits only.
In that view of the matter, this Court directs the Secretary of the respondent-Board (respondent No. 2) to consider the petitioner's case for promotion to the next promotional post within a period of three months from the date of service of a copy of this order upon the said respondent and the respondents authorities will come to a decision on the basis of such consideration as early as possible preferably within a period of one month from the date of holding of such consideration and if upon such consideration the promotion is given to the petitioner, all consequential financial benefits may also be given to the petitioner."
2.
The case of the petitioner was not being considered and as such petitioner filed M.J.C.
for initiating contempt proceeding.
The said M.J.C.
was disposed of vide Annexure-3.
In the meantime pursuant to the order of this Court, Annexure-2, the competent authority passed order and found the petitioner not fit for promotion.
The said order was communicated to the petitioner vide letter dated 822001.
Annexure-1.
The petitioner has challenged the order, Annexure-1 in this writ petition.
It appears from the order, Annexure-2, that while disposing of the writ petition Secretary of respondent-Board was directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the next promotional post within a period of three months from the date of service of copy of the order upon the said respondent.
Therefore, the said order cannot be taken as it is direction to promote the petitioner.
It appears from, the order, Annexure-1, that the case of the petitioner was considered and while considering the case of the petitioner for promotion it has been pointed out that in the year 1992-93 he was given advance to the tune of Rs. 60,000, but no account was given by the petitioner.
Ultimately Rs. 45,856 was deducted from his salary and rest had been ordered to be recovered in 20 instalments.
Thus the authority did not find him fit for promotion.
It is well established Rule of law that for grant of promotion competent authority is required to see the entire service record of the employee and on the basis of service record competent authority has to decide as to whether he is fit for promotion or not.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, says that it was not connected with the duty of the petitioner but the fact remains that advance was given to the petitioner but he did not furnish the account of the said amount and recovery was made.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner, however, says that in the writ petition averment has been made that the respondent- Board has no authority to initiate departmental proceeding against the retired person.
In my view, the said point is not involved in this case as from the order, Annexure-1 it does not appear that any proceeding has been initiated against the petitioner after retirement.
It is merely a question of consideration for promotion.
Therefore, I do not find any reason to give any finding with regard to a point which is not relevant for the purpose.
3.
Thus, on consideration, I find no merit in this application.
Accordingly, it is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.