Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioners have invoked the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court for the issuance of an appropriate writ, or direction quashing the order dated January 7, 2000 vide which recovery from the pay of the petitioner has been ordered without affording an opportunity of hearing to them.
2.
The petitioners, as per the averments contained in the petition, possess requisite qualifications for the post of SS Mistresses.
They were selected and appointed as SS Mistresses.
Later on, they acquired higher qualification of MA  3.
The Punjab Government, Department of Education on 191960 had issued instructions that two or three advance increments were to be given to Masters/Mistresses who had passed M.A./M.Sc.
in first division and three increments to those who passed in second and third division.
Several masters/Mistresses filed writ petition for grant of advanced increments on acquiring the post-graduate qualifications, which were allowed in terms of the judgment in CWP No. 2632 of 1985, (Vidya Sagar Singla and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on February 21, 1996.
The Letters Patent Appeal No. 572 of 1986 filed by the respondent-State was also dismissed on 11091986.
The State of Punjab filed Civil Appeals Nos. 960 and 961 of 1987 in the Hon'ble Supreme Court and these also met the same fate.
4.
The pay-scales of the Masters/Mistresses were revised on the recommendations of the first Punjab pay commission and the Second Punjab Pay Commission.
Resultantly, the pay-scale of the Master/Mistresses were fixed in the grade of Rs. 620-20-700-25-850/30-1000-40-1200 with effect from 0101.
1978.
But later on vide letter dated 1821983 (Annexure P-2), the scale was further revised with a starting salary of Rs. 660/- per month with effect from 0101.1978.
5.
The challenge in this writ petition is to the recovery order issued by the authorities (Annexure P-5) whereby the amount to the extent of 60 per cent has been ordered to be recovered from their salary on the ground that the pay- scales of the Masters/Mistresses were not correctly fixed.
6.
We have heard Shri RC Chatrath, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Rajive Kwatra, learned Assistant Advocate-General for the State of Punjab.
7.
Shri RC Chatrath, learned counsel for the petitioners, in support of his argument that no recovery can be effected from the salary of the petitioners, placed reliance on Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668 wherein it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that in the absence of misrepresentation or fraud by the employee, amount paid cannot be recovered, from the employee though he will not be entitled to draw upgraded scale any further.
Further, he relied upon Rawail Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(4) SCT 481, wherein it has been held that senior persons are entitled to all those benefits which their juniors in the same cadre are getting i.e. the pay of a senior cannot be less than that of a junior and classification for implementing revised pay scales qua one group of the same class and not for the other is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
8.
The respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in their joint written statement, have admitted that the pay of the petitioners was inadvertently not correctly fixed.
The fact of wrong fixation of pay came to the notice of the audit party.
Thus, keeping in view the audit report, dated 712000, the order Annexure P-5 was circulated to the educational institutions for information.
On merits, most of the facts regarding the fixation of pay of the petitioners and others are admitted.
9.
In view of the above facts, the learned counsel for the petitioners firstly contended that the petitioners were not given any opportunity of hearing before passing the impugned order and as such, the impugned order is vitiated being violative of the principle of natural justice.
Secondly, while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sahib Singh's case (supra), learned counsel contended that the petitioners have not made any misrepresentation to the State, while they were paid higher emoluments under the order of the State and, as such, no recovery can be ordered for the past and even on this score, the impugned orders are bad in law.
10.
Since the challenge in this writ petition is limited to the recovery of the amount of 60 per cent from their salary without affording them an opportunity of personal hearing and admittedly, no opportunity of hearing has been given to the petitioners before ordering the recovery, this petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents that before effecting recovery of any amount on account of wrong fixation of pay, then exercise may be carried out after affording an opportunity of hearing to the affected persons after due observance of the principle of audi alteram partem.
11.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition.
The impugned order is quashed.
The respondents are at liberty to pass orders afresh in accordance with law.
In view of the aforesaid observations.
The respondents would also keep in mind the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sahib Singh's case (supra).
While dealing with the contention of the respondents that recovery retrospectively is not permissible, in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.