Bhagwati Prasad, J - The present writ petition has been filed impugning the orders dated 2042001 and 1752001 passed in OA No. 223 of 2000, OA No. 63 of 2001 and OA 117 of 2001 by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur Bench Jodhpur.
The petitioner is seeking a writ of mandamus or certiorari for setting aside the orders dated 2042001 and 1752001.
The petitioner has further prayed that order dated 10.5.2001 passed by respondent No. 2 thereby repatriating and reverting the petitioner to the post of Khalasi i.e. a lower grade to his Parent Division i.e. Delhi Division be set aside.
The petitioner further prayed for direction to regularise him in the post of Clerk-cum-Typist from the date, he has been promoted in the said post on ad- hoc basis.
The petitioner has stated in the petition that following questions of law arise for consideration for general public importance :-  "A.
Whether the petitioner is entitled to be regularised in class III of material checking clerk/office clerk in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 (RPS) revised to Rs. 3050-4500 (RPS) in which he is already continuing since more than 10 years and the statutory instructions of Railway Board also provides that the Railway Employees who have served regularly two years in the post should be regularised under 50% quota in the Division after having suitability test ?
B Whether the petitioner's case comes within the ambit of the protective provisions in the Railway Board's statutory circular such as E (NG)/II/81/RC-I dated 141986, E (NG) - I-73/PM-1/222 dated 2331974, E- 55/PM-I-19-3 dated 1111955, E (NG)-1-105 dated 2441979 and E(NG)-I-77-PM-I-777 dated 17101977 which provides that no reversion from officiating service after competing 18 months should be made ?
C Whether the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the direction contained in the circular dated 10102000 issued by the Railway Board ?
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he is entitled to be regularised in class-III post of material checking clerk/office clerk in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 (RPS) revised to Rs. 3050-4500 (RPS) in which he is already continuing since more than ten years and statutory instructions of the Railway Board provide that Railway Employees who have served regularly two years in the post should be regularised under 50% quota in the Division after having suitability test.
Further, the case of the petitioner is that his case comes within the ambit of the protective provisions in the Railway Board's statutory circular such as E(NG)/II/81/RC-I dated 141986.
3.
The background of the controversy is that casual labours engaged in Construction Division of Railway agitated their claim to be regularised in Construction Division.
According to the petitioner, they were on deputation sent from Group-D to Group-C The Railway Board from time to time has passed the orders whereby those who have worked in Group-C for a considerable period have been ordered to be absorbed in that situation and it is on the basis of this, the petitioner has claimed that he should be absorbed against a promotion quota fixed by the Railway Board Circulars.
4.
According to the petitioner, Railway Board issued instructions on 10102000 and thereby increased promotion quota from 33-1/3% to 50% for promotion in Group-C from Group-D in Railways.
This promotion quota has not been filled in from the persons of the category of the petitioners.
Despite the fact that petitioner has applied for, he is being reverted to the post of Khalasi, he has not performed duties of that post for the last 12 years.
5.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on Rule 188 of the Railway Board's Rules wherein it has been provided that promotion to the lower grades in Group `C' should be wholly filled by promotion from Group D Railway servants who have put in 5 years service.
In the case of posts which are in the normal avenue of promotion to Group `D' railway servants, promotion should be made from amongst the railway servants of the Department.
According to the petitioner, he fulfills eligibility criteria, still he has not been considered by the respondents for promotion.
The petitioner has thus prayed that order of the Central Administrative Tribunal dated 1752001 in OA No. 117 of 2001 be quashed and services of the petitioner be regularised in Group-C Post from the date he has been continuously working.
6.
The respondents have joined the issue and filed the reply.
It has been contended that petitioner has raised question of regularisation earlier and regarding his clear prayers of regularisation, it has been observed in the order by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur Bench, Jodhpur dated 12101988 in OA No. 35 of 1998 thus :-  "7.
It would be seen from the above letter that persons who has completed three years of service as ad hoc MCCs were only to be regularised by their parent department.
This letter dated 11/1521991 does not form a policy.
It is a one-time measure to regularise the services of ad hoc MCCs.
It is admitted fact that the applicant was assigned the duties of Receipt Clerk only on 2531992; therefore, in our opinion the letter dated 11/1521991 cited above does not cover the case of the applicant.
We, thus, find that the application is devoid of any merit and deserves to be dismissed."
7.
The respondents have stated in their reply that successive applications have been filed by the petitioner at Jodhpur and Delhi and has obtained the orders against itself.
Such successive applications are barred by principles of constructive res-judicata and therefore the present writ petition is not maintainable.
The respondents have also relied on an order passed by the Principal Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal on 862001 wherein it has been observed thus :-  As per Para 181 IREM Vo.
I Gangmen have a regular channel of promotion as Keymen/Mate life as per Para 159 IREM Vol.
I Khallasis have regular channel of promotion as Artisans Grade III in their own cadre in the Civil Engineering Dept.
in P Lourdsamy v Union of India and Others, AIsLJ 1998(1) CAT 32, the CAT Bombay Bench has held that the contents of IREM which embodies administrative orders on the Railway Code, the rules and allied establishment matters issued by Railway Board from time to time have statutory force.
10.
From this it would follows that applicants who held lien against Group `D' category of Khallasis and Gangmen in the Civil Engineering Dept.
or respective divisions of the Railways can legally aspire for promotion only within their own cadres Artisans Grade III and Keymen/Mate respectively, and cannot claim promotion as Office Clerks under the 33 1/3 quota referred to above, as the same is available only to those Railway servants in Group D categories for whom no regular avenues of promotion exist.
11.
The question then arises whether persons such as applicants who hold lien against Group D posts of Khallasis/Gangmen in the Civil Engineering Department or the respective divisions of the Railway, can be regularised in the construction organisation against posts of MCCs etc. to which they have been promoted on ad hoc basis and are continuing as such for long period of time.
It must be remembered that the construction organisation has no cadre of its own, and the posts against which applicants have been promoted on ad hoc basis are work charged posts.
No doubt applicants are continuing in these work charged posts to which they have been promoted on ad hoc basis for a considerable length of time, but the fact remains that these posts do not form part of any cadre and are work charged posts, created for a specific job of short duration, the expenditure on which is booked to a particular work estimate.
The fact that applicants have contained against work charged posts for a long period of time could be either because the work for which the post was created was not completed within the original time period, or because when one item of work concluded another item of work was taken up, which gave applicants a certain measure of continuity.
Be that as it may, these posts in the Construction Organisation are entirely outside the cadre in which applicants hold a lien, and hence they have no enforceable legal right to compel respondents to regularise them in the Construction Organisation, merely because they are holding work charged posts in Construction Organisation since considerable lengths of time.
In this connection we find that the Division Bench in its order dated 13072000 itself has referred to the PNM meeting on 851977 at the level of General Manager, Northern Railway with URMU which decided that such of the staff who were continuously working for a period of three years or more as clerks on ad hoc basis may be regularised on the basis of their service records and viva voce, duly observing the extent instructions on the subject as a special cause, not to be quoted as a precedent in future.
It was further decided that if there were still more vacancies after regularising the said staff, such vacancies would be filled by the divisions in which staff hold their lien.
12.
We find that in compliance of the aforesaid PNM decision, a letter was issued on 5101989 to all divisions to send the number of MCCs working in each Division/Office on ad hoc basis for more than three years.
The Construction Organisation in its letter dated 17121990 addressed to GM Northern Railway stated that it too had MCCs who were working on ad hoc basis for more than three years and sought clarification as to what decision has been taken by GM Office in regard to regularisation of MCCs working in Construction Organisation, and whether the decision in the PNM meeting held on 851997 would apply to those MCCs working in the Construction Organisation as well.
13.
After considering the matter, the GM's office letter dated 11/1521991 clarified that MCCs working in Construction Organisation on ad hoc basis for more than three years would be regularised as such by their respective parent department where they hold lien i.e. from where they have been deputed to Construction Organisation.
Thereupon Construction Organisation made a further reference by letter dated 2471991 for permission to hold selections for regularisation of Class IV staff working as MCCs/Clerks for more than three years at their own level but Construction Organisation was advised by Letter dated 3061991 that MCCs working on ad hoc basis in Construction Organisation but holding their lien in their own office/division could not be regularised in Construction Organisation and could be regularised only by their parent division/office as and when their turn came in the concerned division/office.
8.
The respondents have further claimed that another application No. 1606 of 2001 is pending before the Principal Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal seeking regularisation.
The petitioner moved present application without making any reference of pendency of such application.
Thus, the petitioner is guilty of making successive application for the same relief.
The respondents have further claimed that the petitioner is holding substantive post in group-D.
The substantive post is Khalasi.
Khalasi has avenue of advancement vide Railway Board's letter dated 2331988.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Special Leave Petition filed by the Union of India begin SLP(C) No. 900 of 1994 decided on 18.8.1994 has held thus :-  Appointment to post of a Store Keeper/Store Issuer/Clerk is regulated by certain rules governing recruitment to the post in the Department.
The respondent, if eligible, is entitled to be considered for the same along with all others who may be candidates for the appointment.
That is the only correct way of filling these posts which would ensure equal opportunity in the matter of employment as required by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India to all eligible persons who are candidates for these posts.
A direction like the one given by the Tribunal in favour of the respondent or any one like him has the effect of denying equal opportunity to the other eligible candidates by appointing a person not in accordance with the rules.
Any order for absorption and regularisation of a persons not appointed in accordance with the rules, given in the manner contained in the impugned order of the Tribunal would result in denial of equal opportunity in the matter of employment to the other eligible candidates for the public officer.
Such a course must obviously be eschewed.
The Tribunal's order is, therefore, set aside.
We may, however, observe that the respondent would be entitled to be considered for appointment to the post of a Store-Keeper or clerk in accordance with his entitlement and in conformity with the rules applicable for appointment to the posts, subject to the conditions of eligibility prescribed for the post.
9.
The respondents have further stated that Principal Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal in Full Bench Decision has held thus :-  "4.
Shri PS Mahendru, learned counsel has made a valiant attempt to submit that the aforesaid order of the Jodhpur Bench of the Tribunal dated 17.05.2001 does not raise bar of res-judicata in the present application.
He has contended that more than one relief was claimed by the application on the Jodhpur Bench and accordingly,.
it is open to the applicant to challenge that very order in the present application, as he is raising certain other points.
We are unable to agree with this contention, having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case.
It is very clear that the applicant has challenged the same order, i.e., the order passed by the same order, i.e., the order passed by the Deputy Chief Engineer (C), Northern Railway, Jodhpur dated 10.05.2001, which is admittedly based on the office order No. 522 dated 09.05.2001 issued by the CAO/Cont./K.
Gate, Delhi which has already been fully dealt with and decided by the Coordinate Bench of this Tribunal at Jodhpur Bench.
It was also admitted during the hearing that the applicant is working at Jodhpur and is primarily aggrieved by the aforesaid order issued by the respondents at Jodhpur dated 10.05.2001.
"5.
In the above fact and circumstances of the case, the present OA is not maintainable both on the ground of jurisdiction of the Principal Bench to hear this case coupled with the bar of principles of constructive res-judicata and res-judicata.
No costs."
10.
The respondents have further contended that petitioner has failed to refer the statutory provision for regularising the services or appointment to the post of clerk in the Railway establishment.
The petitioner is holding lien against group-D category of Khalasi in the Delhi division.
The post of Khalasi is having a regular channel of promotion in his own cadre.
Learned counsel for the respondents places reliance on Paras 188 and 189 which read thus :-  "188 Promotion to lower grades in Group `C' -  Lower grades in Group `C' like Junior Clerks, Material Checkers etc. in scales such as Rs. 825-1200 should be wholly filled by promotion from Group `D' railway servants who have put in 5 years service.
In the case of posts which are in the normal avenue of promotion to Group `D' railway servants, promotion should be made from amongst the railways servants of the Department concerned in each promotion unit on the basis of seniority-cum- suitability after holding such written and/or practical tests as may be considered necessary.
In the case of posts which are not in the normal avenue of promotion, promotion should be made on the basis of selection after holding such written and/or practical test as may be considered necessary and from panel drawn and according to prevailing rules in respect of selection posts".
"189.
Promotion to higher grades in Group `C' :- (a) Railway servants in group `D' categories for whom to regular avenue of promotion exists 33-13% of the vacancies in the lowest grade of Commercial Clerk, Ticket Collectors, Trains Clerks, Number Takers, Time Keepers, Fuel Checkers, Office Clerks, Typists and Store Clerks etc. should be earmarked for promotion.
The quota for promotion of Group `D' staff in the Accounts Deptts.
to Group `C' post of Accounts Clerk will be 25%.
Promotion to Group `C' will be subject to the following conditions :- (i) All promotion should be made on the basis of selection.
There should be written tests to assess the educational attainments of candidates followed by interviews where considered necessary.
Group `C' categories referred to above should be suitably linked with specified categories in the lower grades on broad affinity of work to form groups for promotion but it should be ensured that the prospects are made regularly equal in the different groups.
The test should be correlated to the standards of proficiency that can reasonably be expected from railway servants who are generally non- matriculates.
The aim of the examiners should be to assess the general suitability of the class IV railway servants offering themselves for promotion to class III posts from the point of view of their knowledge of English and their general standard of intelligence.
(1) Written test should consist of one paper of 3 hours duration divided into two parts - Part `A' to test the working knowledge of the railway servant of the English language and part `B' his general standard of intelligence and proficiency through questions in Arithmetic, General Knowledge mainly pertaining to Railway matters and matters immediately pertaining to the work he has been acquainted with during this Railway service.
In drawing up the questions it must be that they are not set as such a standard as to made it impracticable for a Group `D' railway servant to average intelligence and normal standards of efficiency to qualify in the test.
(2) Oral test should adjudge other factors of suitability if so considered necessary by the General Manager.
(3) Selections may not be restricted to three times the number of vacancies but kept open to all eligible candidates who would like to be considered for such selection.
(4) All those who qualify in written and oral test the qualifying percentage of marks being prescribed by the General Manager, should be arranged in the order of their seniority for promotion against they yearly vacancies available for them in Group `C' categories.
(ii) Group `D' railway servants to be eligible for promotion to Group `D' posts should have put in a minimum 3 years of continuous service.
This does not apply to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates.
(iii) (a) The standard of training imparted to the Group `'D railway servants selected for group `C' posts should be the same as for direct recruits for the same Group `C' categories and in the case of failures in the first attempt such employees may be given a second chance to qualify.
(b) Group `'D railway servants to be promoted as typists should have a minimum speed of 40 words per minute in typewriting as for direct recruits.
(c) Group `D' railway servants when promoted to Group `C' posts in the Accounts Department shall go through the same training and test and shall be subject to the same conditions of service as are in force for the new recruits.
During the period of their training they would get as stipend the pay that they would have normally drawn on promotion to Group `C'.
All allowances like Dearness, Compensatory and House Rent Allowances will be allowed to them at the scales applicable, had the stipend been treated as pay."
11.
According to learned counsel for the respondents, as per Para 189(a) IREM Vol.
I, the vacancies as clerk, typist etc. can be filled in from promotion of Group-D category Railway servants for whom no regular avenue promotion exists.
The petitioner is only entitled to be considered for promotion in his own care because there are avenues of promotion available to him.
Learned counsel further urged that in Paragraph 2007, a provision was made for employment of casual labourers and their regularisation in Group `C' but that was only for casual labourers.
The petitioner being regular employee of Group `D', Paragraph 2007 does not cover the case of the petitioner.
That being the position, the petitioner cannot claim relief which he is asking for.
It has been further contended that the petitioner has no right to remain in the construction organisation where he has got no substantive right as no permanent cadre is available in the construction organisation.
The construction organisation is a temporary organisation where services are taken from other division and the employees are reverted back to their parent division as and when their services are not required.
According to the respondents, Para 189(A) IREM Vol.
I has statutory force which provides the rules for promotion of railway servants working in Group-D categories to higher grade in Group-C This para provides such avenue of promotion in Group-C only for the categories where no regular avenue of promotion exists.
In the case of the petitioner, there exists regular promotion avenue and therefore, the petitioner cannot be regularised.
The Central Administrative Tribunal in its order has held that petitioner is holding a post of G-Operator and Caner in the Construction Organisation though they hold a lien on permanent Group-D Post in the division.
Para 7 of the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal reads thus :-  "The applicants have contended the decision to declare, the posts as surplus by the respondent department has been taken in consultation with the Staff Unions and this system of consultation with the Staff Unions for running the administration has been challenged in these OA's.
We do not see any illegality in meeting with the Staff Unions to resolve various issues pertaining to the day to day administration.
In fact joint consultative machinery is the recognised system adopted by the Government of India for resolving disputes.
It is also seen that the applicants are still continuing on their respective posts in the construction organisation and the Chief Administrative Officer (Organisation) has not issued any transfer/repatriation orders for the applicants.
In the circumstances, the apprehension of the applicants that they would be repatriated to their substantive posts in the parent department is hypothetical.
In any case, they have to join the Cost wherever they are posted since they have already been declared surplus.".
12.
We have considered the submissions made of behalf of the parties and have considered the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
13.
What stands out boldly is that the petitioner is a substantive employee of Group-D category.
On deputation, he was sent to Group-C Category where he has worked for a considerable long time.
The respondent Railway Department after consultation with the Staff Unions came to the conclusion that certain Costs are not required and they are required to be declared surplus.
In the background of decision to hold posts surplus, the case of the petitioner has to be examined.
He is claiming continuance for regularisation in Group-C The post which he is holding has been declared to be surplus.
The petitioner's claim is based on certain Railway Board's circulars and continuance of long service.
14.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has considered the case of employees similarly situated as the petitioner in the case of Krishan Gopal Vyas (supra).
In that case, Central Administrative Tribunal had issued direction that employee should be permitted to be continued to perform the duties of the post they are holding unless they fail to qualify.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that appointment to the post is governed by the rules.
It can only be made in accordance with the rules.
The relevant portion has already been quoted hereinabove and in the light of the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it has to be seen whether rules permit regularisation of the petitioner.
15.
The respondents have contended that those employees who have lien in Group-D and have a channel of promotion available to them, cannot be considered for regularisation in Group-C as they have avenue of promotion in their own cadre.
Recently, a Full Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal at Delhi has also taken a view that such Railway servants who hold lien in their parent cadre under a division of the Railways, on being deputed to Construction Organisation cannot be absolved there if they have a regular channel of promotion in their parent cadre.
Having promoted on a higher post on adhoc basis when sent on deputation and continued to function on that post on adhoc basis for a very long time would not vest in them a right of regularisation in the department where he is on deputation.
They can under the rules claim regularisation on a post on their parent division/office.
Thus, they are only entitled to regularisation on their turn in the parent division/office strictly in accordance with the rules and instructions on the subject.
The order of the Full Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal appears to be in conformity with the rules of the Railways and the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
16.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered opinion that Central Administrative Tribunal in refusing relief to the petitioner has committed no illegality.
The petitioner is a substantive employee in Group-D In his classification, he has chances of promotion and in view of the provisions contained in Indian Railway Employees Manual, he is to be considered for confirmation in his own parent cadre.
On the deputation post, he has no right to be considered either for promotion or absorption.
The petitioner is not entitled to take benefit of Paragraphs 188, 189 and 2007 because they do not relate to the category to which the petitioner belongs.
The petitioner is not a casual employee of Group-D therefore Para 2007 will not be applicable.
He is an employee having lien in Group-D and there are avenues of promotion available to him in his own Group, therefore Para 188 and 189 will not govern his case.
Therefore on the strength of these paragraphs, nothing turns out in favour of the petitioner.
There is no force in the writ petition.
The same is therefore dismissed.
Petition dismissed.