Amitava Lala, J - Let affidavit-of-service and the affidavit-in-reply filed in court today be kept with the record.
In this writ petition, the petitioner has been rendering service as against the deputation vacancy in the concerned school on and from 1091985.
He was allowed to continue the service as against sanctioned post.
On 24121997 in disposing of the writ petition being W.P. 14935(W) of 1997 a single Bench of this court was pleased to direct the appropriate authority to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of service.
The concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) Calcutta, under Memo No. 219/1(3) Law dated 891998 was refused to consider for regularisation of service of the petitioner in view of the fact that the petitioner was not appointed in the clear vacancy post.
One change being therein as per the submission of the Headmaster of the Institution is that one Mr. MP Singh has resigned from the school on 1101997.
Therefore, the service of the petitioner will be regularised as against such vacancy to which it has been held by the concerned District Inspector of Schools that if the regularisation of service is made as against such vacancy fallen due on 1101997, then the petitioner had been working as against clear vacancy for the period in between 1988 to 1997.
I find from the staff pattern as has been signed by the Secretary of the concerned School dated 17101996 under Annexure-`I' to the writ petition, that the petitioner was working in a sanctioned post.
2.
Therefore, the ratio of the judgment as reported in 1997(1) C.L.J.
111 : 1997(3) SCT 121 (Calcutta), Smt. Gouri Bose v. The State of West Bengal and others is squarely applicable in this case.
In paragraph 47 of such judgment it was held that the Education Department, Establishment Branch, Government of West Bengal, by circular No.
536-Edn.(Estt.)
dated 16.6.1980 issued by the Deputy Secretary, Government of West Bengal, Education Department, passed an order stating therein that the recognised school both aided and unaided, where teaching and non-teaching staff appointed against permanent post has been serving for consecutive 2 years and if he/she is functioning against a permanent sanctioned post, should be immediately approved.
3.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner further relied upon a judgment reported in AIR 1987 SC 1345, Bir Bijrang Kumar v. State of Bihar and others to establish before this court that when one petition involving an identical point, if one petition is admitted but other is dismissed, it creates a very anomalous position and there is a clear possibility of a contradictory judgment.
Under such circumstances, the appeal was allowed by the Supreme Court taking the same plea.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submits before this court that the same principle is also applicable in this case.
4.
I was under the impression that the petitioner was working not in the sanctioned post.
This is being the position, no mandatory order can be passed.
But since the petitioner was working in the sanctioned post for a considerable period, there cannot be any embargo regularising the service of the petitioner as against such vacancy or against the vacancy arose during his tenure of service in the said School.
The question is, therefore, to set aside the impugned order as passed by the concerned District Inspector of Schools.
So, I set aside the impugned order dated 891998 being Annexure- `N' to the writ petition and I direct the authority concerned to approve the appointment of the petitioner following then prevailing rules in 1997 which will not be an embargo in this respect for coming of School Service Commission Act in view of judgment reported in 1999(1) C.H.N.
601, Abdul Karim v. State of West Bengal and others which speaks for the same.
The authority concerned will give effect to the approval or regularisation of service at least with effect from 1101997 but notionally for the retiral benefit within a period of 8 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Actual monetary benefit will be given from the date of communication of the order of approval.
The writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocate for the petitioner within a period of fortnight from the date of submitting of the requisites.
Orders accordingly.