Ashim Kumar Banerjee, J - The writ petitioner had faced a disciplinary proceeding which has resulted in an order of removal of service.
Against the order of Disciplinary Authority in accordance with the Disciplinary Rules, the writ petitioner preferred an appeal with 37 grounds.
The Appellate Authority disposed of the appeal by the following order :  "I have gone through the appeal of Sri TK Neogi and the related case file.
Since the charges against Shri T.K.
Neogi were established during the departmental inquiry and Shri Neogi has not made any point in his defence in the appeal, it does not merit any consideration.
The appeal is, therefore, rejected."
2.
Learned advocate Mr. Pratik Banerjee, appearing for the writ petitioner, submits that in accordance with Rule 5162 it was obligatory on the part of the appellate authority to consider whether the findings are justified or whether the penalty is excessive or inadequate and pass appropriate orders.
According to Mr. Banerjee, learned Advocate, the said rule has not been followed while passing the impugned order.
3.
Mr. LK Gupta, learned senior advocate, appearing for the respondent authority, relying on two Apex Court decisions, one reported in AIR 1966 SC 1827 and the other reported in AIR 1986 SC 1040, submits that it is not obligatory on the part of the appellate authority to assign any reason in any event, since no reason has been assigned, on the said ground alone the impugned order cannot be quashed.
4.
The first case cited by Mr. Gupta, learned Advocate, in my view has no application in the instant case.
In the said case while accepting the recommendation of the Tribunal the State Government, being the Disciplinary Authority, has imposed punishment without assigning any reasons.
The Apex Court was of the view since the Disciplinary Authority agreed with the finding of the Inquiry Authority, there were no necessity of giving further justification in this regard.
In the instant case, I am concerned with the impugned order of the appellate authority which has been specifically challenged by the writ petitioner on the ground that no reason has been assigned and the order has not been passed in accordance with the provision of Rule 5162 of the relevant Disciplinary Rules applicable herein.
5.
The second case cited by Mr. Gupta, learned Advocate, is reported in AIR 1986 SC Page 1040.
In this case the Apex Court has relied on the earlier decision reported in AIR 1996 SC 1827 (supra) that the observed : "That apart from any requirement imposed by the statute or statutory rule either expressly or necessary implication, there is no legal obligation on the statutory Tribunal should give reasons for its decision.
There is also no general principle or any rule for natural justice as a statutory Tribunal are always in every case give reasons in support of its decision."
6.
However, in the said judgment the Apex Court ultimately held that the order was not passed in accordance with the relevant rule being Rule 272 of the concerned Disciplinary Rules applicable in the said case and as such, the order of the Appellate Authority was set aside by directing him to dispose of the appeal afresh after applying his mind to the requirement of Rule 272 with advertence to the points raised by the appellant in his petition for leave.
Rule 272 of the said concerned rule has been quoted in Paragraph No. 3 of the said judgment.
7.
I have examined the language of the said rule as well as the rule applicable in the instant case, being Rule 5162 and I find that the principle on which the said rule was enacted is almost similar in the present case.
It was incumbent, by the said rule, upon the Appellate Authority to examine as to whether the penalty imposed is adequate or inadequate or severe such is the case herein.
Hence, following the said Apex Court decision reported in AIR 1986 1040, I hold that this writ petition is bound to succeed.
8.
Hence, the order of the Appellate Authority annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition being dated January 4, 1999 is quashed.
The Appellate Authority is directed to hear the appeal afresh and dispose of the same in accordance with the provision of Rule 5162 of the Disciplinary Rules.
The writ petition being WP 6648(W)/1999 is disposed of.
9.
The Appellate Authority must hear the appeal and dispose of the same within a period of eight weks from the date of communication of this order and will communicate its decision to the delinquent within a week thereafter.
Petition allowed.