Amitava Lala, J - This is an application in the form of writ petition made by the petitioner claiming to be a Matron of the school concerned.
The petitioner was appointed temporarily in the school in the year 1981.
It appears from the Book List which is Annexure `A' to the writ petition, that the name of the writ petitioner was recorded as against the post of Matron.
The petitioner has been relied upon a Circular being No. 25-Edn(S) 5.
SP-34/80 dated 10th January, 1981 which was made for the purpose of regularisation of service of non-teaching staff, i.e.
Physical Education Teachers, Craft Teachers, Sweepers and Night Guards etc. but the circular says that this will be applicable only in respect of any such staff who was in service on 871974.
The petitioner has also relied upon a Circular being No. 614- Edn(S)/5P-34/80 dated 18th January, 1981, wherein the protection of service of unapproved part-time Physical Education Teachers, Craft Teachers, Sweepers and Night Guards etc. has been taken into consideration.
In any event, the designation of Matron is not available in the said circulars but according to the petitioner, her service has to be counted as non-teaching staff, Group-D employee.
2.
The petitioner's right, title and interest what so ever in respect of regularisation of her service was the original subject-matter of the writ petition being WP No. 17367(W) of 1997 Smt. Basanti Paramanik v. State of West Bengal and others, where it is recorded as follows :  "The learned Counsel appearing for the school has addressed me overwhelmingly that the petitioner had been working in the school for well over a decade which had postured her right to be absorbed in her favour, but the respondent authorities attached a feather-weight to the claim of the petitioner."
Under such circumstances, the authority concerned was directed to consider the issue.
The same was considered by the authority concerned under Memo No. Law 219/7 dated 31.7.98 as follows :  "She is not an organiser within sanctioned/admissible strength from the very inception of the School.
Her name never appeared in the reports drawn up by the competent authorities leading to the recognition/upgradation of the school.
She is at best a casual worker in the school hostel.
It is rather an attempt to give a legal shape to an illegal one.
Such mala fide and illegal acts of the secondary school authorities having come to light the D.S.E.W.B.
issued a circular vide memo No. 1380/20 GA dt. 27996 to the authorities of all secondary schools not to override or misuse their powers in case of appointments in contravention of existing rules, norms and procedures which is squarely applicable in the instant case.
This being the actual situation warranted by the foregoing facts and circumstances, I have hardly and scope to entertain the claim of the petitioner towards her absorption/regularisation of service in the post of a Gr.
`D'/Metron in the school.
The representation/case of the petitioner is thus considered and disposed of on the above terms.
All concerned are being informed accordingly."
It is also observed before coming to such conclusion that the Head of the Institution was present and opposed the claim of the petitioner as referred hereinabove and it is stated that the matter was far from being true.
He further stated that the petitioner is an illiterate woman.
She have never been in service in the School.
The petitioner's father had been in service in the school as an Assistant teacher from 6.11.59 to 26382.
The petitioner stayed at the school hostel where the petitioner's mother worked as a maid- servant.
The petitioner joined in the hostel as a maid-servant considering her mother's age and had been working till date over 25 years.
3.
The specific case has been made out therein that the petitioner was never appointed as Group-`D'/Metron in the School against a sanctioned post.
She used to assist her mother only in the hostel as and when required and consequent of her mother's incapacity she began to work in the hostel in place of her mother.
She had been paid a sum of Rs. 300/- per month from the hostel fund by the Superintendent of Hostel of the School concerned.
4.
Under such circumstances, in this writ petition, the petitioner challenged the impugned order of the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) Midnapore, which is Annexure-`H' to the writ petition.
One aspect is very clear from the operative part of the impugned order that the circular being Memo No. 1380/20 GA dated 27996 will be applicable in the present case which is contrary to the interest of the petitioner but the matter has not been ended there.
Both the parties through their respective learned Advocates submitted for consideration of the issue by this Court.
5.
The learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents contended by citing a judgment in the case of JK Public Service Commission and others v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, reported in 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 630, wherein it has been held that the possession of selection for recruitment against existing or anticipated vacancies does not create a right to appointment.
The learned Advocate for the respondents also contended by citing another judgment in the case of Ashwani Kumar and others v. State of Bihar and others, reported in 1997(1) SCT 573 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 1628, wherein it has been held that regularisation of service of an employee whose entry in service is illegal being in total disregard of recruitment rules or being not on existing vacancy has no case for regularisation.
6.
After the observations to follow the strictness of the rule with regard to the appointment a change has been occurred in taking a lenient view in respect of regularisation of service of the casual workers upon illegally appointed employees for their consideration and regularisation.
To that extent, the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner cited various judgments reported in 1998(1) SCT 331 (SC) : 1998(9) SCC 71, Arun Kumar Rout and others v. State of Bihar and others; 1998(3) SCT 288 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 2247 Union of India and others v. Subir Mukherji and others, and 1994(4) SCC 62 (VM Chandra v. Union of India & Ors.) from which I can hold to the extent that such type of appointment for consideration cannot be ignored.
Therefore, the petitioner deserves sympathetic consideration in getting appointment against the sanctioned post.
There is a dispute arose before this Court and the Court was about to refuse the claim of the petitioner to this extent in regularising the irregular service specifically on the point that the petitioner was not attached at all as casual worker or otherwise in the school but she had been working in the Hostel which is also a part and parcel for consideration.
7.
So far as the sympathetic consideration is concerned, I have come to know that the vacancy arose in the year 1982 due to retirement of a non-teaching staff for which the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) Midnapore, sent a penal from the Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribes candidates.
Pursuant to such vacancy a prior permission for interview was taken the panel was forwarded to the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools.
Had it been the only occasion for the purpose of consideration the Court would not have been entertained as to whether the service of the petitioner will be considered for regularisation of service or not.
But recently, on the case of GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in 2000(4) SCT 295 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 2695 : 2000(5) SLR 97 (SC), it was observed as follows :  "Exhibiting in the control of the University in the matter of running of the Cafeteria cannot negate the cry of the labour force working in the canteen asking for parity in their scale of pay.
Regularisation will undoubtedly bring forth parity with the other employees of the University.
The Regulations as framed under the statute unmistakably depict that the twin conventional tests of implicit obligation and factors of overall control and supervision by the University stands satisfied and the legal responsibility cannot be shifted to the students (the Food Committee).
The Regulations lead to unmistakable conclusion that the employees of the Cafeteria cannot but be termed to be the employees of the University."
Therefore, it gives an out-look the think as to whether the petitioner being an inmate of the Hostel can be considered for the purpose of regularisation of service or not under such circumstances, a further sympathetic consideration on the basis of the total guidelines of the Supreme Court judgment has to be made by the authority concerned for the purpose of coming to an appropriate conclusion.
8.
Therefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction upon the concerned Dist.
Inspector of Schools (SE) Midnapore, to consider the appointment of the petitioner within a period of four weeks from the date of the communication of this order upon giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and by passing a reasoned order thereon.
The impugned order being Annexure-`H' to the writ petition is set aside.
9.
For the purpose of the affective adjudication, a copy of the writ petition along with all necessary papers can be forwarded to the authority concerned for due consideration.
Status-quo with regard to service of the petitioner shall be maintained till two weeks after passing of the order by the authority concerned, as directed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates for the petitioners within 7 days from the date of submitting the requisites.
Order accordingly.