RL Anand, J. - Ms. Sukhwinder Kaur has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to consider her for admission to B.Ed.
Course 1999-2000 as per her merit against the 9 vacant seats.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she passed her B.Sc.
Home Science from College of Home Science, Kaoni, District Muktsar, Punjab, in the Session ending July, 1999.
She got 676% marks in B.Sc.
Home Science.
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana issued prospectus for admission to various courses in the colleges affiliated to it.
The College of Agricultural, Ludhiana, has got the provision for imparting education in B.Ed.
Course.
There are 25 seats for B.Ed.
in it.
This college is under the direct control and supervision of Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
According to the petitioner, she qualifies for admission to B.Ed.
Course and she submitted her application complete in all respects.
The same was entertained and considered by the University.
As per procedure laid down in Rule 7A, a merit list was prepared for admission to B.Ed.
Course.
In the merit list prepared by the Punjab Agricultural University, the petitioner was placed at serial No. 47 in the list for B.Ed.
Course.
On 2381999, the respondents called the candidates from Merit No. 34 to 44 for counselling.
However, the petitioner was not called.
On the next day, i.e. on 24.8.1999, the petitioner along with her father met the Vice Chancellor and requested that the petitioner should have been considered for admission as her merit was at serial No. 47.
The petitioner and her father did not get any satisfactory reply from the Vice Chancellor.
Hence the present writ mainly on the ground that as per para 7-A of the Prospectus the candidates three times in number of the seats, were required to be called for interview and in the alternative, the case set up by the petitioner is that University was supposed to fill the vacant seats.
3.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
Written-statement has been filed in which the respondents have denied the allegations.
4.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that petitioner has no legal right.
The stand of the respondents is that against 25 seats 25 candidates were called.
They were interviewed.
14 out of 25 did not deposit the requisite fees.
As a result of that, these 14 seats became available.
Therefore, second admission notice for 13 candidates after retaining one seat for Sports Personnel, was issued on 1281999.
9 seats remained vacant as per the information dated 1981999 received from the Dean, College for Agriculture.
Again third admission notice for 9 seats was issued on 1981999.
The fourth admission notice for one candidate of General Category was issued on 2081999 as the sports category candidate seeking admission on sports basis was considered ineligible.
The candidates vide admission notices dated 1981999 and 2081999, were also informed telegraphically along with the regular post because the time left for admission to the said programme was short as the last date for admission/registration of new entrants was 2381999.
According to the respondents only five seats are still vacant.
5.
The stand of the respondents is that it was not obligatory on the part of the respondents-authority to call the candidates three times in number of the seats, as alleged by the petitioner.
6.
I have heard Shri J.S.
Toor, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri AR Takkar, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.
7.
My attention has been invited to para 7-A of the prospectus and the learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that as per this clause, it was obligatory on the part of the respondent-University to call the candidates three times in number of the seats available in the respective programmes.
Since there were 25 seats, therefore, the University was supposed to call 75 candidates.
The candidates up to Merit No. 44 has been adjusted/accommodated.
The merit of petitioner is at serial No. 47.
Had the University called the candidates up to serial No. 75, the petitioner would have been considered for the B.Ed.
Course.
8.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner because clause 7-A is applicable to B.Sc.
Agriculture (Hons.
), B.V.Sc.
Animal Husbandry and B.Ed.
(Hons.)
and Home Science.
The petitioner was not seeking admission in any of these courses.
Rather she was seeking the admission in B.Ed.
Course.
For B.Ed.
Course, there is no such guideline for the University.
In these circumstances, it was not obligatory on the part of the respondent-University to call the candidates three times in number of the seats available in this programme.
9.
It was then submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that it is the admitted stand of the respondents-authority that five seats are still lying vacant and under the interim orders of this Court, the petitioner has been adjusted.
The counsel submitted that merit up to 44 has been accommodated.
Since there are five seats vacant, in these circumstances, the petitioner had a very bright chance to get the admission in B.Ed.
Course.
The counsel submitted that it will not be in the larger public interest to keep the seats vacant.
In support of his contention the learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon the observations made in a judgment reported as 1998(4) RSJ 192 : 1999(1) SCT 419 (P&H), Aman Deep Garg v. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering, in which it was observed as follows :-  "I am of the opinion that the petitioner's case is fully covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Pawandeep Kaur Birk's case (C.W.P.
No. 15393 of 1997).
In this case the Court observed that seats left vacant in a particular diploma/degree course would not be in the larger public interest."
10.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner also invited my attention to the judgment dated 2012000 passed in C.W.P.
No. 12041 of 1999 : 2000(2) SCT 977 (P&H), Nishu Bala v. Punjabi University, Patiala.
11.
There is a merit in the contention raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
Ours in a country where everybody does not get the opportunity to get a higher education.
Keeping in view our limited resources the seats are created in the University in different courses.
It is a matter of pity that inspite of the limited seats available in each trade and speciality, some seats remain un-filled for one reason or the other.
It will always be considered in large public interest if the authority ensures that these seats are filled on merit and the eligible persons should be given the chance to get higher education.
There is no use or fun to keep the seats vacant when the number of the seats in every trade or speciality is less and when there is a stiff competition in every speciality.
12.
Admittedly, the merit of the petitioner was 47.
The last candidate who was adjusted had a merit of 44.
It is the case of the respondent-authority that five seats are lying vacant.
In these circumstances, the petitioner had a fair chance to be selected for the course of B.Ed.
Since she has already been admitted in this Course, under the interim orders of this Court, therefore, the equity is more in her favour so that she may be able to continue with her studies.
It is stated at the bar by the counsel for the petitioner that petitioner has completed her course.
13.
Resultantly, the petition is hereby allowed and directions are given to the respondent-authority to regularise the admission of the petitioner to the B.Ed.
Course for the Session 1999-2000 and declare her result immediately on receipt of the copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.