AS Gill, J - This order will dispose of five writ petitions being 5695, 10366, 10367, 10368 and 10369 all of 1999 as the controversy raised is common in all these petitions.
However, in order to appreciate the controversy, the facts have been taken from CWP 10368 of 1999.
2.
The petitioners in these petitions seek issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order passed by the respondent authorities whereby their prayer for regularisation of service has been rejected.
They have also prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to regularise their services w.e.f.
3111996 as per the policy decision of the Government of Haryana contained in letter dated 731996, Annexure P-1 as adopted by the Haryana Urban Development Authority (HUDA) vide letter dated 10.3.1996, Annexure P-2, attached with all the petitions.
They have also prayed for a direction to the respondents to grant the regular pay scale and other consequential benefits payable to them.
3.
Ramai, the petitioner in CWP 10368 of 1999 was employed as a Labourer by the HUDA on daily wage basis w.e.f.
161999 and as per the averments contained in the writ petition she has been working as such till date.
It is claimed that the work against which the petitioner has been appointed is of regular nature.
The State of Haryana issued instructions dated 731996 for regularisation of work charged/casual/and daily rated employees.
It was provided in the said instructions that all casual and daily rated employees who have completed five years of service on 3111996 and were in service on that date, were entitled for regularisation provided they had worked for a minimum period of 240 days in each year and the break in service in any year is not more than one month at a time.
These instructions were later on modified by instructions dated 10.3.1996 whereby the period of five years was reduced to three years.
4.
The petitioner represented to the authorities on 15.6.1996 for her regularisation specifically stating that she had completed more than seven years of service and had also worked for a minimum period of 240 days in each year and, therefore, as per the policy of the Government, she was entitled for regularisation.
On receipt of her representation, the department sought clarification from her about the break in service from 181994 to 3091994.
The petitioner submitted a medical certificate issued by the Senior Medical Officer, Government Dispensary, Urban Estates, Panchkula, to the effect that she was under treatment in the Dispensary in connection with delivery of a child and she had been advised complete bed rest for two months commencing from 181994.
A copy of the certificate has been place on record as Annexure P-5.
In spite of this, services of the petitioner were not regularised.
She ultimately filed a writ petition in this Court.
The writ petition was disposed of which a direction of HUDA-authorities to decide the petitioner's representation by passing a speaking order, within six months from the date of that order.
The respondent-authorities thereafter asked the petitioner to furnish the Birth Certificate of her child.
The petitioner somehow could not produce this certificate immediately and sought at least two months time so as to enable her to submit the birth certificate, but the respondents in the meantime rejected the representation of the petitioner by order dated 15.9.1997 by stating "as per the record received from the office of Sub Division Engineer Sub Division No. III, HUDA, Panchkula, the petitioner remained absent from the office from 181994 to 3091994 continuously.
The medical certificate attached by the employee with the writ petition, received from the Civil Surgeon, Senior Medical Officer, Dispensary Sector 8, Panchkula, was given in the Sub Divisional Office on 9121996 by the employee while the medical certificate should have been given in this office by the time she remained absent.
The female child has been shown in the medical certificate of the employee.
In this regard the employee had been asked to submit the Birth Certificate vide letter No. 1946 dated 2781997 and in reply to this the employee has asked for two months time for the submission of Birth Certificate.
It has been proved that the employees has given this an after- thought."
5.
Similarly, the petitioners in the other petitions also remained absent for a particular period on medical ground.
They also furnished medical certificates evidencing the cause for their absence, but their cases for regularisation were also rejected on the same or a similar ground.
This is how they approached this Court by way of present writ petitions.
The petitioners claim that their cases in respect of regularisation of services are fully covered by the instructions issued by the Government.
6.
In the written statement, it is submitted that the case of the petitioner has been duly considered.
However, she having a break in service for more than thirty days in one year at one time without any satisfactory explanation for the same, had no case for regularisation.
It is further stated that the medical certificate was furnished late whereas it should have been submitted at the time when the petitioner remained absent.
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the rival contentions.
From the pleadings of the parties and a perusal of the impugned orders placed on record of the writ petitions, it is clear that the petitioner was appointed as daily wager and she is continuing as such till date except with the break for the period from 181994 to 3091994.
Similarly, the petitioners in the other four petitions also were appointed as daily wagers by the HUDA and they also remained absent from service for a particular period.
The petitioners in all these petitions explained reasons for their absence by furnishing their respective medical certificates.
A copy of such certificate has also been placed on record by each of the petitioners with their respective petitions.
Still their cases for regularisation were rejected as noticed above.
They have, therefore, challenged these orders by way of these petitions on the ground of being illegal, arbitrary and having been passed on hypertechnical grounds.
8.
A cursory look on the impugned orders appended to each of the petitions would go to show that the prayer of the petitioners for regularisation has been rejected only on the ground that the medical certificates were furnished by them late whereas these should have been furnished at the time they remained absent.
The sole ground for rejection of the prayer of petitioner Ramai, for regularisation has been highlighted above (underlined portion) in verbatim and the cases of the petitioners of other petitions have also been rejected on the same ground.
It is not the case of the respondents that the medical certificates furnished by the petitioners were bogus or were not the genuine document.
In these circumstances, this can easily be inferred that as matter of fact, the respondent-authorities were satisfied with the cause shown by the petitioners for their absence but in spite of this they ignored the medical certificates from consideration, only on the ground that the same were furnished late.
On the other hand, however, it is the categoric stand of the petitioners that they furnished the medical certificates after they were asked to do so.
9.
In the circumstances as noticed above, the question which falls for consideration by this Court is, whether the absence of the petitioners, which was caused due to sickness/medical grounds as indicated in their respective medical certificates, can be treated as a break in service so as to disentitle them the benefit of regularisation in service.
A Division Bench of this Court has already settled this issue in Anand Kumar v. Haryana Urban Development Authority, 1995(1) Service Cases Today 677.
An extract from that judgment relevant for our purpose needs be highlighted here as under :-  "Likewise if an interruption in service is due to sickness or authorised leave, or accident, or a legal strike or a lock out, such interruption cannot be treated as break in service, so as to disentitle an employee the benefit of regularisation in service.
It is significant to note that the definition of the expression "continuous service" used in Section 25-B, excludes interruption of service on account of sickness or authorised leave or accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the workman.
Though Section 25-B cannot be invoked in its letter and spirit for the purposes of interruption of the circulars issued by the Government for regularisation of daily wager/causal employee, the legislative intendment for enacting Section 25-B of the Industrial Disputes Act can certainly provide a reasonable guidance for the purpose of interpretation of the expression "break in service", which is used in the circulars of the Government.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that a break in service or interruption in service of daily wager which has been brought about on account of circumstances beyond the control of daily wager/casual employee cannot be a ground for denying him the benefit of regularisation in service."
10.
There is no denying the fact that the prayer of the petitioners for regularisation has been rejected for no other reason but only on the ground that the medical certificates should have been given in the office by the time they remained absent, as is explicitly mentioned in the impugned orders.
It is only for this reason that the respondent-department has considered the period of absence of the petitioners as break in service and rejected their case for regularisation.
The absence of the petitioners on the ground as noticed above could not be treated as break in service as held by a Division Bench of this Court in Anand Kumar's case (supra).
Apart from the above, it is not the case of the respondent-authorities that the petitioners did not fulfil any of the other conditions as mentioned in the policy of the Government, Annexure P-2 or that they were otherwise not eligible for regularisation.
The inevitable conclusion in these circumstances would, therefore, be that the petitioners are entitled to regularisation of services in terms of policy Annexure P-2.
11.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petitions are allowed and the impugned orders declining the prayer of the petitioners for regularisation of their services are quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation in terms of the policy dated 10.3.1996, Annexure P-2 attached with each petition, by ignoring the period of break in service indicated in the their respective impugned orders.
The petitioners shall also be granted regular pay scale and all other consequential benefits which may flow from their orders of regularisation.
Let this order be complied within three months from the date of its communication.
Petitions allowed.