SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - This writ petition has been filed by the workman challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 3131997 (copy annexure P/5) vide which the claim made by the petitioner was declined.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as a Driver in the establishment of respondent No. 2 for a period of 89 days on 2621993.
After that his period of service was extended upto 3171993.
During the period of second contractual appointment, an accident took place with the vehicle the petitioner was driving.
Vide notice dated 2071993 (copy annexure P/1), the contract service of the petitioner was sought to be terminated with effect from 3171993 and the petitioner was asked to show cause.
By an order dated 2971993 (copy annexure P/2), the service of the petitioner was terminated because it was not required beyond 3171993.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the award after long delay i.e. after a period of more than 3 years.
No reason is shown as to why this delay had taken place.
The petition can be dismissed only on the point of delay and laches.
However, as counsel for the petitioner argued on the merit also, we consider the same.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that the order of termination is punitive.
However, we are not in a position to accept this argument because the service of the petitioner was terminated on the date on which the contract expired.
Of course show cause notice was given and in the show cause notice there is a mention of the accident and the case being registered against the petitioner.
However, nothing could have compelled the employer to continue the petitioner beyond the date of termination of contract.
the Labour Court has also considered the fact that the petitioner has not completed 240 days' service.
6.
Considering the fact that the petitioner contract was not extended and also he had not completed 240 days' service, we find nothing wrong with the award of the Labour Court, Moreover, the petition also deserves to be dismissed on account of delay and laches.
7.
In the result, this petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.