VS Aggarwal, J - Gurdev Singh petitioner has invoked Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and seeks to set aside the selection and appointment or respondent No. 4 to the post of Cleaner in the office of the District Public Relations Officer, Ambala, respondent No. 3.
2.
The facts alleged are that the petitioner passed his matriculation examination under the Haryana Education Board.
He got his name registered with the Employment Exchange Haryana at Divisional Employment Exchange, Ambala, for the purpose of getting some employment through the Employment Exchange.
The petitioner had obtained a Conductor Licence from the Licensing Authority, Ambala.
He worked as a Conductor with some private concern.
3.
One vacancy for the post of Cleaner had fallen vacant in the office of respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 had intimated regarding the vacancy to the Employment Exchange, Ambala Division comprising six Exchanges at Ambala Cantt., Ambala City, Naraingarh, Naggal, Barara and Raipur Rani.
The name of the petitioner was forwarded.
He was called for interview by respondent No. 2 on 12.8.1998.
The petitioner alongwith three other candidates including respondent No. 4 had appeared.
The name of respondent No. 4 had been forwarded by the Employment Exchange, Barara.
Respondent No. 4 is stated to have been selected.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that respondent No. 4 could not have been registered in the Employment Exchange at Barara because he is resident of District Yamuna Nagar.
He is not a resident of District Ambala.
He further contends that respondent No. 4 was not eligible and has arbitrarily been appointed.
5.
The petition has been contested.
In the written statement filed by respondents No. 1 to 3, it has been pleaded that different Employment Exchanges had been called upon to sponsor the candidates for the post of Cleaner.
As per provisions contained in Rule 5(d) of the Punjab State (Class IV) Service Rules, 1963, a candidate had to possess the requisite knowledge of the regional language.
It was a Class IV post.
He is required to clean the vehicle and perform the duties of the driver on tour.
Respondent No. 4 was qualified and was selected.
Father of respondent No. 4 had no connection in this regard.
The other assertions of favouritism and that respondent No. 4 could not be appointed were controverted.
6.
Respondent No. 4 preferred his separate written statement.
He pleaded that he is a permanent resident of District Yamuna Nagar but has joined private service on 10.5.1995 at Barara.
He was residing at Barara and, thus, has got his name registered at Employment Exchange, Barara, on 961998.
The Employment Exchange sponsored the name of respondent No. 4.
He was interviewed and was rightly selected.
7.
The first and the foremost question that comes up for consideration is as to if respondent No. 4 was qualified to be appointed or not.
It is not in controversy that, as per provisions contained in Rule 5(d) of the Punjab State (Class IV) Service Rule, 1963, a candidate must possess the requisite knowledge of the regional language and of English as may be prescribed by the Government from time to time.
Respondent No. 4 had the requisite knowledge.
It is not necessary that he should have been a matriculate.
Consequently, it cannot be termed that respondent No. 4 did not fulfil the requisite qualification.
8.
The main argument, however, advanced was that respondent No. 4 was a resident of District Yamuna Nagar and, thus, his name could not have been sponsored.
On behalf of respondent No. 4, it is admitted that though he is a permanent resident of District Yamuna Nagar but still he is working at Barara since 1995 and has got his name registered at the Employment Exchange, Barara.
We find no reason to discard the said explanation and otherwise also it is not necessary that the names could only be sponsored by certain Employment Exchanges.
For choice of a suitable candidate, one is not to confine to persons whose names are registered with the Employment Exchange only.
A similar question arose before this Court in the case of Vikram Singh and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) Recent Services Judgments 412, wherein it was held as under :-  "It is no doubt correct that the Parliament has enacted the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
The purpose of this Act is to provide avenues for various categories of people to have their names registered so that whenever there is an appropriate job or vacancy, their claims may be considered.
It is also a method of providing the employer, which includes the Government, with a forum from where a list of eligible persons can be procured.
However, the provisions of the Act cannot be read to mean that the choice of suitable candidates has to be confined to the persons whose names are registered with the Employment Exchanges.
It is not unlikely that the person, though fully qualified, may not get his name registered with the employment exchange.
It is equally possible that a person may get a temporary employment after his name has been registered with the employment exchange which may result in deletion of his name from the list of persons registered with the appropriate authority.
In either event, the right of a person to compete for a public service cannot be curtailed or confined to only such persons as are registered with the employment exchange.
If an eligible person applies for a job, the employer is bound to consider his/her claim and cannot exclude such a person from consideration only on the ground that he/she is not registered with the employment exchange or the name has not been sponsored by the said authority.
Such a course of action would be totally violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
In these circumstances, the argument so much thought of by the learned counsel must fail and is rejected.
9.
Another limb of the argument advanced was that the petitioner was more qualified and should have been selected.
At the outset, we reject this argument because it is entirely for the authorities to consider as to who is more suitable unless there are mala fides alleged and shown.
This Court would be reluctant to interfere and consider as to who is more qualified.
It is a fact which falls within the domain of the concerned selecting authority.
10.
Needless to state that the petitioner had only a fundamental right under the Constitution of India to be considered.
The Supreme Court in the case of Krishan Chander Nayar v. The Chairman, Central Tractor Organisation and others, AIR 1962 SC 602, also held that a person concerned has the fundamental right of being considered.
11.
Similar was the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Shiv Singh v. Union of India and others, AIR 1973 SC 962.
Indeed, once the petitioner had been considered but respondent No. 4 had been appointed, he cannot make a grievance in the absence of any other cogent reason that prejudice is caused or his fundamental right has been violated.
In these circumstances, we find no reason to interfere.
The result is that the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.