RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of three writ petitions - No. 7915 of 2000, Yogesh Goyal and 10 others v. State of Punjab, respondent No. 1, Baba Farid University of Health and Medical Sciences, Faridkot, respondent No. 2 and Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam, respondent No. 3; No. 7916 of 2000, Manheet Sandhu and 4 others v. aforesaid respondents; and No. 7978 of 2000, Nirmaljit Sidhu and another v. State of Punjab and others.
In C.W.P.
No. 7978 of 2000, respondent No. 4 is Punjabi University, Patiala.
For the sake of facts, I have taken the same from C.W.P.
No. 7915 of 2000.
The petitioners of all the three writ petitions through their writs under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India have made a prayer for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to issue roll numbers to them and, further, permit them to appear in BDS 3rd Professional Examination scheduled to be held w.e.f.
June 19, 2000 and declare their result of 3rd Professional Examination held on 1962000, as stated above.
2.
Before I further incorporate the pleadings of the parties, I may make a mention that under the orders of this Court the petitioners were permitted to undertake the BDS 3rd Professional Examination, but their result has not been declared so far as this was the interim direction.
3.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they appeared in the entrance test conducted in the year 1997 for the purpose of admission to the Bachelor of Dental Surgery and MBBS Course.
The test was conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala on behalf of the State of Punjab.
On the basis of their respective merits, they were selected and admitted to under BDS Course at Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam.
The Course is of four years duration divided into four professionals of one year each.
After the completion of four years academic education, the students have to undergo one year internship and thereafter they are awarded the BDS Degree and qualify as Dentists.
The petitioners were admitted to their first professional year in 1997.
Accordingly in 1998 they appeared in Annual/Final Examination of 1st Professional BDS Course and successfully passed the same.
In September 1998, they commenced their studies to the 2nd Professional year.
On the declaration of the result they were declared to have passed the 2nd Professional as well.
In September, 1999 the petitioners got admission in the 3rd Professional.
Now they are to appear in the 3rd Professional Course.
They have no re-appear in the 2nd Professional.
After having cleared 2nd Professional in September, 1999, they were permitted to attend the 3rd Professional Course.
There is no re-appear so far as the petitioners are concerned.
They continued as regular students.
The annual fee was paid and accepted by the College.
In January, 2000 all the petitioners paid examination fee to the College which was ultimately accepted by Baba Farid University for the issuance of roll numbers.
Now they have come to know that no roll numbers have been despatched permitting them to appear in the examination which was scheduled to be held on June 19, 2000.
4.
Earlier Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam was affiliated to the Punjabi University, Patiala.
Vide notification dated 2231999 issued by the Government of Punjab under Sections 7(2) and 7(3) of Baba Farid University of Health and Medical Sciences Act, 1998 notified that all the Medical Colleges which were previously admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Panjab University, Chandigarh and Punjabi University, Patiala or any other University shall now be admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
It was further notified that from July 1, 1999 all the Colleges imparting education in Health Sciences will be affiliated to Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
It was also notified that examination will be conducted by Baba Farid University.
Meaning thereby that from July 1, 1999 all the Colleges imparting education in Health Sciences will be governed by the rules and regulations of Baba Farid University.
This University did not have its own Calendar, hence it held a meeting on January 19, 2000 and decided to follow the rules and ordinances of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar till it frames its own rules/ordinances.
As per Ordinance No. 23 of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 3rd Professional Examination is open to a student who has been enrolled during one academic year preceding the examination in a college affiliated to the University in the Faculty of Dental Sciences for the degree of Bachelor of Dental Surgery and has previously passed the 2nd Professional Examination for the Degree of Bachelor of Dental Surgery of this University or an examination of any other recognised University in India and produces certificate of good character and certificate of having attended not less than three quarters of full course of lectures.
It was also one of the conditions of the Ordinance that the candidate should have cleared the House Examination securing at least 33% marks both in theory and practical separately.
Thus, as per the above Ordinance of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar the petitioners were eligible to appear in the examination held on 1962000.
The College of the petitioners demanded and accepted the examination fee from them and admission forms were sent to the University.
It is the categorical case of the petitioners that they have undertaken the required number of lectures in each of the subjects and, therefore, they are eligible for 3rd Professional Examination to be held in June, 2000.
The grouse of the petitioners is that the respondent-University has illegally and wrongly not despatched the roll numbers and not granted permission to them to appear in the 3rd Professional Examination.
5.
Notices of these writ petitions were given to the respondents.
When these writ petitions came up for hearing before the Hon'ble Division Bench, it was specifically ordered that the Principal of respondent No. 3 should be present in Court on the date of hearing along with relevant record and respondent No. 2 was also directed to produce the record available with it.
6.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 i.e. Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
According to respondent No. 2, the University was created by the State of Punjab by an Act of 1998 and vide notification dated 2231999 the Governor of Punjab notified that all Educational Institutions in the State of Punjab imparting education in Health Sciences would be affiliated with this University w.e.f.
171999 and the University would conduct the examinations of the said institutions from November/December, 1999.
It was submitted that examinations of June, 1999 and September, 1999 were conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjabi University, Patiala and Panjab University, Chandigarh to which these institutions were earlier affiliated.
Baba Farid University conducted the examinations for the first time in February, 2000 for the BDS Courses.
In para No. 8 of the written statement of the University it was stated as follows :-  "As per the regulations of Guru Nanak Dev University, a candidate can be permitted to proceed to the next higher class only till September and if he does not clear in September then he is out of the higher class.
According to the Punjabi University Calendar a candidate can proceed to the next higher class only if he has one re-appear and has to clear that re-appear before he can take the next higher examination.
Apart from this in both the Calendars required attendance of 75% lectures, 33% marks in the house examination and for a student to be on the roll of a Dental College for one year preceding the examination.
This one academic year has been further defined by the Punjabi University to mean two academic sessions i.e. summer and winter."
Further, it was stated by respondent No. 2 in para No. 9 of the written statement as under :-  "A decision was taken by the ad hoc Board of Studies in Dental Sciences on 1912000 to the effect that seeing the disparity in the rules governing the cases of re-appear in the BDS examination any student who fails in more than one subject would not be permitted to the next class as per the Dental Council of India regulations.
However, that decision was to apply for the 1999 admissions onwards and for other students the rules, regulations and Ordinances of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar would apply."
7.
It was maintained by respondent No. 2 that the petitioners never took the June/July, 1999 examination conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala and they took the 2nd Professional Examination only in September, 1999.
Actually in the Punjabi University, Patiala their session was with the supplementary batch i.e. from September to September and not with the regular batch from June to June.
Even in that University the petitioners would not have been entitled and would not have taken the examination in June, 2000, but would have only taken it in September, 2000.
Since they cleared the subjects only in September, 1999, they could have taken the examination only in September, 2000.
8.
In short, the defence of respondent No. 2 is that the petitioners were not eligible to undertake their examination to be held in June, 2000 by the University, rather their eligibility becomes only in September, 2000 as they were not the candidates of the regular batch but were the candidates of the supplementary batch.
9.
A re-joinder was filed to the written statement of respondent No. 2 in which the petitioners have reiterated their allegations levelled in the writ petitions by denying those of the written statement.
According to the petitioners the respondent No. 2 has raised self-contradictory issue in the written statement.
They reiterated that their case may be regulated as per the decision taken up by the respondent-University in its letter dated 4111999.
Prior to 25.11.1999 there were no rules or regulations of the University and in these circumstances the University rightly decided through letter dated 4111999 to hold the examination to save one academic year of the students.
With regard to the basic qualification of 75% lectures and 33% marks in the internal examination, the stand of the petitioners is that the College forwarded their examination forms only after it was found that they are eligible.
The attendance of the petitioners was complete and in this regard a certificate has also been issued by the Principal.
The examination forms were not only sent by the College along with the examination fee but were also duly accepted by the respondent-University in January, 2000.
The petitioners had completed one year academic course.
They are being discriminated as identically placed students have been issued roll numbers by the University itself, their results have been declared and they are continuing with the studies.
The petitioners have given names of 11 persons in the replication, who appeared in the annual examination of BDS 2nd Professional Examination held in April/May, 1999.
According to the petitioners all these students were their classmates and they got re-appear in two or more subjects and they appeared in September, 1999 along with the petitioners and cleared their supplementary examinations.
They were permitted to appear in the examination to be held in June, 2000.
The course attended by them and the petitioners was the same.
Therefore, this action on the part of the respondents is arbitrary.
10.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the College or Punjabi University.
11.
Along with their pleadings, the parties have placed some documents and I will discuss the relevant documents in the subsequent portion of this judgment.
12.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
13.
The points formulated by this Court for the disposal of the writ petitions are - whether the petitioners have completed 75% lectures and whether they have attended academic session of one year preceding to the examination; secondly, whether the petitioners have obtained 33% marks in the house examination; and thirdly, whether the petitioners are entitled to appear in the examination of 3rd Professional Course legally as held in June, 2000 and if so whether the University can withhold the result of the petitioner.
14.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. Sibal, relied upon a certificate dated 2182000 bearing No. GND-236/2000 issued by the Principal, Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam, who certified that the following 16 students of supplementary batch of 1997 admission who appeared in BDS 3rd Year Examination of May-June, 2000 completed their requisite attendance with regular batch of the same year :-  1.
Yogesh Goyal 2.
Sudhanshu Mehta 3.
Aditya Goyal 4.
Bhawan Preet Singh 5.
Harmanpreet Kaur 6.
Shruti Sharma 7.
Shruti Singla 8.
Shweta Bansal 9.
Darpan Harjas Kaur 10.
Shivani Arora 11.
Preet Inder Kaur 12.
Manheet Singh Sandhu 13.
Rajeev Garg 14.
Abhishek Bansal 15.
Alka Oberoi 16.
Deepak Bansal 15.
It may also be clarified that the total number of the writ petitioners of two writ petition Nos. 7915 of 2000 and 7916 of 2000 are 16, as stated above.
Two certificates dated 1292000 issued by the Principal, Guru Nanak Dev Dental College and Research Institute, Sunam have also been placed on the record.
Certificate No. 296 of 2000 certifies that Nirmaljit Sidhu and Birinder Singh Brar, students of 1997-98 admission batch of BDS appeared in sent up examination of BDS 3rd Professional Examination and qualified for appearing in annual examination to be held in May/June, 2000.
Vide certificate No. 297 of 2000 it has been certified that these students of 1997-98 admission batch of BDS, who appeared in BDS 3rd Year Examination held in May/June, 2000, completed their 75% attendance with regular batch of same year.
It may also be mentioned here that this part of the case has not been refuted or denied specifically by the University in the written statement.
Though as a principle it has been stated by the University that a candidate is required attendance of 75% lectures and 33% marks in the house examination before he becomes eligible for the 3rd Professional Examination.
16.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has also submitted that the University has not placed any admission form of any of the petitioners to suggest that it was ever certified by the Principal of the College that these petitioners did not complete the required attendance of 75% or that they did not secure 33% marks in the house examination.
In spite of the directions given by the Court no record has been produced from which it can be suggested that the petitioners do not fulfil the requisite attendance and marks.
In such a situation, the first two points are decided in favour of the petitioners and it is held that they have completed 75% lectures and obtained 33% marks in the house examination.
17.
The most crucial point in this case is as to whether the petitioners can take the benefit of the decision or the University dated 4111999.
To appreciate this aspect of the case, it will be useful for me to incorporate in verbatim the contents of this letter.
The letter is addressed to all the Principals of all affiliated Colleges under the Faculty of Dental Sciences.
The subject is BDS Examinations to be conducted in Nov./Dec., 1999.
The letter runs as follows :-  "The supplementary examinations this year have already been conducted by three Universities in the State.
But a request has been received from one of the colleges that there may again be reappear cases and in order to save their one academic year, this University may conduct another examination during December, 1999.
You are requested to please let us know the number of students in various classes of BDS who will be appearing in the examination.
You may also please intimate if any of the students has to appear in full subjects for the first time.
If so, their complete particulars be intimated within ten days."
The reading of above letter would show that the University received a request from one of the colleges that there may be again cases of re-appear and in order to save one academic year the University may conduct another examination during December, 1999.
With this background the University requested to let it know the number of students in various classes of BDS who will be appearing in the examination.
In June, 2000 the examination of the 3rd Professional was declared.
The petitioners applied for this examination.
Their admission forms were accepted by the College along with the fee.
These forms were referred to the University which did not allow the petitioners in June, 2000 examination mainly on the ground that they have not completed 2nd year academic session because they were the batch of supplementary session and not original session.
In this regard the learned counsel for the respondent- University referred to the Chart and he tried to show that 11 persons appeared for the first time in 2nd Professional BDS Examination in September, 1999 and their result was declared in November, 1999 and they cleared all the subjects.
Their effective period of study in 3rd Professional was from November to June and in this manner they have only studied for seven months.
Mr. Patwalia wanted to show that in the examination held in the month of June/July, 1999 the petitioners did not appear and, therefore, they cannot be held to be regular students of the principal batch, rather their batch started from September, 1999 and their eligibility for the 3rd Professional will be completed in September, 2000, which is yet to come and the petitioners cannot take the benefit of that situation to which they were not even entitled to (in) the original University ie Punjabi University.
18.
I think that there is a fallacy in the argument of the learned counsel for the respondent.
If the documents are again examined in minuteness it appears that the petitioners had been attending classes with regular students of BDS 3rd year and those students also appeared in May/June, 2000 examination.
Even if the petitioners have not taken the principal examination, it will not make a difference if they have taken the supplementary examination of September, 1999 held in November, 1999.
The principal point for determination is whether these persons completed the lectures and whether they secured 33% marks in the internal examination.
There is no germ of truth in Annexure R2/5, when it is certified by the Registrar of the University that the effective period of study of the petitioners is only seven months.
The petitioners, in fact, had been getting the education even prior to September, 1999.
It is true that they did not appear in June/July, 1999 examination for one reason or the other, but there is no basis for me to hold that they were of September, 1999 batch.
They were the regular students but they missed their first examination and appeared in September, 1999 for the first time and cleared in all the subjects.
The object of the University was to save one year of the students and in these circumstances the petitioners were entitled to appear in June, 2000 examination and the University could not deprive the petitioners from issuing the roll numbers and it also cannot withhold their result.
This point is also thus decided in favour of the petitioners and against the respondent- University.
19.
In view of my above discussion and the points decided in favour of the petitioners, all the three writ petitions are hereby allowed and a writ of mandamus is issued to the respondent-authorities to allow the petitioners to appear in BDS 3rd Professional Examination of June, 2000 and to declare their result of the 3rd Professional.
As I have stated above that the petitioners were allowed to undertake their examination under the orders of this Court, that examination undertaken by the petitioners shall be deemed to have been regularised.
Now the University will declare the result of the petitioners immediately on the receipt of copy of this judgment.
No order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.