RL Anand, J - Unsuccessful plaintiff Shri Bharat Singh Ex-police constable has filed the present Regular Second Appeal and it has been directed against the judgment and decree dated 15101998 passed by the Court of Additional District Judge, Karnal who affirmed the judgment and decree of the trial Court dated 1351996, which dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that plaintiff was enrolled as a police constable in Haryana Police, in District Hisar on 551973.
It is stated that the plaintiff while posted in Police Lines, Karnal on 1291987 was put on patrol duty at 700 PM in beat No. 3, Karnal, according to entry in Duty Roster maintained in Police Lines, Karnal but the plaintiff refused to sign the Duty Roster or to perform the patrol duty.
Thereupon, an entry to that effect was made in the Rojnamcha and the matter was reported by the Line Officer to the Superintendent of Police, Karnal who ordered for departmental inquiry and Shri Sajjan Singh, Inquiry Officer, held the plaintiff guilty of the aforesaid charge.
It is further alleged that Superintendent of Police, Karnal vide order dated 25.8.1988, dismissed the plaintiff from service holding him guilty of refusal to perform the duty.
The appeal of the plaintiff was also dismissed by the D.I.G.
Ambala Range on 2281989 and the revision of the plaintiff was also dismissed on 1011990 by the Inspector General of Police.
The plaintiff has challenged the order of dismissal passed by the punishing authority as well as the orders of the appellate authority and the revisional authority.
3.
Both the Courts had gone against the plaintiff.
Aggrieved by the judgments and the decrees of the Court below, the present Regular Second Appeal has been filed which I am disposing of with the assistance rendered by Dr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Ms. Anju Arora, AAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the State.
4.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant is two fold; firstly that before passing the order of dismissal the punishing authority did not keep in mind the regard to the length of service of the plaintiff and his right to pension and secondly, the impugned act, even if it is taken for the sake of argument as correct, does not constitute the gravest act of misconduct for the purpose of Explanation which is added to Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable to the State of Haryana.
5.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for respondent relies upon a judgment reported as 1992(4) SLR 213 : 1992(2) SCT 418 (P&H), State of Haryana v. Tek Singh.
6.
After considering the rival contention of the parties, this Court is of the opinion that the order of dismissal and the subsequent orders passed by the appellate authority and the revisional authority cannot be sustained in the eye of law for the pleas which have been taken up before me by the learned counsel for the appellant.
Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable to the State of Haryana lays down as follows:-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
7.
The plain reading of the above provision would show that dismissal is a penalty which is very strict in its nature as it deprives a public servant of his bread and butter with penal consequences because such an employee would further be debarred from his right to pension.
That is the reason that while incorporating Rule 162 in the Punjab Police Rules, the Legislature has laid a stress that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct".
The word `only' is very significant.
It implies that there must be gravest act on the part of police official before the should be invited to bear the wrath of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Be that as it may, the Legislature has further incorporated in this very Rule that before passing an order of dismissal the punishing authority must apply its mind to the facts and circumstances and try to formulate an opinion about the effect of dismissal of the police official on his length of service and right to pension.
Right to pension is not a bounty nor it is an ex gratia which is granted by the Government.
It is a civil right of a public servant to ask for pension from the Department as he had spent his life and youth in the service of the country and in the service of the Department.
In such a situation in order to deprive a public servant of his bread and butter, there must be an application of mind on the part of the punishing authority.
Such orders of dismissal cannot be passed as a matter of course.
8.
In the present case, the punishing authority did not apply its mind nor there is any indication in the impugned order that why the punishing authority wanted to deprive the plaintiff from his claim of pension.
In such a situation, the order of dismissal cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
9.
To proceed further an Explanation has been added in the Rules for the purpose of State of Haryana.
According to this Explanation, for the purpose of sub-rule (1), the following shall, inter alia, be regarded as gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer, facing disciplinary action :-  (i) indulging in spying or smuggling activities; (ii) disrupting the means of transport or of communication; (iii) damaging public property; (iv) causing indiscipline amongst fellow policemen; (v) promoting feeling of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language; (vi) going on strike or mass casual leave or resorting to mass abstentions; (vii) spreading disaffection against the Government; and (viii) causing riots and the life."
10.
The above eight illustrations would show that these are the only gravest acts for which the order of dismissal can be passed.
11.
Now, let us examine what is the charge against the present plaintiff ?
At the cost of repetition, it can be said that the charge against the plaintiff was that he was directed to go to beat No. 3 on 1291987 to perform the patrol duty and the plaintiff refused to acknowledge those orders and as such he did not perform the duty as desired by the authorities.
This alleged breach on the part of the plaintiff is not covered by any of the eight acts of misconduct quoted above.
This Court never wanted to encourage the plaintiff because after all he is a member of disciplinary force.
Discipline in Police Department is the backbone of its success but law has to take its own course.
Apart from this allegation, there is no such allegation from which it can be said that the act of the plaintiff comes within the definition of the gravest acts of misconduct.
12.
In these circumstances, the order of dismissal dated 25.8.1988 and the subsequent orders passed by the appellate authority and the revisional authority, cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
13.
In this view of the matter, the present appeal is allowed, the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is hereby decreed by setting aside the orders dated 25.8.1988, 2281989 and 1011990 with clear observation that it will always be open to the Department to pass the punishment against the plaintiff according to law.
Appeal allowed.