RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 14943, 15313, 15521, 15853, 16099 and 16463 all of the year 1999.
Facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 14943 of 1999.
2.
The main grievance of the petitioners is that they having been confirmed earlier in the rank of Head Constable than the private respondents had a prior right to be deputed for Intermediate School Course.
It is also stated in the writ petition that some persons, though officiating as Head Constables, have been deputed for the Intermediate School Course in supersession of the claim of the petitioners who are confirmed Head Constables.
3.
Notice of motion was issued.
Reply has been filed on behalf of the official respondents as well as on behalf of some of the private respondents.
It is admitted that there is no doubt that the private respondents who have been deputed for the Intermediate School Course were confirmed later than the petitioners in the rank of Head Constable but in view of the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 10547 of 1991 (Ranjit Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on September 12, 1991 which in turn relied upon a Supreme Court judgment in DK Mitra v. Union of India, 1985(2) SLR 791 out of the confirmed Head Constables in a range, the person who has longer length of service as Head Constable has to be sent first in order of their working seniority as Head Constables.
After exhausting the confirmed Head Constables as aforesaid, the question of deputing probationer/officiating Head Constables would come in.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgment, Haryana Government has also issued instructions dated 2911998 (copy Annexure R-1) which are in conformity with the aforesaid judgment.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in this point of the petitioners.
4.
So far as the second point is concerned, it has been stated by the respondents in their written statement that the officiating Head Constables who have been deputed for the Intermediate School Course are the ones belonging to reserved category and they have been sent against the seats reserved for the said category.
The general category candidates cannot have any claim over the seats reserved for various reserved category candidates for deputing them for the course.
The reserve category candidates have their inter-se seniority.
Out of the reserved category candidates also, firstly, the confirmed Head Constables are to be sent depending upon their length of service and then officiating Head Constables.
A general category candidate cannot stake his claim against such a reserved seat.
This is also in accordance with the instructions issued by the Haryana Government dated 1891992 (copy Annexure P-4).
A Full Bench of this Court in a judgment reported as 1998(2) RSJ 764 in which one of us (RS Mongia, J was a member) speaking for the Court held that the instructions/policy of the State Government for reserving seats in the police promotion course is valid.
Consequently, we do not find anything wrong in sending the private respondents to the Intermediate School Course prior to the petitioners.
5.
As a matter of abundant caution we must clarify here that so far as the reservation in sending for the courses for the Scheduled Caste and other categories is concerned, as many people may be sent from the reserved category as is the prescribed percentage every time the candidates are to be deputed for the different policy courses.
For example, if the reservation for Scheduled Caste is 10% and 20 candidates are to be deputed for a course from a particular range for Intermediate School course, then two scheduled caste candidates will be sent for the Intermediate School Course and 18 from the general category.
However, if there is some backlog of reserved categories then they may be more as per the relevant instructions.
After they get qualified, their promotion to the rank of ASI would be as per the roster and as per the Supreme Court judgment in RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : 1995(1) SLR 791.
The Scheduled Caste will get promotion to the higher ranks only on the reserved point subject to one rider that if any scheduled caste otherwise can get the promotion as per his seniority in the rank of Head Constable or above, he would be promoted in his own right because in that eventuality he will not be getting promotion on the reserved point.
6.
In CWP No. 15313 of 1999, a prayer has also been made that the petitioner's case be also considered for confirmation when his juniors were promoted.
Let the petitioner make representation in that behalf to the appropriate authority, which will be considered in accordance with law.
Subject to the observations made above, these writ petitions are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.