ML Singhal, J - Pirthi Pal Singh was posted as Constable on the rolls of the Police of Police District, Ambala.
10006/50 was his constabulary number.
On 3.9.1979 he had been put on sentry duty from 6 am to 9 am at Police Station Ambala City.
He did not perform sentry duty and instead absented.
Pirthi Pal Singh resumed sentry duty from 6 am to 9 am at Police Station Ambala City.
SI Ram Lubhaya of Police Pipli found him under the influence of liquor and picketing trucks etc. and checking them in front of Police Post, Pipli.
He got him medically examined from Dr. Jag Mohan of Kurukshetra Hospital, who found him under the influence of liquor.
SI Ram Lubhaya made complaint against him to SP Ambala on 11101979 and on the basis thereof departmental inquiry was initiated against him.
DSP Shri Bhagat Ram was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
He was charge-sheeted.
Charge sheet was served upon him.
Statement of allegations was also served upon him.
DSP Bhagat Ram found the charge proved against him.
As a result of that inquiry SP accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer and served upon him show cause notice calling upon to show cause why he be not dismissed from service.
After considering the reply to the show cause notice vide order dated 18.2.1980 passed by SP, Pirthi Pal Singh was dismissed from service.
2.
Pirthi Pal Singh filed suit for declaration challenging his dismissal from service.
It was alleged in the plaint that the Inquiry Officer had imported his personal knowledge while holding inquiry and, therefore, his findings stood vitiated.
Inquiry report is based on extraneous considerations.
Departmental authorities were biased and prejudiced against him inasmuch as he was transferred from Ambala to Jind when inquiry was pending because the then Inquiry Officer Bhagat Ram was not prepared to submit his report according to the wishes of Shri RS Kalsan, SP Kurukshetra and inquiry was entrusted to Shiv Ved Parkash, District Inspector.
Inquiry Officer acted beyond his jurisdiction.
He acted as prosecutor as well as a Judge.
He cross-examined some witnesses.
Punishment of dismissal from service could not be passed on him for a few hours of absence from duty.
Further, there was no finding by the SP that his absence for a few hours was the act of gravest act of misconduct in the face of which, he could not be an efficient police officer.
3.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit urging that inquiry was quite in order and there was no bias against him in the mind of the Inquiry Officer.
There was no bias against him in the mind of the Punishing Authority.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 19101980 passed by Superintendent of Police, Jind is illegal as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary party ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice under Section 80 of Civil Procedure Code ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit (appellant ?)
is estopped from filling the suit by his own act and conduct ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
4.
Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Jind dismissed the plaintiff's suit in view of his findings that the plaintiff's dismissal from service was quite in order and there had been no infraction of the principle of natural justice in the conduct of the inquiry nor when the impugned order was passed on 19101980.
5.
Plaintiff went in appeal to the District Court.
Appeal was dismissed by learned Addl.
District Judge Jind on 5111984.
6.
Still not satisfied, the plaintiff has come up in this Regular Second Appeal to this Court.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned counsel for the State of Haryana.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that assuming the findings of the Inquiry Officer to be correct, it was only few hours absence from duty on the part of Constable Pirthi Pal Singh which should not have cost him his job.
It was submitted that there is no evidence that he was creating nuisance while under the influence of liquor in front of Police Post Pipli.
Suffice it to say, he was posted on sentry duty at Police Station, Ambala City on 3.9.1979 from 6 am to 9 am Instead of being thereon duty, he slipped, took liquor and went to Pipli and started stopping and checking trucks etc. in front of Police Post, Pipli while under the influence of liquor.
SI Ram Lubhaya checked him and got him medically examined from the doctor, who opined that he was under the influence of liquor.
Misconduct imputed to Constable Pirthi Pal Singh was not absence alone.
Misconduct imputed to him became aggravated when he became off from sentry duty, took liquor and started stopping and checking trucks etc. in front of Police Post, Pipli.
It may be true that if he had been merely absent from duty and had taken only liquor, that may not have been viewed as serious a misconduct as to entail his dismissal from service.
In Rattan Lal v. The State of Haryana and others, 1983(2) SLR 243, it was held that "SI Ram Dev who was on a checking round at the relevant time found that the petitioner and two other colleagues of his, namely, Constables Om Parkash and Nand Singh, who were members of the Guard Force deputed to guard the Malkhana in the Old Treasury Building at Rohtak, were under the influence of liquor.
Under the orders of the said SI they were got medically examined.
As regards Rattan Lal the opinion of the doctor was that he was emitting smell of alcohol in deep respiration.
He had taken alcohol but not under due effect of alcohol.
According to the roster of duties of permanent guards, the petitioner was on duty from 9 am to 12 noon and then 9 pm to 12 midnight on 20/21121974.
Constable Kanahya Lal was to follow him on duty and it was he who was guarding the Malkhana at the crucial moment when SI Ramdev appeared there for routine checking.
It was held that consumption of liquor by a Constable when he is on duty is no misconduct rendering him liable to disciplinary action.
In the case in hand, however, Constable Pirthi Pal Singh was on duty.
He ran away from duty, took liquor and started picketing trucks and checking them in front of Police Post, Pipli, (sic) complained of is act of the gravest act of misconduct.
In Punjab State through Collector v. Gurdip Singh, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 641 : 1994(4) SCT 402 (P&H), it was held that "even a single act of misconduct can, in a given situation amount to the gravest act of misconduct, but the mandate of the rule making authority is clear that the punishment of dismissal from service has not to be awarded in case of a misconduct of ordinary nature."
It was submitted by learned counsel for the appellant relying upon Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 Volume II that dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for the police service.
In making such an award, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension".
It was submitted that the appellant had put in about nine years of service and there is no evidence that he had absented earlier also.
There is no evidence that he had taken liquor earlier also.
It was submitted that a single misconduct during period of nine years of service should not have visited him with extreme penalty of dismissal from service particularly when there is no finding by the punishing authority to the effect that the alleged misconduct was showing incorrigibility and his complete unfitness for the Police service.
It would bear repetition that a single act of misconduct can be gravest acts of misconduct which can entail dismissal from services.
It is not necessary that there should be a series of acts of misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for Police service.
A single act of misconduct may suggest the gravest acts of misconduct on the part of the delinquent entailing his dismissal from service.
It was held in Bhagwat Parsad v. Inspector General of Police and others, 1967 SLR 807, that "the use of word acts did not exclude a single act of misconduct.
In order to give effect to the legislative intent words in plural number may be construed to include the singular and the words importing the singular only, may be applied to plurality of acts, things or persons.
In order to gauge gravity of misconduct, what matters, is not frequency, as obliguity or delinquency.
It was for the police officer who judged the infraction of the police rules to determine the seriousness of the misconduct and to decide upon the suitability of the punishment.
It will not be within the ambit of the powers of this Court, when petitioned to issue the extraordinary writs of certiorari, mandamus etc. to interfere with the discretion of the Heads of the Departments when it has not been exercised wantonly or arbitrarily."
It is, thus, clear that the misconduct imputed to Constable Pirthi Pal Singh was so grave an act of misconduct that it could entail his dismissal from service.
Impugned order of dismissal was passed on 18101980.
Plaintiff filed suit on 30.4.1983.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that this suit could have been instituted within three years of the date when he was dismissed from service excluding, of course, the time he had spent in making representation etc. to the higher authorities against his dismissal from service and also the time which he took in serving statutory notice upon the State as envisaged in Section 80 CPC.
Plaintiff has nowhere stated in his statement as to when he preferred an appeal and revision against the order of dismissal and as to when they were decided and, therefore, he is not entitled to exclude the period which he spent in prosecuting appeal and revision.
Plaintiff could impugn his dismissal from service within three years under Article 58 of the Limitation Act.
It was held in SS Rathore v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1989(4) Supreme Court Cases 582, that the plaintiff-appellant's suit for declaration that the order of dismissal from service was bad and he continued to be in service fell under Article 58 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act.
Article 113 of the Act, corresponding to Article 120 of the old Act, is a general one and would apply to those suits to which no other article in the Schedule applies.
The question, therefore is as to when the right to sue first accrued within the meaning of Article 58.
The order of dismissal made by the Collector did merge into the order of the Divisional Commissioner when the appellant's appeal was dismissed on August 31, 1966.
The 60 days time spent for complying with the requirement of notice; under Section 80 of the Code was available to the plaintiff in addition to the period of three years.
Counting the date from the date of the appellate order, the suit would be within time.
Plaintiff's suit was obviously within time as having been brought within three years of the date when he was dismissed from service.
9.
In view of what has been said above, this appeal fails and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.