NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by Smt. Kulwant Kaur Gill under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution seeking a direction to the State of Punjab and others to grant approval for the petitioner's appointment as a Hindi Teacher in Bhupindra Khalsa Higher Secondary School, Moga (for short, the `Bhupindra School') as she fully eligible and qualified for the post.
2.
Bhupindra School is a privately managed, recognised and aided school.
Grant equivalent to 95% of the salaries of the employees is given by the State Government of Punjab.
An enactment, namely, the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 was brought into force so as to provide security of service to the employees of the privately managed schools.
Rule were also framed under the Act in the year 1981.
3.
The petitioner's case is that she was appointed as a Hindi teacher in the Bhupindra School after finding her qualified for the post.
Qualification for the post of Hindi teacher was Matriculation, Prabhakar and OT (Oriental Training).
All appointments to the aided posts are made by the Managing Committee of the Bhupindra School.
In pursuance of an advertisement in the newspaper "Daily Tribune" dated June 2, 1985, she sent in her application.
She was called for interview on July 5, 1985 and was selected for the post of Hindi teacher.
She was Matriculate, Prabhakar and OT Appointment letter (Annexure P-1) was issued to her on that very day.
She joined the post on July 9, 1985.
The Managing Committee of the School sent the case of petitioner's appointment as Hindi teacher for approval to the District Education Officer, Faridkot.
The District Education Officer, however, refused to grant approval on the ground that `OT' qualification acquired by the petitioner from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) was not recognised by the Punjab Government and the petitioner, was, thus, not qualified for appointment as a Hindi teacher.
The District Education Officer directed the Managing Committee of the Bhupindra School to terminate her services.
4.
The petitioner's grievance is that there was no provision in the Rules to obtain approval for appointment of a teacher in a privately managed recognised added school.
It is further stated that there are many Hindi and Punjabi teachers in different schools who also acquired `OT' certificate from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag.
They are continuing in service.
Management of the Bhupindra School had no objection to the qualification of `OT' which the petitioner possessed.
5.
The official respondents No. 1 to 3 have, in their joint reply, stated that the petitioner's case for approval is under consideration of the Department.
However, it is further stated by them that the State Government did not reject the petitioner's appointment but only required the School authorities to show that LT certificate acquired by the petitioner was equivalent to `OT' certificate given by the Punjab Education Department.
Petitioner possessed `LT' certificate and not `OT' certificate.
Since the examination conducted by Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag was not recognised by the Punjab Government, the petitioner could not be said to be eligible and qualified for being appointed to a grant-in-aid post.
6.
Respondent No. 4 (Bhupindra School) has, in its reply, explained that the petitioner was informed on October 4, 1985 that request for approval of her appointment has not been allowed by the District Education Officer.
She was, therefore, asked to submit upto October 14, 1985 proof of recognition of the LT certificate (Annexure R-3).
She, however, did not submit any proof.
She had passed the LT Examination from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP), which is not equivalent to the `OT' certificate recognised by the Punjab Government.
Her appointment was subject to the approval of the Punjab Government vide condition No. 13 in the letter of appointment.
Approval from the District Education Officer was sought in the light of the Government instructions dated December 16, 1983 (Annexure R-2).
Further, her appointment was made on probation for a period of one year vide condition No. 1 in the letter of appointment.
Her services, therefore, could be terminated at any time during probation.
She had joined service as Hindi teacher on July 9, 1985 and her services were dispensed with on October 30, 1985.
Thus, she had only served for less than four months and she had no right to continue.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that there are many teachers working in different schools, who have acquired `OT' qualification from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP).
Since they are continuing and their services have not been dispensed with, the termination of the petitioner's services cannot be said to be justified.
Writ Petitions Nos. 3714 and 3683 of 1981 were filed by similarly-situated teachers whose services were terminated and this Court stayed the termination of the services of the petitioners therein.
In support of this contention, reliance is placed by the learned counsel on a decision of this Court dated July 21, 1992 in Kulwant Singh v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 3143 of 1980, wherein a similar question had arisen for consideration.
Relying upon an earlier decision of this Court in Vijay Kumari v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) R.S.J.
455 : 1992(1) SCT 135 (P&H), it was held that the termination of the services of the Hindi teacher possessing OT certificate from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) was not justified.
8.
On a perusal of the decision in the case of Kulwant Singh (supra), it is noticed that the petitioners there had acquired OT qualification and had continued for about 13/14 years in service.
In contrast, the petitioner in the present case has acquired LT certificate from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP).
She only spent less than four months in service.
She was on probation for one year.
There is nothing to show that the LT qualification acquired by the petitioner from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, was equivalent to the OT qualification recognised by the Punjab Government.
In Smt. Surinder Singh v. Presiding Officer, School Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigahr and others, 1996(3) R.S.J.
258 : 2001(4) S.C.T.
300(Pb.
& Hry.
), it has been held that if one wrong has been committed by an authority, it cannot be said that in the cases of others, the authorities may not take proper steps for undoing the wrong.
It may be seen that in the case of the petitioner, the appointment was made by the Managing Committee of the Bhupindra School on a specific condition that it is subject to the approval of the District Education Officer.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner had been in service for less than four months and the Managing Committee dispensed with her services.
Since she was on probation for a period of one year, she had no right to claim continuance in service if any of the conditions of the appointment letter was found to be not fulfilled.
The view taken by this Court in the case of Kulwant Singh (supra) could not help the petitioner because the facts here are different.
The Court in the case of Kulwant Singh (supra) had noticed specifically that the teachers had continued in service for about 13/14 years and no objection was even raised against their qualifications.
When the teachers sought regularisation of their services, a new plea was raised by the State Government that the teachers did not possess the requisite qualifications.
9.
It is further noticed that the petitioner has not challenged the order of her termination.
Her services were terminated by order dated October 30, 1985.
A copy of the order showed that she was required to note down the order but she declined.
When she filed the writ petition on November 6, 1985, she did not make a mention of the order dated October 30, 1985.
It is, thus, a case of concealment.
The order of termination was in the knowledge of the petitioner but she preferred to only challenge the order of the District Education Officer whereby approval for appointment was declined.
10.
The petitioner has not challenged the termination order dated October 30, 1985.
The order is, therefore, not liable to be set aside.
Further, she was on probation for one year.
She joined the service on July 9, 1985 and her services were dispensed with on October 30, 1985.
Thus, she had not completed even four months in service.
She concealed the order of termination when she filed the writ petition.
She has not been able to show that LT Qualification was equivalent to OT Qualification recognised by the Punjab Government.
11.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.