JS Narang, J - The short question which arises for consideration before us is : Whether the petitioner after having been reinstated in service is entitled to benefit of Rule 1.101(2) of the PWD Code Rules for the purpose of pay fixation and other consequential benefits ?
2.
For the determination of the above said question, it shall be appropriate to refer to certain admitted facts, which are as under :  The petitioner joined service in the Department of PWD (Irrigation Bench) Punjab on 22101973 as Sub-Divisional Officer after having been selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission and was placed in the seniority as reflected in Annexure P1.
The petitioner was ordered to be dismissed from service vide order dated 5101986.
The petitioner challenged the order of dismissal by way of filing a Civil suit before the trial Court at Chandigarh.
The suit was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 20101990.
The petitioner/plaintiff filed an appeal against the said judgment and decree which was accepted by the first appellate Court and vide judgment and decree dated 2121997, the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside and the suit was decreed granting the declaration to the effect that the impugned order dated 5101996 is declared ineffective and inoperative in the eyes of law.
The learned appellate Court had observed that it shall be open to the Government to pass any order as per the provisions of law on the basis of the inquiry already held in which the show cause notice stood served upon the plaintiff for stoppage of the increments with cumulative effect or in any other legal manner.
3.
The State Government vide order dated 1991997 inflicted punishment upon the petitioner by way of stoppage of five increments with cumulative effect in partial modification of the previous order dated 5101986/15101986, the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated.
Copy of the order of reinstatement is annexed as Annexure P3.
Upon reinstatement, the seniority of the petitioner was fixed at Serial No. 242.
The gradation and distribution list of the officers had been prepared as on 111998 but the petitioner did not find his name mentioned therein.
The petitioner claims that his name should have been between one Shri Piara Singh and Shri Devinder Singh i.e. at Seniority No. 156 and 157 respectively.
As a sequel thereto, he is also entitled to his pay fixation in accordance with Rule 1.101(2) of the PWD Code Rule.
For ready reference, the said rule is reproduced here as under :-  "1.101(2).
If an officer of IB and B&R Branches fails to pass any of these examinations within the prescribed period, his increments falling due after the expiry of the prescribed will be withheld and will not be granted with retrospective effect on his passing the examination.
On passing the examination he will with effect from the date following that date on which the examination ended be entitled to the rate of pay corresponding to his length of service.
If, however, his failure to pass be due to circumstances beyond his control Govt. may extend the period for him."
4.
The official respondents filed reply to the petition and have virtually admitted the facts stated in the petition.
However, the State has taken the plea that the petitioner is suffering on account of his own fault for not having qualified the departmental revenue examination which is pre-requisite for the grant of annual increment and as per the record, the petitioner passed his examination on 1361998.
Thus, his pay had been fixed vide order dated 1411999 Annexure R1 after granting the annual increment to which he was entitled to under Rule 1.101(2) of the PWD Code Rule.
5.
So far as status of the petitioner in the gradation list as on 111998 is concerned, a categoric reply has been submitted and the averments are contained in para 10 to the effect that the petitioner stands at Serial No. 156-A in the gradation list.
Reply to para 10 of the writ petition is reproduced here as under :-  "The averments made in this para are wrong.
It is admitted that in the Gradation List dated 111998 the petitioner stands at Serial No. 156-A.
It has already been explained that the petitioner qualified the Departmental Revenue Examination on 3061998.
Thus he became eligible for annual increments and other benefits w.e.f 30.6.98 and not before that.
The case is being considered for giving him the Divisional Charge from 30.6.98 onwards."
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the rule in question and on reading of the said rule, we are of the view that if a person does not pass the prescribed examination within the prescribed period, his increments falling due after the expiry of the prescribed period would be withheld.
However, on the passing of the examination his pay has to be fixed at the rate of pay corresponding to his length of service, this would mean that on passing the examination, the pay has to be fixed as if the increments were given to the petitioner on the basis of his length of service but under these circumstances, such an incumbent would not be entitled to any arrears.
7.
Petitioner was dismissed from service in 1986 but the said dismissal order was set aside/declared ineffective and inoperative vide judgment dated 2121997 and the petitioner stood reinstated vide order dated 1991997 Annexure P3 and vide that order, the order of dismissal was converted to one awarding punishment of stoppage of five increments with cumulative effect.
It is on the first opportunity, the petitioner passed the examination in question on 3061998, as has been admitted by the State.
According to us, passing of the examination by the petitioner would relate back to a date when the incumbent had the first chance for appearing in the examination.
It is borne out from the record that after dismissal of the petitioner his juniors were promoted in the year 1996.
In the case of the petitioner, he shall be deemed to have passed the examination in the first chance which became available to him.
It would be obviously prior to 1996, as such, the petitioner has definitely acquired the right to be considered for promotion with effect from the date his juniors were promoted, considering him to be fully qualified by taking into consideration his record of service including the punishment awarded on 1991997.
Learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to a judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge of this Court in Gurdial Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1992(1) Service Cases Today 691.
The ratio of this judgment supports the contention of the learned counsel to the effect that the petitioner shall be deemed to have passed the examination in question in the first instance which became available to him.
8.
For the foregoing discussion, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to fix the pay of the petitioner by taking into consideration the examination in question having been passed by the petitioner in the first chance which became available to him.
Upon fixation of the pay, the petitioner shall not be entitled to any arrears.
It is further directed that the petitioner be considered for promotion with effect from the date his juniors were promoted considering him to be fully qualified by taking into consideration his record of service including the punishment awarded vide order dated 1991997 Annexure P3.
These directions be carried out within a period of three months.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.