Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner claims that he had worked as a Labourer on daily wages with the Haryana State Electricity Board from March 1981 to January 4, 1983.
He was retrenched without complying with the provisions of Sections 25-F and 25-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Thereafter he was employed on November 1, 1994 for a period of two weeks.
His services were terminated on November 16, 1994.
Aggrieved by the termination, the petitioner issued a demand notice, alleging that the action in terminating the service was illegal.
He claimed reinstatement "with continuity of service with full back wages for the period of forced unemployment...." A copy of this demand notice is at Annexure P3 with the Writ Petition.
2.
The matter was considered by the appropriate Government after obtaining comments from the Board.
Vide order dated June 21, 1995 the petitioner's claim was rejected with the observation that his "services were terminated on 411983....." and that he had "served the demand notice on 1711995 after 11 years...." It was further observed that he was not "able to explain the delay in raising the dispute...." After rejection of the petitioner's request, the petitioner claims to have again submitted a representation to the Labour Commissioner.
Vide order dated October 25, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P8 with the writ petition, the petitioner was informed that his application dated May 31, 1999 had been "considered and found not feasible of acceptance....." Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He prays that the order dated June 21, 1995, a copy of which is at Annexure P5, and the order dated October 25, 1999, a copy has been produced as Annexure P8, be quashed.
3.
We have heard Mr. JS Maanipur, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that there is no limitation for a workman to raise an industrial dispute.
Thus, even if a workman approaches the authority after a lapse of 20 years, it cannot refuse to refer the dispute to the Labour Court.
Learned counsel places reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court reported as Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-op.
Marketing-cum-proceesing Service Society Ltd., 1999(2) Service Cases Today 667.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner's services were terminated on January 4, 1983.
What was the petitioner doing thereafter till the year 1995 ?
There is no explanation.
It is reasonable to assume that the petitioner must have been working somewhere.
Irrespective of that the petitioner has not been able to furnish any explanation for his failure to raise any dispute within a reasonable time after January 4, 1983.
The mere fact that he was granted employment for a period of two weeks in the year 1994, was really of no relevance for challenging the retrenchment ordered in January 1983.
Since there was an inordinately long delay, the appropriate authority took a possible view.
Its view was justified as the petitioner was unable to give any reasonable explanation for the delay.
Even at the hearing before us no explanation, whatsoever, for the long delay in approaching the authority, has been given.
In this situation, we find no infirmity in the impugned order.
5.
Mr. Maanipur has referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ajaib Singh's case (supra).
We have perused this judgment.
In this case their Lordships were pleased to hold that the validity of a reference could not be questioned on the ground of delay.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, in the present case no reference has been made.
Validity of a reference is not being questioned.
The appropriate authority has considered it proper to reject the petitioner's request on account of an inordinately long and unexplained delay.
It is not shown to be in violation of any rule or law.
Litigation is a time consuming and expensive process.
It is only the vigilant and the needy, whose claim can be considered by the Court.
One who sleeps over the matter for years without any explanation, whatsoever, cannot claim that the order is illegal.
6.
Mr. Maanipur contends that the termination of services on November 16, 1994 was also illegal.
7.
The petitioner was, admittedly, appointed for two weeks.
What did the termination order violate ?
There is no answer.
Mr. Maanipur contends that the employer had adopted an unfair labour practice.
The contention is misconceived.
The workman has not raised any such plea.
We find no infirmity in the action of the authority in passing the impugned orders.
The petition is wholly frivolous and lacking in merit.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.