DP Sarkar-II, J - This is a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner-Smt. Lila Pal was informed by the Secretary of the Duff Primary School within Chinsurah Municipality, District Hooghly that she was appointed by the Managing Committee of the School as a music teacher w.e.f.
23rd March, 1978 on the following conditions :-  (i) That she would get Rs. 50/- only per month as remuneration.
(ii) That she would have to take music classes and to organise other cultural programmes of the School.
(iii) That she would not demand any other allowances from the School.
(iv) That her post was unapproved one.
2.
The Duff Primary School is a Government Aided School within the urban area.
It is the further case of the petitioner that she was informed by a letter of the Secretary of the Institution dated 21.7.78 that she would also take all the normal classes of the School as per the routine given by the Head teacher although she was appointed as a music teacher.
3.
On the basis of the increase in the Roll strength of the Institution an additional post was due to the School w.e.f.
23382 and accordingly the Secretary of the School informed the petitioner that she was appointed as an Assistant teacher of the Institution against such additional post but subject to the approval of the District Inspector of Schools (Primary Education).
It was further intimated that the pay and allowances of the petitioner would be paid from the school fund till the government approval was obtained.
Since March, 1982 this petitioner has been working as an Assistant teacher.
There was number of correspondences during these years with the District Inspector of Schools (Primary Education) of Hooghly and also other authorities for approval of her appointment as an Assistant teacher in March, 1982 against the additional post.
The school authority also requested the D.I.
of Schools (Primary Education) and the District Council of Primary Education for sanctioning the additional post and approving the appointment of the petitioner against that post.
But no response was received by the petitioner or the school authority from the D.I.
of Schools (Primary Education) or District Council of Primary Education.
So, after a long lapse of time in 1992 the petitioner came forward with the Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution praying for a Writ of Mandamus for directing the authority concern to approve her appointment as in additional teacher and to pay her the salary and allowances etc. w.e.f 23382 and also a direction to approve the additional post as requested by the Managing Committee.
4.
On behalf of the State-respondents it has been submitted that the petitioner was admittedly appointed on ad hoc basis at a fixed remuneration of Rs. 50/- without any allowances and that also against an unapproved post in March, 1978.
Therefore, the petitioner's service from March, 1978 cannot confer any right on the petitioner.
But according to the petitioner by the letter dated 21.7.78 she was directed by the Managing Committee also to take classes in other subjects as may be allotted to her by the Teacher-in-charge in addition to the subject of music for which she was appointed on ad hoc basis.
Therefore, the petitioner's submission is that she was appointed as an Assistant Teacher in July, 1978 as she was asked to take up classes in other subjects.
But the letter dated 21.7.78 is very clear which speaks about allotment of additional duty to the petitioner but it does not say that she was appointed as an Assistant Teacher from that date.
Therefore, allotment of additional duty should not be construed as appointment as an Assistant Teacher.
This interpretation is supported by the prayer of the petitioner in the Writ Petition.
The petitioner has prayed for necessary direction to approve her service w.e.f.
23rd March, 1982.
So, as per the prayer in the Writ Petition the petitioner has not based her claim on the past service prior to March, 1982.
If she was appointed as an Assistant Teacher by the letter dated 21.7.78 there cannot be any reason as to why the petitioner shall claim approval to her appointment w.e.f March, 1982 and there was also no reason for the Managing Committee to give her a fresh appointment in March, 1982.
Therefore, we are to consider the question of her appointment since March, 1982.
The appointment was given by the Managing Committee against the vacancy which was not in existence at the time of appointment, the School authority approached the D.I.
of Schools (Primary Education)/District Primary Council for sanctioning an additional post on the ground of rise in the roll strength and until that additional post is sanctioned by the authority, question of appointment against such post becomes redundant.
5.
On the other hand, this case has got another aspect that the present petitioner has been constantly working in this Institution and rendering service as an Assistant Teacher since 1978 upto this date at a meagre amount of remuneration.
On one fine morning, she joined the Institution in March, 1978 while she was in the prime of her youth with a rosy hope to be absorbed permanently to the Institution.
She also obtained the B.T.
Degree and as such she possessed adequate qualification.
There is no allegation against her efficiency as a teacher.
Her sincerity and seriousness as a teacher has never been questioned by the School authority during long 21 years of service.
Now, she stands on the verge of the age of about 50 years.
Her all rosy hopes have withered away.
Still she has been kept at bay from her cherished goal i.e. the job of an Assistant Teacher in a primary institution by the State-respondents for no fault of her on the ground of some technicality of recruitment Rules which were framed by the State-respondents with the sole purpose which is far less humanitarian but more extraneous and partisan in nature.
But the fountain of flow of justice should be impeded with a barrage of technicality of Rules.
The Court should not keep its eyes shut to the demand of principles of natural justice, to the demand of the humanitarian tenets.
6.
The person who has been working for 21 years as a teacher in a particular Institution even against an unapproved post may have the reasonable expectation to be regularised in course of time to that post and as such the doctrine of reasonable expectation as enunciated by the Apex Court of the country cannot be overlooked in the present context.
At the same time, the Apex Court in its decision reported in AIR 1991 SC 2088, has reported that where a teacher works on ad hoc basis for a period of seven years, such a teacher should be regularised before direct recruitment.
In the above context, I cannot accept the submission of the Ld.
Advocate appearing for the State- respondents that the appointment of the petitioner as an assistant teacher by the Managing Committee is not in conformity with the recruitment Rules.
But the force of argument that the petitioner was appointed against the additional post in anticipation of necessary sanction for that post from the authority, cannot be denied.
Accordingly, the Writ Petition should be allowed in part.
The School Authority is hereby directed to pursue the matter of sanction of an additional post on the basis of their increased roll strength.
The respondents are hereby directed to consider the case of an additional post of assistant teacher in the Duff Primary School at Chinsurah and to give their sanction if it is found that all requirements under the Rules have been fulfilled.
Such consideration should be completed within six weeks from the date of communication of this order.
7.
In the event of sanction granted for an additional post of an assistant teacher as requested by the Managing Committee of the Duff Primary School at Chinsurah, Hooghly such order should be intimated to the School Authority within the time limit as fixed above.
8.
The School Authority is hereby directed to regularise the appointment of the present petitioner against that additional port w.e.f.
the date of sanctioning of that post.
On such appointment the D.I.
of Schools (Primary Education), Chinsurah is directed without fail to approve such appointment within two weeks from the date of intimation from the Managing Committee of the School.
On receipt of such approval the petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of pay scale from the date of her appointment against the sanctioned post.
9.
To meet the ends of justice the over-age of the petitioner is hereby condoned.
10.
The Ld.
Advocate for the State-respondents has pointed out that the petitioner has approached the Court after inordinate delay and such delay should be treated as bar to allow the Writ Petition.
After careful consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case I cannot agree with such submission because when a person has his/her right to claim the share of natural justice, no delay to approach the Court for that purpose shall defeat that right.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, disposed of in terms of the order above.
Petition partly allowed.