THB Challapathi, J - The defendants are the appellants.
The plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration that the order of his dismissal dated 2381990 passed by the Assistant Inspector General of Police and confirmed by the 3rd, respondent are illegal and void.
According to the case of the plaintiff, he was appointed as Constable on the death of his father and he joined the Police Department at Patiala on 6.2.1989 and after completion of training, he was posted at Ferozepur.
While he was serving at Ferozepur, the 4th respondent by his order dated 2381990 discharged him from the police service under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules on the ground that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police official.
According to the petitioner, there was no report from this superiors regarding his alleged inefficiency and the representation made by him was also dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General, Railway Police, Punjab.
Therefore, he filed the suit alleging that the order of discharge is bad in law.
2.
It was contended by the defendants-appellants in their written statement that the order of discharge is simpliciter in nature and is not stigmatic and the same was passed in accordance with the rules and therefore, the suit is liable to be dismissed.
3.
On the basis of the pleadings, the trial Court framed appropriate issues and on a consideration of the evidence on record, the trial Court dismissed the suit.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff was allowed by the Appellate Court.
Hence the defendants preferred this appeal.
4.
It is clear from the order that it is an order of discharge simpliciter.
It is not disputed that the authorities have got the power of discharge of the officials under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules when the Appointing Authority is satisfied that the Police official is unlikely to prove an efficient police official.
The record clearly shows that on a consideration of the work and conduct of the plaintiff, the order of discharge was passed.
The learned Additional District Judge erred in holding that the Deputy Inspector General of Police in his order which is marked as Exhibit P-2 on a representation made by the plaintiff, referred to certain allegations made by the DIG therein.
Therefore, the District Judge held that the order is stigmatic.
Exhibit P-2 is not an order of discharge and it is an order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police on the representation of the plaintiff which does not lie under the statutory rules.
Under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, no appeal or revision is provided against the order of discharge.
Therefore I am of the opinion that the learned Additional District Judge erred in law in relying upon the order Exhibit P-2.
When once a representation is made, the authority who is considering it has to necessarily deal with the grounds on which the representation has been made.
It is the plaintiff himself who invited the Deputy Inspector General of Railway Police to pass the order Exhibit P-2.
It has been held by the Apex Court in State of UP and others v. Krishna Kumar Sharma, 1997(11) S.C.C.
437 that the averments made in the counter-affidavit filed by the State in reply to the averments made in the writ petition do not alter the nature of order of termination which was termination simpliciter in accordance with the rules.
The other decisions relied upon by the Additional District Judge are not applicable to the facts of this case.
5.
In view of the above discussion, I allow the appeal and set aside the decree and judgment of the learned Additional District Judge dated 1431997 and restore that of the trial Court.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.