Swatanter Kumar, J - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner Jaswinder Singh has prayed for quashing of the order dated 2421999 passed by the respondents.
Vide the impugned order the respondents had cancelled the registration of the petitioner as a research scholar for PhD in the department of History of Punjabi University, Patiala.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has mainly raised two contentions for the consideration of the Court :-  (a) The impugned order is violative of principles of natural justice as adequate opportunity to cross examine the witnesses and to see the relevant records including non-furnishing of documents was not granted to the petitioner despite the request; (b) Copy of the report of the Committee was not furnished to the petitioner before passing the impugned order and as such the entire proceedings are vitiated.
3.
The facts are hardly in dispute.
The petitioner was admittedly registered for doing his PhD and Dr. Balbir Singh Dhillon was appointed his guide.
The petitioner was involved in a criminal case registered under FIR No. 425 dated 19121998, under Sections 326/323/324/148/149 IPC in Police Station, Sadar, Patiala.
The petitioner had applied for anticipatory bail which was granted by the learned Sessions Judge, Patiala on 321999.
A Committee was constituted to hold enquiry against the petitioner.
The Committee submitted its report and recommended the punishment against the petitioner for rejection of his registration.
The Vice Chancellor accepted the said report and directed cancellation of registration of the petitioner with the University for completing his PhD The petitioner, thus, challenges the action of the respondents on the above grounds.
4.
The reply was filed on behalf of the respondents stating that the petitioner was involved in a serious crime and the enquiry had been conducted in accordance with law.
It was also disputed that there has been any discrimination against the petitioner, as action was taken the other co- accused, as well by respondents.
5.
Learned counsel for the University, at the out-set conceded that the copy of the report of the Committee, which is the very foundation of the impugned order passed by the Vice Chancellor of the University, was not furnished to the petitioner at any stage prior to passing of the impugned order.
In view of this undisputed position, following the principles enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Indian the case of Union of India v. Mohammad Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) R.S.J.
397 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC), the impugned order has to be set aside especially when it is an admitted position on record and even during the course of arguments it was conceded that the copy of the report was not furnished to the petitioner before his registration was cancelled.
The prejudice to the petitioner is obvious as he never knew as to on what basis the Committee found him guilty and how could he meet that case in regard to conclusion of punishment.
A definite right of the petitioner has been infringed and the violation is one which is not merely procedural but is one which substantially affects the defence of the petitioner in the enquiry and has seriously prejudicated his interests.
6.
It may not be necessary for this Court to discuss other grounds raised by the petitioner which are seriously disputed by the respondents.
7.
The impugned order dated 2421999 is liable to be set aside.
The next question arises is whether the whole proceedings stand vitiated or the proceedings should be re-examined from the stage when the respondents were required to provide copy of the enquiry report to the petitioner.
Following the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of State Bank of Patiala and others v. SK Sharma, JT 1996(3) SC 722 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) and keeping in view the prejudice to the petitioner in mind, I am of the considered view that ends of justice would be met if the respondents are directed to furnish the report of the Committee to the petitioner first and then proceed to seek his reply to the said report and permit him to be heard in accordance with the principles enunciated by a judgment of Full Bench of this Court in the case of Ram Niwas Bansal v. State Bank of Patiala and another, 1998(3) R.S.J.
(sic) : 1998(3) SCT 550 (P&H) and pass an order afresh in accordance with law and keeping in view the various contention raised by the petitioner in his reply to the report.
8.
Resultantly the impugned order dated 2421999 (Annexure P-4) is set aside.
The respondents are at liberty to proceed against the petitioner afresh in accordance with law and the observations made above.
There shall be no order as to costs.