RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Mr. GS Cheema, Sr. DAG, Punjab has shown us the proceedings of the DPC in which 13 Executive Engineers belonging to general category have been found suitable for promotion to the rank of Superintending Engineer.
The consideration of two Executive Engineers, namely, Shri ML Bhalla and Shri RS Padha were kept in sealed covers because of pendency of some departmental inquiries against them.
It transpires from the noting that Shri RS Padha stands exonerated of the charges levelled against him in the inquiry and necessarily his sealed cover has to be opened.
So far as the Backward Class and Scheduled Caste candidates are concerned, it has been mentioned that there was no vacancy available for Scheduled Caste candidates to be filled in prior to November 18, 1997 and, therefore, question of considering any Scheduled Caste Executive Engineer for filling the vacancy of Scheduled Caste quota by virtue of reservation did not arise.
However, there was one post for Backward Class which had become available on 121996.
Two candidates namely, Surinder Pal Singh and Harbans Singh, Executive Engineers, belonging to Backward Class category were considered for filling up that post by virtue of reservation.
The DPC found Harbans Singh to be suitable.
The DPC proceedings took place on 13111998.
When asked, the learned counsel for the State submitted that regular promotions are not being ordered on the ground that in SLP(C) 18028-29 of 1998, the Apex Court on 18.1.1999 had stayed promotions which may have to be ordered on the basis of judgments of the Apex Court in Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) RSJ 1 : 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC) and Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) RSJ 1 : 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC) regarding which the application of the State Govt. for clarification as to the true import of the said two judgments is pending.
So far as the promotion of the petitioners is concerned, it may be observed as a matter of abundant caution that none of them belongs either to Scheduled Caste category or Backward Class category who might have to be considered by virtue of seniority in the rank of Executive Engineer.
That being so their seniority would not be adversely affected whether ratio of Jagdish Lal's case is applied or Janjua's case is applied for determining their seniority.
So far as the Backward Class candidates are concerned the vacancy of Superintending Engineering which fell vacant on 121996 is to be filled in by virtue of reservation from a Backward Class candidate.
Even if Janjua's case (supra) was to be applied and the Backward Class candidate were to lose their seniority in the rank of Executive Engineer that will not make any different for filling up vacancy by reservation as irrespective of the seniority the Backward Class candidates vis-a-vis general category candidates in the rank of Executive Engineers, they would be considered for promotion against the post to be filled by reservation.
It would have made some difference if the post was to be filled by a Backward Class candidate on the basis of seniority and not on the basis of reservation.
In our view the stay order granted by the Apex Court in the above mentioned SLP would not come in the way of the State Govt. for ordering regular promotion subject to the Appointing Authority concurring with the recommendation of the DPC.
2.
In the aforesaid circumstances, we are of the view that the current duty charge given against the posts of Superintending Engineer must come to an end as soon as possible and regular promotions on the basis of the recommendations of the DPC be made in accordance with law.
Let it be done within four weeks from today.
3.
Before parting with the judgment we may observe that so far as the petitioners are concerned, petitioner No. 1 has been found suitable by the DPC from amongst the general category candidates whereas other two petitioners being not senior enough were not in the zone of consideration.
Learned counsel for the State after checking up from the record, states that it was inadvertently mentioned in the written statement that the case of petitioner No. 2 Shri R.K. Aggarwal, was considered for promotion.
4.
In this view of the matter we do not find any case for interference so far as the petitioners No. 2 and 3 are concerned.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the above terms.
Copy of the order attested by the Special Secretary be given to Mr. Cheema, Sr. DAG, Punjab for onward transmission to the concerned quarter.
Order accordingly.