VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner (Rupali Mamta Jain) had appeared in B.Com.
Part II examination in April, 1998.
The result was declared in the first week of July, 1998.
She was declared to have failed.
She applied for re- evaluation.
The result of re-evaluation was declared on 12111998.
She was declared to have passed.
When the petitioner was declared to have failed, she took admission in B.Com.
Part III in Mukand Lal National College, Yamunanagar.
After her re-valuation result was declared, she was given casual admission in B.Com.
Part III on 10121998 subject to the approval of the University.
The representation of the petitioner for regularisation was sent to the University.
The admission of the petitioner had not been regularised.
The result was that she had to knock the door of this Court and prayed for a direction to be issued to the respondents to regularise the admission of the petitioner in B.Com.
Part III and to allow the petitioner to appear in the Final Examination of BCom.
Part III commencing in April, 1999.
2.
On 31.3.1999 this Court had directed the respondents to allow the petitioner to take B.Com.
Part II examination in April, 1999 provisionally, subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed, the petition as such had been contested.
There was no controversy related to the facts.
It was reiterated that petitioner was declared to have failed in B.Com.
Part II in July, 1998 and that on re-evaluation of the result, she was declared to have passed.
However, as per respondent No. 1 under Clause 9 of the Ordinance `General Rules for Examination' printed in University Calendar, Volume II, a candidate whose result of an examination when declared late by the University for no fault of his, if otherwise eligible may be allowed to seek admission in the affiliated/maintained colleges of University within 15 working days from the despatch of his result card, without late fees subject to the condition that no such admission shall be allowed after 31st October of the year.
The Vice- Chancellor may allow late admission in very special cases of genuine nature after 31st October of the year.
The petitioner's result was declared after 31.10.1998.
Her request for regular admission, therefore, was declined but she was allowed to take the admission in correspondence course.
4.
Additional written statement with the permission of the Court had been filed on 281999.
It was asserted that under Section 11(6) of the Kurukshetra University Act, the Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.
The Vice-Chancellor did not permit late admission and, therefore, respondent No. 1 contened that the petitioner was not eligible for regular admission in B.Com.
Part III.
5.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the re-evaluation result had only been declared on 12111998.
This was not the fault of the petitioner but of respondent No. 1.
Firstly, they declared the petitioner to have failed and secondly the re-evaluation result was further delayed.
Thus, it was claimed that she should be allowed to be taken as a regular student of B.Com.
Part III.
On the contrary as is apparent from the resume of the facts given above, on behalf of respondent No. 1 it was highlighted that after 31.10.1998 the Vice-Chancellar did not deem it appropriate to allow the petitioner to join as regular student.
6.
On careful consideration of the matter in question, it is patent that the petitioner cannot be made to suffer for the fault of respondent No. 1.
Under the Calendar of the Kurukshetra University guidelines have been provided which relate to Paper-Setting and Evaluation.
Paragraph 186 deals with the situation like the one which the petitioner is concerned.
It reads :-  "186.
If as a result of re-evalution, a candidate passes the examination or is placed in compartment, he shall, if otherwise eligible, be allowed to join the next higher class within ten days of the date of the letter communicating the result of re-evaluation to him.
His attendance shall be counted from the date of admission.
No extra chance will be allowed for clearing compartment/re-appear in lieu of any chance which a candidate might have missed before declaration of the result of re-evaluation.
A candidate shall be allowed to withdraw his application for re- evaluation for one or more papers only if his award(s) from the re-evaluation has not been received for that paper(s) in the University Office.
No refund of fee shall be allowed in such a case."
It is abundantly clear from aforesaid that once on re-evalution the petitioner had passed the examination and was eligible, she should be allowed to join the next higher class.
The above said paragraph is clear and unambitious.
7.
Reliance on Clause 9 of the Ordinance (General Rules of Examination) of the University Calendar, Volume II is totally misplaced.
It permits the Vice-Chancellor to allow late admission in very genuine and special cases.
Normally this Court does not interfere in the discretion that is to be exercised by the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
However, if there is any arbitrary exercise of power which does not stand scrutiny, it necessarily has to be quashed.
The result was declared late after re-evalution by the University.
One fails to understand as to what could be any other special case than the one with which the petitioner is concerned.
The University itself was at fault.
It should have taken care and allowed the petitioner to join as a regular student within the stipulated time.
8.
This Court was concerned with a similar situation in the case of Amit Puri v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 1995(2) Service Cases Today 634.
The facts were by and large identical.
The petitioner applied for re-evaluation and re-checking for two of the papers.
The result of re-evaluation was delayed.
He applied for admission within time.
It was refused on the ground that late admission is not to be allowed.
It was held :-  "Furthermore, the delay has occurred on account of the fact that the University had failed to declare the result of the re-evaluation of the answer book within the stipulated time.
The petitioner would suffer no way to be blamed.
The petitioner would suffer an irreparable loss if he is made to lose one academic year.
In view of the facts as noticed above, such a course of action cannot be accepted.
In other words, the University cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong."
No different are the facts of the present case.
Therefore for these reasons given above, the impugned action of the respondents cannot stand scrutiny.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and it is directed that petitioner be taken as a regular student.
As already mentioned above during the pendency of the writ petition, she was allowed to take examination of B.Com.
Part III provisionally.
The University is directed to declare her result.
Petition allowed.