Nagendra Rai, J - The petitioners have filed the present writ application for restraining the respondents from making recovery of the amount drawn in excess by way of increment from the pay and pension of the petitioners on the ground of their not having passed the Hindi Noting and Drafting Examination.
They have further prayed for an appropriate direction to fix the pay and allowances of the petitioners counting the three years from the date of order of promotion (20490) for the purpose of passing Hindi Noting and Drafting Examination or in the alternative for exemption from passing examination in terms of the Government instruction contained in Memo No. 2334 dated 31284.
2.
The petitioners were initially appointed as Junior Engineers in Water Resources Department on different dates ranging from 1958 to 1963.
Later on they were promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer in the periods from 1979 to 1985 and were given current charge of Assistant Engineer and Sub-Division Officer.
An altercation arose with regard to the finalisation of seniority and the matter went up to the Supreme Court and thereafter the petitioners were granted regular promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer on different dates by notification dated 20490 and 4291 (Annexure-1 series) and after that they were granted time-bound promotion by notification dated 18792 after completion of 10 years of service.
The State Government decided that the monetary benefits should be given to the petitioners on their promotional post with effect from the date of assumption of charge from 22nd February, 1988.
The aforesaid decision was challenged by the petitioners by filing a writ application being C.W.J.C.
No. 4821/96 and the same was heard along with other cases and this Court directed the respondents to pay the petitioners full salary and other allowances to the post of Assistant Engineer with effect from the date of their promotion with interest.
A copy of the said judgment has been annexed as Annexure-3 to the writ application.
The respondent-State thereafter while considering the case of the petitioners for payment of salary from due date on the promotional post passed an order for recovery of the amount drawn in excess by way of increment for not having passed the aforesaid Hindi Noting and Drafting Examination within the stipulated period counting from 271278, the date the petitioners were given promotion vide notification dated 20490.
A copy of the pay slip wherein such deduction has been made has been annexed as Annexure-7 to the application.
3.
According to the petitioners the aforesaid action of the respondent State is not according to law.
According to Rule laid down in Appendix IV of the Bihar P.W.D.
Code Vol. II the Assistant Engineers have to pass the departmental examination within three years from the date of assumption of charge on the said post failing which their increments are to be withheld.
The Government of Bihar in the Public Works Department vide notification No. 3965 dated 26269 decided that those Assistant Engineers promoted from the Subordinate Engineering Service, who have crossed the age of 40 years on the date of issue of circular, will be exempted from passing the examination.
The same decision was reiterated by the Government vide notification dated 3.2.84.
A true copy of notification dated 26269 and notification dated 3.2.84 have been annexed as Annexures 4 and 5 to the writ application.
The Government of Bihar in the Road Construction Department, which is the nodal department of the petitioners vide notification dated 22783 passed an order that Assistant Engineers promoted from Junior Engineer have to pass departmental examination within 3 years from the date of assumption of the charge of the post otherwise their increment would be withheld provided they have not attained the age of 50 years.
Persons attaining the age of 50 years were exempted from passing the said examination.
A copy of the said notification has been annexed as Annexure-6 to the writ application.
It is further asserted on their behalf that they were given promotion vide notification dated 20490 and 4291 and as such they are required to pass examination within three years to be counted from said dates in terms of the aforesaid decision.
The petitioners No. 1 to 5 have already retired from the service and 6 and 7 were exempted from passing the examination having attained the age of 50 years.
Petitioner Nos. 8 to 13 have already passed the departmental examination within three years from the date of issuance of notification i.e. from 20490 and petitioner Nos. 14 to 19 are not required to pass such examination.
As such direction for recovery of excess amount paid by way of increment has to be quashed.
4.
The respondents have filed the counter-affidavit and it is stated therein that the service condition of the Engineers of the Public Works Departments, Govt. of Bihar, is governed by relevant Rules prescribed in the Public Works Department Code in addition to rules prescribed by Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
According to the provisions of Public Works Department Code, an officer who fails to pass the departmental examination within two years of joining the employee (employment ?)
will receive no further increments of pay until he passes the examination.
The penalty for delay in passing examination will ordinarily cease to operate when the officer passes the examination but the arrears of increment so withheld will not be granted to him.
An Assistant Engineer of Works Department is also required to pass professional examination prescribed in Bihar Public Works Department Code within three years of joining the appointment.
The petitioners have not stated as to whether they have passed the above mentioned examination or not.
It is further stated therein that if an employee does not pass the prescribed Departmental Examination inspite of his serious and repeated attempts or due to circumstances beyond his control his case may be considered for exempting him from passing the examination provided his service is satisfactory and there is no vigilance charge pending against him and he has crossed the prescribed age.
The power of granting exemption is not mandatory but discretionary.
No one can claim exemption as a matter of right.
It is further stated that the cases of the petitioners for promotion were taken up in 1978 alongwith other persons and the matter was challenged upto the Apex Court and during the pendency of the case further promotions were stopped.
In the meantime, the petitioners were made Overseer, Sub-Divisional Officer.
They should have appeared in the examination but they did not appear in the examination and applied for exemption.
As the petitioners have not passed the aforesaid examination nor exemption was granted and they have taken illegal benefits of increment, the respondents have taken steps to recover the amount.
5.
The only question to determined in this case is as to whether the direction for recovery of the amount paid to the petitioners by way of increment is to be recovered or not.
6.
The facts which are not in dispute are that the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Engineer vide notificated dated 20490 and 4291 from the back date from perusal the differed circulars appended with the writ application.
It is clear that the Assistant Engineers have to pass the departmental examination within two years and the professional examination within three years.
In case they fail to pass the examination they are not entitled to increment.
However, if they pass the examination the penalty will cease to operate but the arrears of increment so withheld cannot be granted to them.
It is also clear from the aforesaid latest circular as contained in Annexure-5 to the writ application that there is provision for exemption from passing the examination provided the conditions as laid down in the aforesaid notification are fulfilled, namely, he has crossed the prescribed age, he has made attempts but due to circumstances beyond his control could not pass the examination, his service is satisfactory and no charges were pending against him.
It is clearly mentioned therein that the power to exempt from the aforesaid examination is discretionary and not mandatory.
It further appears that according to the aforesaid circular the departmental examination or professional examination has to be passed within the prescribed period from the date of joining.
7.
According to the petitioners as their notification of appointment was made on 20490 and 4291 the period of three years shall be counted from that date whereas according to the State as they were appointed an promotional post from the retrospective date that period has to be counted from back date.
8.
The claim of seniority of the petitioners and others which was subject of litigation went upto the Supreme Court and in pursuance of the decision of the Apex Court a final order of promotion on the basis of the placement in the seniority has been issued on 20490 and 4291.
As the petitioners were not promoted in a regular way earlier and prior to the promotion they were incharge to the post of Assistant Engineer, in my view that cannot be taken into consideration for determining the period for passing the departmental examination as asserted on behalf of the State in the counter-affidavit.
This apart as the promotion order itself was issued in 1990 and 1991, the petitioners were not sure as to their promotion prior to that in view of the pending of the litigation.
As such they could not have appeared in the examination earlier.
9.
In the facts of this case the period of three years has to be counted from the date of their promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer i.e. 20490 and 4291.
As such if all the petitioners or any of them have passed the examination within three years from the date of issuance of notification granting promotion respondent-State cannot recover the increment paid earlier on account of not passing the examination within the prescribed period.
10.
Some of the petitioners claim that as they have crossed the prescribed age they will be deemed to have been exempted from passing the examination.
As such in their case also the order of recovery is not justified.
11.
The documents appended with the writ application as contained in Annexures 4 and 5 clearly shows that the power to grant exemption lies with the competent authority.
Exemption is not as a matter of right not it is mandatory, on the other hand it is discretionary.
Only on the ground that some of the petitioners have crossed the prescribed age they are not entitled to exemption as a matter of right.
They have to make a prayer before the authority concerned and the authority being satisfied on the fulfilment of the grounds as mentioned in the Government notification contained in Annexure-5 has to pass an appropriate order either granting exemption or refusing exemption.
12.
Accordingly, in case of those petitioners who have crossed the prescribed age or have retired it will be open for them to apply before the competent authority to grant exemption and the authority concerned is directed to dispose of the matter within four months from the date of production of a copy of this order.
In case the claim for exemption is allowed then no recovery of the amount shall be made.
In case the claim for exemption from passing the said examination is not allowed then the steps may be taken for recovery of the amount given by way of increment on account of not passing the examination within the prescribed period or not being granted exemption in terms of the Government decision.
13.
In the result, the writ application is allowed to the extent that those petitioners who have passed the aforesaid examination within three years from the date of issuance of notification i.e. 20490 and 4291 in their case no recovery of the amount paid by way of increment shall be made.
So far the petitioners who have not passed the examination within the prescribed period but have reached the prescribed age then they will file a petition for exemption from the aforesaid examination and the same should be disposed of within the time as mentioned above.
In case the exemption is granted to them then no steps should be taken for recovery of the excess amount paid by way of increment.
In case exemption is not granted then the steps may be taken for recovery of the excess amount.
14.
With the aforesaid observation/direction writ application stands disposed of.
Application allowed.