Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 4773, 1996, 8454, 2353, 2968, 3387, 3434 and 3519, all of 1999.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 4773 of 1999.
2.
The State Council of Education Research & Training, Punjab, Chandigarh, published an Information Brochure/Prospectus, inviting applications from eligible candidates for the Joint Entrance Test for admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course (ETT) in all the 12 District Institutes for the Session 1998-2000.
The qualifications for taking the test were also laid down and it was provided inter alia that a candidate who had passed the 10+2 or an equivalent examination with 50% marks would be eligible to take the test.
The petitioners who had passed the Three Years Diploma Course in Engineering, accordingly, filed applications for the Entrance test and having been treated as eligible were allowed to take the test which (though scheduled to be held on 31st January, 1999) was postponed and subsequently held on 7th February, 1999 and on the basis of their merit were granted admission to the Course.
Their admissions were however cancelled vide order dated 13th March, 1999 (Annexure P-8) by the respondents on the ground that they were not eligible to gain admission as they had qualified the Three Years Diploma Course in Engineering and had not passed that 10+2 Examination.
The petitioners, thereafter, challenged Annexure P-8 by filing C.W.P.
No. 3869 of 1999 and in its decision dated 22nd March, 1999, this Court quashed the order Annexure P-8 on the ground that the said order had been made without giving the petitioners an opportunity of a hearing.
It was further ordered that as it was for the respondents to determine as to whether the qualification of 10+2 was equivalent to the three Years Diploma Course in Engineering which the petitioners had passed, it was appropriate that they be directed to re-examine the matter and to dispose of the issue by passing a speaking order keeping in view the fact that in the previous years right from the year 1991 till 1999, the Three Year Diploma Course in Engineering had been treated as equivalent to the 10+2 examination.
The petitioners, accordingly, appeared before a Committee constituted for the purpose to determine the question of equivalence of the two courses.
The Committee came to the conclusion that the 10+2 examination could not be held to be equivalent to the Diploma Course.
The DPI while making the formal order Annexure P-11 dated 31st March, 1999, observed as under :-  "I have carefully gone through the contents of the writ petition and have perused the pleadings of petitioners held before me, so as also in the presence of the said Committee.
After thorough consideration of all the facts of the case, I am of the considered opinion that the Three Years Diploma Course of State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, are not equivalent to the plus two class/examination of the Punjab School Education Board in view of the reasons stated above.
The plan put forth by the petitioners that the Three Years Engineering Diploma has been equated with 10+2 by the Academic Council of the Punjabi University, Patiala has nothing to do with this matter as the Universities are autonomous bodies and they can take their own decision for admissions to their courses.
But so far as admission to the ETT Course is concerned, the Three Years Diploma cannot, in any way, be equated with the 1+2 Class of the Punjab School Education Board as these students have not passed Compulsory Punjabi subject which is essential for a student to be declared pass in plus two class/examination of the Punjab School Education Board and the Course content of three Years Diploma Course has not been found at par with that of 10+2 syllabus.
So far as the prayer of the petitioners for allowing them admission to ETT Course is concerned, it is worth mentioning that the petitioners have been imparted specialised technical training of Engineering during their Three Years Diploma Course, which might have been framed keeping in view their further requirement while performing their engineering jobs, whereas the qualification of 10+2 has been prescribed for admission to ETT Course so as to train them to teach students in primary schools.
These two streams are entirely different.
Since the students of Three Years Diploma in Engineering students, the Three Years Diploma (Engineering) cannot be expected to perform their jobs in Primary Schools, where they are to impart education to the students.
So, in my considered opinion, the candidates with Three Years Diplomas are not eligible to ETT Course.
The Circular letter No. ETT-Cell-99 dated 1/221999 disallowing B.Sc.
Home, B.Sc.
Agriculture/Three Years Polytechnic Diplomas was rightly issued with prior approval of the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Education Department."
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioners have come to this Court for a second time by way of the present writ petition now impugning the order Annexure P-11.
3.
On notice of motion, a reply has been put in by the respondents.
It has been pleaded by way of preliminary objection that the ETT course had been started in accordance with the guidelines laid down by National Council of District Institute of Education and Training Act which had been promulgated with the intention of improving the quality of school education and that it was for the National Council to lay down qualification for admission to the ETT Course.
It has also been pleaded that as the ETT Course was designed to train teachers for primary classes candidates were required to have proficiency in languages, Social Sciences, General Sciences, and Mathematics and it was for this reason that the minimum qualification for admission thereto had been provided as 10+2 in Science with Punjabi up to the Matric level.
It was also explained that higher qualifications from other streams of knowledge were not relevant as it would not serve the purpose for which the course had been started.
It has also been highlighted that ETT qualified teachers were required to teach Mathematics, Science, Social Studies, Punjabi.
Hindi, Educational Technology, Teachers Functions, Psychology, Emerging India, Physical Education, Art and work experience and English.
It has, accordingly, been urged that the possession of a Diploma in Engineering was not relevant for admission to the ETT course.
In reply to a specific plea raised by the petitioners in paragraph 32 to 38 of the writ petition, it has been admitted that a large number of candidates who had Diploma in Engineering had, in fact, been granted admission from 1991 upto the year 1999 on the basis that they held qualifications equivalent to 10+2 but it has been pleaded that as certain queries had been raised regarding the equivalency in question for the Session 1998-2000, the matter had been taken up administratively and a decision had been taken at the level of the Secretary Education that the Three Years Diploma in Engineering was not equivalent to the 10+2 examination.
4.
Mr. Ramesh Goyal, the learned counsel, for the petitioners has raised three arguments in the course of the hearing.
He has first argued that as per the decision of this court in C.W.P.
No. 3869 of 1999, the respondents, were, in particular, to take into account that a large number of candidates with Diplomas in Engineering had been admitted in the ETT Course from the year 1991 onwards and as this fact had not even been alluded to by the respondents in the order Annexure P-11, it could not be sustained.
He has also urged that once equivalence had been granted by the respondents to a particular course, the same could not be changed or modified unless there was a change of circumstances.
He has finally urged that the order Annexure P-11 proceeded on the basis that the issue that was required to be considered while determining the equivalence of the two courses was the similarity in the scheme of subjects whereas the word 'equivalence' itself suggested a parity of status and as such the finding that the course of instruction in the Diploma or the +2 Course was dissimilar, was not relevant to the issue.
Similar arguments have been addressed by the other learned counsel, who appeared in support of their respective petitions.
5.
Mr. Sharma, the learned D.A.G.
Punjab, appearing for the respondents has, however, controverted the stand of the petitioners on the basis of the written statement and has pointed out that the equivalence visualised under the Information Brochure/Prospectus was with regard to the bridge course that a candidate might have undergone after having passed out of the 10+2 examination and that the petitioners' qualifications were not relevant for the purpose of admission to a course for primary school teachers.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that these petitions deserve to succeed.
It is clear from paragraphs 32 to 38 that the respondents had treated the 10+2 examination as equivalent to the Diploma Course in Engineering right from the year 1991 up to the present year and a large number of Diploma Holder Candidates had been granted admission to the Course.
The respondents have sought to justify the refusal of admission to the petitioners for the present year to a office note (which has been produced in Court today) which had been initiated as certain queries had been raised with regard to the equivalence of the two courses.
It appears that a note was recorded by the dealing hand in which it had been pointed out that Diploma Holders had been permitted to sit for the testing the previous year but this appears to have been done at the instance of Dr. Jagtar Singh, a Member of the previous examination committee and as such, it should be clarified whether such students should be allowed to take the test to be held for this year.
After the comments had been received from the said Dr. Jagtar Singh, the note in question was marked to the Convener of the new examination Committee and he too recorded a note that the "basic qualification prescribed was 10+2 or Prep or Giani" and that there was no provision for admission on the basis of an equivalent examination.
The matter was then referred to the Secretary, Education on Ist February, 1999, who approved the note in question and it was on this basis that the petitioners were held ineligible for the course.
A bare reading of the note reveals that there has been virtually no application of mind on the question posed and it was in fact, based on a mis- conception of the rules as it proceeded on the basis that an equivalent qualification was not even postulated for admission to the course in question.
It is the conceded position that the National Council for Teacher Education, operates in each individual State through the State Council of Education Research & Training.
The controlling authority for admission to the course is, therefore, the State Council.
The Director of the State Council issued a latter Annexure P-13 dated 7th February, 1995 (in the connected C.W.P.
No. 3434 of 1999) to the Principal of the District Institute of Education and Training, Nabha in which it was conveyed that the Three Years Diploma in Engineering was relevant for admission to the ETT Course as it was equivalent to the 10+2 examination.
The respondents have not denied the authenticity of this letter and have maintained an eloquent silence thereto.
It is obvious from the facts given above that the permission granted to the Diploma Holders in the previous year was, therefore not an omission or an oversight but was on account of a definite opinion that the Diploma Holders were deemed to possess an equivalent qualification vis-a-vis candidates who had passed the 10+2 examination.
In this eventuality, Mr. Goyal's argument that there was no material on record to justify the departure made for this year becomes relevant.
As already noted above, the respondents' primary plea that the matter had been reconsidered by the Government at the Secretary's level is not relevant for the reasons already set out above.
7.
I am also of the considered view that the plea raised by the respondents that as the course of instructions for the +2 and the Diploma Course in Engineering were wholly dis-similar there could not be any equivalence between the two is also unacceptable.
The respondents have proceeded on the basis that equivalence has to be equated as same or similar.
This fact is self evident from Annexure P-11.
The word equivalent has been defined in Chambers English Dictionary as being 'equal in value, power, meaning or interchangeable'.
The New Shorter Oxford Dictionary describes the word as being "equal in value, significance or meaning."
This factor appears to have escaped the notice of the Committee or the DPI before the order Annexure P-11 was made.
8.
These petitions are, accordingly, allowed and the order Annexure P-11 is quashed.
As the petitioners had been allowed admission to the ETT on the basis of their merit before they had been asked to leave the course, they shall be readmitted forthwith and allowed to complete the same in terms of the order of this Court.
It has also been pointed out that there are certain other candidates in the connected writ petitions who had been allowed to take the test and had the requisite merit but were not allowed to join the course on account of the decision taken by the respondents.
Such candidates will also be permitted to join the course as a consequence of this order.
It is clarified that in both the categories mentioned above, the respondents would compute the attendance of the candidates from the date that they are given admission/re-admission to the course in question on account of this order.
There is yet a third category of candidates, who were not allowed to take the test on the plea that they were not eligible to do so.
Such candidates shall be treated as eligible and allowed to take the test in the next year, irrespective of the fact that the qualifications for the next Sessions are changed.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petitions allowed.