GS Singhvi, J - The petitioners have prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the alleged termination of their services w.e.f.
28.6.1996.
They have also prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise their services in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular letter dated 2751993.
2.
Although there is a serious dispute between the parties about the total period of engagement of the petitioners, it is not in controversy that the petitioners - Dalip Singh, Avtar Singh, Inder and Mangat Ram - were engaged as workmen in Polythene Bags Factory under the Divisional Forest Officer, Kurukshetra w.e.f.
11.2.1987, 12121987, 29.11.1986 and 171987 respectively.
Their services were terminated some time in 1991.
The industrial dispute raised by them was decided by the Labour Court, Ambala on 1061996 by way of compromise which postulated reinstatement of the petitioners with continuity of service but without back wages.
Immediately after the pronouncement of the award, they were taken back in service as casual labourers.
3.
The petitioners have averred that soon after their reinstatement, the respondents again discontinued their services/engagement w.e.f.
28.6.1996.
This statement has been seriously contested by the respondents who have averred that the petitioners are not attending duties in spite of the notices sent to them by the competent authority.
In support of this assertion, respondents have relied on the replies submitted by them before the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, Kurukshetra in response to the notices issued by the latter on the basis of the demand notices sent by the petitioners.
However, in our opinion, it is not necessary to deal with this aspect of the case in detail because the petitioners have invoked remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the 1947 Act').
At any rate, in view of the assertion made by the respondents that they have not brought about the cessation of the master-servant relationship, the petitioners are free to report for duty and as soon as they do, the respondents will have to employ them as casual labourers.
4.
The only issue which requires serious consideration by the Court is whether the petitioners are entitled to be regularised in service in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular dated 2751993.
If the petitioners' claim was to be examined only in the light of the said circular, there would have been little difficulty in declining relief to them in view of the categoric statement made in the reply that none of them served for continuous period of 5 years as on 3131993 within the meaning of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana.
However, we cannot overlook the fact that vide circular letters dated 7.3.1996 and 18.3.1996, the Government of Haryana has issued revised instructions for regularisation of services of daily wage/work-charge/casual labourers, who have completed three years service as on 3111996.
In terms of these instructions, the petitioners who have acquired a right to be treated as continuing in service in view of the award dated 1061996 are entitled to be considered for regularisation of their services.
5.
Shri Parmod Goyal, learned Deputy Advocate General made half-hearted attempt to convince us that the petitioners are not eligible to be considered for regularisation of services because they have not worked for 3 years preceding 3111996 and they have not been paid for that period.
However, we have not felt impressed and are not inclined to agree with him that notwithstanding the award passed by the Labour Court on the basis of the compromise arrived at between the parties that the petitioners will be reinstated with continuity of service, they are not to be treated as continuing in service for the purpose of consideration of their cases for regularisation of service.
The award passed by the Labour Court which must be treated as statutory in character by virtue of Section 18 of the 1947, has the effect of conferring a right upon the petitioners to be treated as continuing in service for the entire period between the date on which the respondents discontinued their engagement and the date on which they were allowed to re- join duties in compliance of the award dated 1061996.
Therefore, it is not possible to treat the intervening period differently for the purpose of considering the petitioners for regularisation of their services in accordance with the policy framed by the government.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioners w.e.f.
3111996.
They shall also be given other consequential benefits except the wages for the period between 28.6.1996 and 8.8.1997.
For the remaining period, the petitioners may make application under Section 33-C(2) of the 1947 Act.
The respondents shall also be entitled to contest such application on all those grounds which may be available to them under the law.
The petitioners are directed to report for duty within one month and submit their joining in writing to respondent No. 3, who shall place them on duty as regular employees.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment of free prescribed for urgent applications.
Petition partly allowed.