GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the communication Annexure P-14 dated 11121998 sent to the petitioner by the Director General of Police, Haryana requiring him to report for medical examination for appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police in pursuance of the letter No. 11477-82/E-5 dated 391998.
The petitioner has also prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him as inspector in view of the decision of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 8487 of 1998 Rajiv Deshwal v. State of Haryana : 1999(1) SCT 605 (P&H);.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that soon after the demise of his father, Sardar Sadhu Singh, on 18.10.1994 while he was holding the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police, the petitioner applied for compassionate appointment.
He filed C.W.P.
No. 17708 of 1995 for issuance of a direction to the respondents to provide him ex-gratia employment by alleging that action on his application was being unduly delayed.
The same was disposed of by a Division Bench on 6121995 with the direction that the respondents should provide suitable employment to the petitioner.
The petitioner filed C.O.C.P.
No. 382 of 1996 for implementation of the order dated 6121995.
On being noticed by the Court, respondents filed reply stating therein that persons senior to the petitioner were available for consideration for appointment on compassionate ground.
After considering the averments made in the pleadings, the learned Single Judge dismissed the contempt petition on 1711997 with the observation that as and when vacancy arises, the petitioner shall be considered for appointment.
3.
Later on, the Director General of Police, Haryana passed a detailed order giving offer of appointment to the petitioner on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
In pursuance of the instructions issued by the Director General on 391998, the Commandant 4th Battalion, HAP, Madhuban issued office memo Nos. 16667-70 dated 1791998 and 18636-39 dated 13101998 asking the petitioner to report for medical examination.
He sent another communication to the petitioner on 29101998 requiring him to appear along with his educational certificates and also to make himself available for medical examination.
It, however, appears that the petitioner did not comply with the instructions issued by the department and this seems to be the only reason why the respondent No. 2 has been compelled to issue the impugned memo.
requiring him to comply with the instructions issued earlier.
4.
It also appears that after the issuance of the letter of appointment on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, the petitioner sent notice of demand for justice dated 26111998 to the respondents claiming appointment on the post of Inspector in view of the order dated 3.11.1998 passed in Rajiv Deshwal's case (supra) but even without waiting for the slightest time, he has rushed to this Court for quashing of the letter Annexure P-14 and for directing the respondent No. 2 to offer him appointment on the post of Inspector.
5.
Shri RK Malik argued that in view of the verdict given in the case of Rajiv Deshwal (supra), the petitioner is entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground on the post of Inspector of Police as of right and, therefore, he cannot be asked to join the post of Assistant Sub Inspector in pursuance of Annexure P-14.
He submitted that the petitioner has the right to be appointed against the available vacant post of Inspector.
In our opinion, the submission of the learned counsel merits rejection.
It is a well settled principle of law that the instructions issued by the government for ex-gratia employment constitute an exception to the rule embodied in the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India that every appointment to the public service shall be made after advertising the post with a view to give opportunity to all the eligible persons to compete for that.
The rationale of this policy is that the family of the deceased employee should be provided relief by way of giving employment to one of the dependents.
However, the policy of compassionate appointment cannot be read as creating a vested right in the dependent of the deceased employee to claim appointment on a particular post.
In the present case, the appointment was offered to the petitioner on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police but for the reasons best known to him he has failed to avail the same under a totally erroneous thinking that his joining on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector will adversely affect his right to be considered for appointment as Inspector.
6.
We are rather surprised at the attitude of the petitioner.
He has rushed to the Court immediately after sending the notice of demand through his counsel on 26111998.
He could have reported for duty in pursuance of the communication dated 1791998, 13101998 and 11121998 and then persuaded the competent authority to entertain his claim for appointment as Inspector on the basis of judgment in Rajiv Deshwal's case (supra).
However, the fact of the matter is that without bearing little patience, he has approached this Court for quashing the letter vide which he has been another opportunity to avail appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector.
In our considered opinion, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief in this petition particularly because he has not even shown that the period of three weeks stipulated in the notice for demand of justice Annexure P-13 has expired.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, we decline to entertain the petition at this stage but make it clear the observations made in this order shall not prejudicially affect his right to be considered for appointment as Inspector after he joins duty as Assistant Sub Inspector in pursuance of Annexure P-14.
Order accordingly.