THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition, the petitioners are seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus under Article 226 of the Constitution of India directing the respondent to fix the pay of the petitioners in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986 besides the special pay already drawn by them.
2.
The petitioners are working as Steno-Typists, a Class-III post in various Departments in the Government of Haryana.
According to them prior to 1969, the post of Steno-Typist carried the pay scale of Rs. 60-175+Special Pay of Rs. 15/- and on revision effected in the year 1969, the pay scale was revised to Rs. 110-225 with a Special Pay of Rs. 25/-.
The same was again revised with effect from 1.4.1979 to Rs. 400-600 with a Special pay of Rs. 50/- and the same was further revised to Rs. 950-1500 with a special pay of Rs. 100/- w.e.f.
111986.
According to them, the Sub Divisional Clerks and the Wild Life Inspectors were granted a pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 and Rs. 1350-2200 respectively with effect from 111986.
According to the petitioners, the Sub Divisional Clerks and Wild Life Inspectors were getting the same scales of pay which the petitioners were getting prior to 111986.
Thus according to the petitioners, they were discriminated while revising the pay in 1986 and they should be paid the same pay as that of the Wild Life Inspectors since the requisite qualification of Wild Life Inspectors is also Matric as that of the Steno Typists.
Further it is the case of the petitioners that in addition to academic qualification of Matric, the petitioners who are Steno-Typists, have to acquire the qualifications in shorthand and typing and their work is more onerous than that of Wild Life Inspectors and therefore, they should also be placed on par with Wild Life Inspectors.
It is also their case that the Central Government employees working as Stenographers were getting higher scale of pay than the petitioners though the qualifications are one and the same.
Therefore, the petitioners are seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent-State of grant the revised pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986.
3.
There cannot be dispute that the Wild Life Inspectors and Sub Divisional Clerks cannot be equated with the Stenographers working in various Departments of the Government.
There is no comparison in the working though the academic qualification is the same.
It is for the expert body like the Pay Commission to evaluate the nature of the work and the fixation of their pay.
The Court will not entertain any claim for equation of the pay scales among the various employees of the State Government working in different Departments.
If there is any discrimination in regard to pay-scales of the employees working in the same Department carrying on the same duties and discharging the similar or identical functions, the Court may direct the Government to maintain the parity in the pay on the ground of discrimination, but when the petitioners are claiming parity with the employees of some other Departments having the functions different from that of the petitioners and the responsibilities are not one and the same, the Court will not go into the question of parity of scales of pay, since there is no discrimination among equals.
The petitioners cannot claim to the equals with the employees of other Departments, who are discharging dissimilar functions and having different responsibilities.
4.
It has been held by the Apex Court in The Secretary, Finance Deptt.
and others v. The West Bengal Registration Service Association and others, 1992(2) SLR 82 : 1992(2) SCT 301 (SC) that "it is well settled that equation of posts and determination of pay-scales is the primary function of the Executive and not the Judiciary and, therefore, ordinarily Courts will not enter upon the task of job evaluation which is generally left to expert bodies like the Pay Commissions etc.
It is further observed as follows :-  "Courts must, however, realise that job evaluation is both a difficult and time consuming task which even expert bodies having the assistance of staff with requisite expertise have found difficult to undertake sometimes on account of want of relevant data and scale for evaluating performances of different groups of employees.
This would call for a constant study of the external comparison and internal relativities on account of the changing nature of job requirements.
The factors which have to be kept in view for job evaluation may include (i) the work programme of his department, (ii) the nature of contribution expected of him, (iii) the extent of his responsibility and accountability in the discharge of his diverse duties and functions, (iv) the extent and nature of freedoms/limitations available or imposed on him in this discharge of his duties, (v) the extent of powers vested in him, (vi) the extent of his dependence on superiors for the exercise of his powers, (vii) the need to coordinate with other departments etc. We have also referred to the history of the service and the effort of various bodies to reduce the total number of pay-scales to a reasonable number.
Such reduction in the number of pay-scales has to be achieved by resorting to broadbanding of posts by placing different posts having comparable job-charts in a common scale.
Substantial reduction in the number of pay-scales must inevitably lead to clubbing of posts and grades which were earlier different and unequal.
While doing so, care must be taken to ensure that such rationalisation of the pay structure does not throw up anomalies.
Ordinarily a pay structure is evolved keeping in mind several factors, e.g. (i) method of recruitment, (ii) level at which recruitment is made, (iii) the hierarchy of service in a given cadre, (iv) minimum educational/technical qualifications required, (v) avenues of promotion, (vi) the nature of duties and responsibilities (vii) the horizontal and vertical relativities with similar jobs, (viii) public dealings, (ix) satisfaction level, (x) employer's capacity to pay etc." 5.
In view of what has been stated above, I do not find any grounds to warrant issuance of a writ of mandamus in exercise of the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.