Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The learned Single Judge having accepted the claim of the respondent-Writ petitioner with regard to the grant of a higher scale of pay, the State of Haryana has filed the present letters patent appeal.
A few facts may be briefly noticed.
2.
The respondent was appointed as a Head Clerk in the Panchayat Samiti Department on March 5, 1996. this post was in the pay scale of Rs. 150-300.
On March 6, 1968, he was confirmed on the post of Head Clerk.
With effect from February 1, 1969, the pay scale of the post of Head Clerk was revised from Rs. 150-300 to Rs. 225-500.
3.
In the year 1960, the posts of Head Clerks and Stenotypists in the Panchayat Samiti Department were abolished by the State Government.
Resultantly, the persons working on these posts were rendered surplus.
Vide letter dated February 14, 1969, instructions were issued for their adjustment in different departments/offices of the State Government.
It appears that certain posts of Sub Inspectors were available in the Food and Supplies Department.
On April 2, 1969, the respondent made a request for his adjustment as a Sub Inspector.
His request was accepted.
Vide order dated May 2, 1969, he was appointed as a Sub Inspector in the Food and Supplies Department.
This post carried a pay scale of Rs. 60-120.
A few months later, the posts of Inspectors which were in the pay scale of Rs. 90-120 became available.
On July 7, 1969, the respondent requested that he be promoted as an Inspector.
This request was also accepted.
Vide order dated December 2, 1969, the respondent was appointed as an Inspector and given the pay scale of Rs. 140-300.
The respondent continued to work as such.
4.
In the year 1991, it appears that the respondent approached this Court with the grievance that he was entitled to a higher scale of pay with effect from December 2, 1969, on the post of Inspector.
He had been representing.
In spite of repeated efforts, nothing had been done.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No 6538 of 1991.
It is stated by the counsel for the respondent that by an ex parte order, the writ petition was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to consider and decide his representation.
In pursuance to the directions, the Department issued an order dated July 31, 1991, by which the representation was rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the respondent filed Civil Writ Petition No 6343 of 1992.
He challenged the order by which his representation was rejected.
He also claimed that he was entitled to be placed in the higher pay scale of Rs. 225-500 with effect from December 2, 1969.
Still further, he claimed that he be appointed as an Assistant Food and Supplies Officer as another person viz. Kanwar Bhan Rapria had been appointed as such by the Department.
This writ petition was decided by the learned Single Judge vide order dated November 6, 1995.
The respondent's claim with regard to his appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer was rejected.
However, the claim for the grant of pay scale of Rs. 225-500 was accepted.
Directions for refixation of pay were issued.
It was further directed that the respondent shall be entitled to the payment of arrears of salary for a period of 38 months preceding the filing of the writ petition.
The writ petition was allowed in these terms.
Aggrieved by this decision, the State has filed the present letters patent appeal.
5.
The factual position is not in controversy.
However, on behalf of the appellants, it has been contended by Mr. Bishnoi that the claim made by the respondent was highly belated and thus the writ petition should have been rejected on that ground alone.
Secondly, it has been submitted that the respondent had voluntarily sought appointment as Sub Inspector and thereafter promotion as Inspector.
His requests were accepted.
He was granted the pay scale as was admissible for the post.
In fact, the respondent was not eligible for appointment as Inspector.
He was granted benefit of relaxation of the rules.
Despite this, he is now making a claim for higher salary to which he is not entitled.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the respondent.
6.
The two questions that arise for consideration are:-  (1) Should the learned Single Judge have dismissed the writ petition on the ground of delay ?
(2) Has the learned Single Judge erred in accepting the claim of the respondent for the grant of higher scale of pay with effect from December 2, 1969, and in ordering the grant of arrears of salary for a period of 38 months ?
Regarding (1) :  7.
It is the admitted position that the respondent had been appointed as an Inspector in the pay scale of Rs. 140-300 in December, 1969.
It is also not disputed that he had approached this Court for the first time in the year 1991 through Civil Writ Petition No 6538 of 1992.
This petition was duly disposed of by an ex parte order.
However, in pursuance to the directions given by the Bench, the Department had considered the representation submitted by the respondent and decided it vide order dated July 31, 1991.
Aggrieved by this order, the respondent had approached this Court through the writ petition out of which the present appeal has arisen.
8.
Admittedly, notice of this petition was given to the Department.
A reply was filed on their behalf.
In the written statement, no objection regarding delay had been raised.
In fact, even while considering the respondent's representation, the authorities had not rejected his claim on the ground of delay.
Thus, it is clear that the respondent's claim was not rejected by the Department on the ground of delay nor was such a plea raised in the written statement.
9.
It is a settled principle of law that it is the case pleaded which has to be found by the Court.
The Courts is normally reluctant to go into a matter which does not arise out of the pleadings of the parties.
In the matter of proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, it is specially necessary that a plea should be raised so that the concerned person is in a position to give an explanation.
If the Department had raised the plea of delay, it could have been possible for the respondent to give some explanation.
He could have produced the representation that had been submitted by him.
He could have also pointed out from the records that the matter was under consideration.
The respondent cannot today be confronted with the objection of delay as he was not afforded an opportunity to duly explain it at the time of filing of the pleadings.
Since a specific plea had not been raised, we are not inclined to accept the contention that letters patent appeal should be allowed on the ground of delay.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Not only that the Department did not reject the respondent's claim on the ground of delay but even at the time of the filing of the written statement, a specific plea was taken that the "matter is under consideration of the Chief Secretary/Finance Department for their sanction to convert the post of Inspector Food and Supplies held by him in his own pay scale of Head Clerk."
Thus, it was the case of the appellants that they were still considering the matter.
If the matter was under consideration as later as the year 1992, it would not be fair for the appellants to accuse the respondent of having approached the Court after a long delay.
On this basis, the plea raised on behalf of the appellants is liable to be rejected.
11.
In the light of the above, the answer to the first question is that the Department is not entitled to raise the plea of delay as a specific plea had not been raised.
Equally in view of the pleadings, the objection is wholly lacking in merit and cannot be sustained.
Regarding (2) :  12.
It was then contended that the respondent having applied for the post of Sub Inspector and Inspector, cannot be permitted to make a claim for a higher salary.
13.
This contention is misconceived.
It is undoubtedly correct that the respondent had requested the Department to promote him as an Inspector which post was in the scale of Rs. 90-200.
This, however, did not preclude him from claiming the scale of Rs. 225-500 to which he had become entitled by virtue of the fact that by a subsequent notification the pay scale had been revised retrospectively with effect from February 1, 1969.
Still further, vide letter dated July 6, 1968, the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana, had issued instructions to all departments by which decision of the Government with regard to absorption of staff and grant of salary had been conveyed.
In this letter, it was inter alia provided that the surplus staff "is intended, as far as possible, to be absorbed in equivalent grades."
Not only this, it was further stipulated that "where the grades are not equivalent, the employees will be permitted to carry their own grades of pay and if it is considered necessary to create a post of that grade by keeping the corresponding post in other grade in abeyance."
Thus, it is clear that the respondent was entitled to carry his own scale of pay to the post against which he was adjusted.
The department had to consider and create a post in the higher grade by keeping the original post in abeyance.
This was the mandate of the instructions.
The learned Single Judge has merely directed the appellants to carry out the obligation under the instructions.
14.
Mr. Bishnoi contended that the respondent did not fulfil the qualification for the post of Inspector.
Thus, he was not entitled to claim a scale sanctioned for the post.
15.
We have examined this plea.
It is the admitted position that while considering the claim of the respondent for appointment to the post of Inspector, the Department had relaxed the requirement regarding the academic qualification and approval of the competent authority had been obtained.
Once the qualification had been relaxed, the respondent was deemed to be duly qualified and cannot be denied the benefit ensuing from the instructions dated July 6, 1968.
In view of the above, even the second question is answered against the appellants.
16.
No other point has been raised.
17.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this appeal.
It is consequently dismissed.
Resultantly, even the interim order which had been passed by the Bench on October 18, 1996 by which the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge had been stayed shall stand vacated.
Since the respondent had retired even before the decision of the writ petition, he has suffered hardship for the last about 6 years.
His pension and gratuity had been fixed and granted without taking into consideration the higher scale of pay.
The needful shall now be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case of failure to do so, the respondent shall be entitled to payment with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual to the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.