TS Doabia, J - The departmental proceedings initiated under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, resulting in penalty of dismissal from service is being inflicted on the petitioner.
This order passed on 6th of Jan '92, has been placed on the record as Annexure `C'.
It is this order passed by the disciplinary authority which is the subject matter of challenge in this petition.
This order was challenged in appeal also.
The appeal stands dismissed.
Copy of this order has also been placed on the record of this file as annexure `D'.
The misconduct which was attributed to the petitioner was that on 28th April '90, the petitioner consumed liquor within the office premises.
After consuming liquor, he is said to have taken an official vehicle to a place to which he was not supposed to take.
Another driver namely Rajinder Kumar asked the petitioner not to do so.
The petitioner did not pay any heed to this.
This vehicle was used for carrying some civilians.
The vehicle met with an accident.
After this incident, the petitioner was not available.
He was traced only after 3rd day of the accident.
It was this misconduct which was attributed to the petitioner.
This misconduct was found to have been established.
On establishment of the above factual position, the petitioner came to be visited with penalty of dismissal from service which was to be a disqualification for future employment under the Government.
The above order passed by the disciplinary authority is being challenged inter alia on the following grounds:  (i) that the charge-sheet was not framed by the disciplinary authority in terms of the Rule 14 of the Rules referred to above; (ii) that the enquiry officer was not appointed by the disciplinary authority; (iii) the Enquiry Officer suo-moto framed the charge.
This, according to the petitioner, was not in accordance with the rules referred to above.
The specific plea is that the charges were to be framed by the disciplinary authority itself and this task was left to the enquiry officer.
This plea has been taken in para 8 of the petition.
Objections have been filed.
The stand taken is that instructions were issued by the disciplinary authority to the Garrison Engineer to complete the case upto the oral enquiry level and the memorandum containing charges duly approved by the disciplinary authority was forwarded to the Garrison Engineer for serving upon the petitioner.
This he was competent to do.
It is further stated in para 8(i) of the counter that charge sheet issued to the petitioner was not accepted by him.
As such, the oral enquiry came to be held.
So far as the merit of controversy is concerned, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner has been found guilty on the basis of the statement of another driver Rajinder Kumar.
It is urged that it was this driver who made an entry in the register, said to have been maintained by him.
It is urged that whatever was imputed in the article of charge has not been ultimately proved.
Particular reference has been made to the article of charge at Serial No. 1, wherein it is indicated that Kewal Krishan while acting as driver had consumed liquor in the office complex along with unauthorised civilian personnel and also with Rajinder Kumar MT driver on the evening of 28th April '90.
After consuming liquor, the petitioner used new Matador to transport the civilians to their destination.
It is further mentioned in the charge that on the gate, the chowkidar had seen Kewal Krishan driving the vehicle.
Entry is said to have been made by Rajinder Kumar MT driver that the vehicle is being taken out.
It is urged that if this statement in the charge sheet is taken note of and compared with the statement which was made by Rajinder Kumar MT driver before the enquiry officer, then it becomes apparent that there is clear contradiction.
The article of charges be noticed.
These are as under:-  "MES-507841 Sh. Kewal Krishan while functioning as MT Dvr Gde-II in the office of GE Udhampur Zone consumed liquor in the office complex along with some unauthorised and civilians personnels and Shri Rajinder Kumar, MT Dvr on the evening of 28 April 1990.
After consuming the liquor, Sh. Kewal Krishan used new Matador for unauthorised duty to leave the civilian friends to their destination on the said date near about 1630 hrs.
without permission of SO-I E/M or MTO.
Gate chowkidar had seen Sh. Kewal Krishan, MT Dvr taking/driving the vehicle.
Sh. Rajinder Kumar, MT Dvr on GE Udhampur Zone had made an entry in the gate register to take out the vehicle without the knowledge/permission of SO-I/E/M or MTO whereas this entry should have seen made by the incharge viz. Sh. Kewal Krishan, MT Dvr.
2.
The above acts on the part of Sh. Kewal Krishan, MT Dvr-II amount to devotion to duty and unbecoming of Govt. Servant and thereby violated the provision of Rule 3(i), (ii) and (iii) of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964.
Article of charge-II  1.
That MES-507841 Sh. Kewal Krishan, MT Dvr met with an accident on 28 April 1990 while driving the Matador along with civilians near Biron Bridge causing damage to the veh, death of one Bull and minor injuries to civilians accompanying with him.
The accidented vehicle was brought by Sh. Kewal Krishan, MT Dvr near Thomas Bridge, did not report the matter to senior officers and left the vehicle.
Capt.
Daya Singh, AGE E/M of GE 6350 had seen the accidented vehicle near Biron Bridge when offr.
was coming from Tawi Water Supply and he informed the gate chowkidar.
Sh. Jain E/M I and Sh. Sanjay Sharma SO-II E/M.
The accident was brought to the notice of CMP and they had submitted MP report received under 71 sub Area Provost unit letter No. PRO/46/A dated 10 May 1990 along with under mentioned damages to the new vehicle :  (a) Head light broken (b) Wind screen came out (c) Dents to radiator guard back side door shild from mount cover pipe damage.
(d) Dvr side dented (e) Self start  The statement given by Rajinder Kumar, driver, who has appeared as a witness is as under :- ".... Q Who are all the persons who drinking liquors ?
A.
The four personnel who had come from outside, i.e. School along with myself and Sh. Kewal Krishan were consuming liquor.
Q Where did the liquor come from ?
A.
We purchased from Chopra Bazar.
Q.
Why did you enter the vehicle in the register placed at main gate ?
When you had been telling MT driver Shri Kewal Krishan not to take the vehicle ?
A.
First he asked me to out the jeep which was on my charge, then I refused the same but since the Matador was on his charge and he could take the vehicle, therefore, I entered in the register..." That so far as the question as to whether the charge stands proved on the basis of material available on the record is concerned, I am of the opinion that on the basis of the evidence which has come on the record, the respondent-authority has taken a view to which no exception can be taken.
The charge against the petitioner was that he while performing the duties of a driver, consumed liquor in the office complex along with unauthorised civilians.
Rajinder Kumar, MT driver, was also party to this.
After consuming the liquor, he took new Matador in an unauthorised manner.
He wanted to transport his civilian friends to their destination.
The vehicle met with an accident.
The petitioner was not traceable for three days.
The statement of Rajinder Kumar, MT driver, on the basis of which statement, some contradictions are sought to be pointed out, may also be examined at this stage.
He is categoric that four persons had come from outside.
He has stated that they were having liquor along with the petitioner.
He gave an explanation as to why the vehicle in question was registered by him in the register before it was taken out.
He stated that the petitioner firstly wanted him to take the jeep which was in his charge.
When he refused to comply with this, the petitioner took the vehicle in his possession outside the office area.
When this was done, then he made an entry in the register.
Thus, the circumstances under which this entry came to be made by Rajinder Kumar, driver, has been duly explained.
This cannot lead to the conclusion that it was Rajinder Kumar who had taken the vehicle outside the complex.
The fact that the petitioner was missing for three days and the fact that he consumed liquor inside the office complex stands established.
In these circumstances, there is absolutely no room to upset the findings of fact recorded by the respondent-authorities.
Even otherwise, this court is not to act as an Appellate Authority and has not to reappreciate the findings of fact recorded by the disciplinary authority.
See Indian Oil Corporation v. Ashok Kumar Arora, AIR 1997 SC 1030 : 1997(2) SCT 52 (SC); and Govt. of Tamil Nadu v. KN Ramamurthy, AIR 1997 SC 3751 : 1997(4) SCT 76 (SC).
In both the decisions, it has been observed that the jurisdiction of this court in the matter of judicial review is very limited.
As such, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner with regard to the merits of the controversy is without any legs to stand.
The same is rejected.
The question as to whether the charge-sheet was framed by the Competent Authority or not, may now be examined.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the charge-sheet was framed by the Competent Authority.
The competent authority had directed the Enquiry Officer to complete the case upto the oral enquiry.
This is the stand taken in para 8(i) of the counter.
If this be the position, then the stand taken by the petitioner that the charges were not framed by the disciplinary authority lose significance.
Independently of the above, the Supreme Court in India in the case reported as Inspector General of Police and another v. Thavasiappan 1996(2) SCC 145 : 1996(3) SCT 681 (SC), has observed that the charge sheet need not to be issued by the authority empowered to impose the proposed penalty.
Same view was expressed in the case reported as State of M.P. v. Shardul Singh, 1970(1) SCC 108 which was relied upon in Thavasiappan's case.
In the above case, a departmental enquiry was initiated against a Sub Inspector of Police by the Superintendent of Police who after holding the enquiry sent the report to the Inspector General of Police who ultimately dismissed the Sub Inspector of Police from service.
The Sub Inspector of Police was appointed by the Inspector General of Police.
Upholding the action of Inspector General of Police, it was observed that Article 311 does not in turn require that the Authority empowered under that provision to dismiss or terminate an employee should frame the charges or should itself initiate or conduct the enquiry preceding the dismissal or removal of the officer or even that that enquiry should be done at its instance.
The only right guaranteed to a civil servant under that provision is that "he shall not be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed."
In another case reported as Transport of Commissioner v A Radha Krishna Moorthy, 1995(1) SCC 322 : 1995(1) SCT 728 (SC), the Supreme Court of India held that initiation of disciplinary enquiry can be by an officer subordinate to the appointing authority.
Same view stands reiterated in the decision reported as Director General, ESI and another v. T Abdul Razak, 1996(4) SCT 272 (SC) : 1996(4) SCC 708.
It was observed that it is not necessary that the authority competent to impose the penalty must initiate the disciplinary proceedings and the proceedings can be initiated by an inferior authority who may be an officer subordinate to the appointing authority.
See also 1997(11) SCC 17.
Thus, I am of the opinion that :  (i) the charges in this case were formulated by the competent authority.
These were communicated through the Enquiry Officer, who was directed to proceed upto the stage of oral enquiry; (ii) the enquiry can be initiated by an authority subordinate to the appointing authority and this authority can frame the charges; (iii) on merits, the case stands fully proved against the petitioner.
There is no room for interference.
In view of the above, this petition is found without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.