TS Doabia, J - The petitioner as on today is an Accounts Officer (Gazetted) grade-II in the Border Security Force.
He was born in the month of October, 1942.
He thus attained the age or 55 years in October, 1997.
He should have superannuated in the month of October, 1997 but for extension granted to him.
This extension was granted in terms of rule 43(b) of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules of 1955.
This order was passed on 30th Sept 1997.
Para 2 of this order recites that the officer will retire from service on expiry of said period on 31st March, 1997.
Apprehending that he would not get further extension, he has approached this Court.
He submits that he falls within the category of "Civilians in Defence Forces" and therefore the age of retirement should be taken as 58 years.
As above is the only aspect of matter which is required to be taken note of, therefore, facts dealing with the service profile of the petitioner have not been noted in detail.
2.
The petitioner joined the service on 5th of Nov., 1966 as Upper Division Clerk.
In the year 1969 the Ministerial Cadre in the Border Security Force came to be combatised.
All these officials who came to be combatised came to be governed by the Border Security Force Act and the rules framed under it.
The petitioner submits that as any other civilian holding civil post in connection with the affairs of the Union of India, he should be permitted to continue in service as a matter of right upto the age of 58 years.
He submits that by resorting to the procedure of combatising the age of retirement cannot be taken as 55 years.
The petitioner submits that he has good record and therefore his case should be considered for grant of extension.
In para 5 of the petition instances have been quoted.
The names of the officers who have been granted extension have been indicated.
In a nutshell as indicated above, the petitioner submits that he has a right to continue in service upto the age of 58 years.
In any case he submits that he should be granted extension as has been done in the case of other employees.
Objections have been filed.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents is to the effect that when Border Security Force was raised, there were two cadres to look after the Force.
One was Secretarial staff; this was posted at Force Headquarters at New Delhi.
The other was non-secretarial staff who were posted in Field Formations.
Both the cadres were civilians in character.
In the year 1968 a decision was taken that all non-secretarial staff would stand combatised.
They were to be provided with ration money and uniform.
Not only a uniform was to be provided but they were to be assigned a rank also.
It is accordingly, submitted that on the above decision having been taken and the Civilian Secretarial Staff having been combatised, all Civilians came to be governed by Border Security Force Act, 1968 and the rules framed under it.
It is further submitted that so far as service conditions are concerned, these came to be governed by Central Reserve Police Forces Rules of 1955.
It is submitted that these rules were made applicable to the men of the Border Security Forces.
It is stated that under these rules a Member of the service retires on attaining the age of 55 years.
Reference has been made to rule 43(a).
For facility of reference this rule is reproduced below :-  "Rule 43(a).
Retirement of a member of the Force shall take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month in which such member attains the age of 55 years."
It is the further the case of respondents that this aspect of the matter was considered by the IVth Pay Commission.
There was a proposal to retain the age of retirement at 58 years.
There was a proposal to the effect that in the case of Ministerial Staff the age of retirement should be 58 years.
However, ultimately a decision was taken that all combatised ministerial staff should be granted rank pay scales thereby bringing them at par with other combatised personnel.
The requisite policy decision taken in this regard has been placed on the record as annexure R-2 and R-3.
It is in these circumstances it is pointed out that the age of retirement of Ministerial Staff has been retained at 55 years.
4.
The further stand taken by the respondent-Union of India is to the effect that the petitioner was given the rank of Assistant Commandant.
In the case of Assistant Commandant, the age of retirement is 55 years.
The reliance in this regard has been placed on rule 9 of the Border Security Force (Seniority, Promotion and Superannuation of Officers) Rules, 1978.
This rule is being noticed as under :-  "9.
Superannuation Retirement age of Officers holding a rank higher than that of Commandant shall be fifty-eight years; and for officers of the other rank it shall be fifty- five years.
Provided that the Central Government may, in very special circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing extend the retirement age of :- (a) an officer of the rank higher than that of Commandant, for a period of one year at a time but not in any case beyond the age of sixty years; (b) Officers of other rank for a period of one year at a time, but not in any case beyond the age of fifty-eight years."
Thus the case projected by the respondents is :- (i) That the petitioner stands combatised.
(ii) He is governed by Border Security Force Act of 1968 and the rules framed thereunder.
(iii) That in the matter of age of retirement the petitioner is governed by rule 43 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules of 1955.
(iv) That even under rule 9 of the Border Security Force (Seniority, Promotion and Superannuation of Officers) Rules 1978, the petitioner's age of retirement is 55 years.
This is because :- (a) The petitioner is holding the rank of Assistant Commandant.
(b) In the case of Assistant Commandant the age of retirement under the above rule has been fixed at 55 years.
After having taken note of pleadings of the parties and after having heard the petitioner, who has appeared in person and Sh. Ahluwalia, Law Officer, for the Union of India, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the contention raised by the petitioner.
5.
The petitioner stands combatised.
He is to be governed by the Rules framed under the Border Security Force Act, 1968 and other rules applicable to the Force.
Rules framed under Central Reserve Police Force Act are also applicable.
Under Rule 43 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, the age of retirement has been fixed at 55 years.
The same is the position when rule 9 of the Border Security Force (Seniority, Promotion and Superannuation of Officers) Rules, 1978 is taken note of.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner as a ministerial staff is also holding the rank of an Assistant Commandant; he has been given uniform also.
As such his age of retirement would be 55 years.
6.
The argument raised by the petitioner that the respondent-authorities have been granted extension and therefore extension should be granted in his case also now be examined.
In the decision dated 6th of Jan, 1986, copy whereof is annexure `L', it has been provided as under :-  "It was only incidental that this resulted in bringing down their retirement age from 58 to 55 years.
DG has, therefore, desired that the powers to grant of extension should be exercised liberally and extension should be denied only in such cases where the individual is found to be an undesirable type or totally unfit to continue in further service.
In order to ensure that uniform policy is followed in all the Frontiers for rejection of cases of extension in service of ministerial staff details of such cases where the Frontier proposes to reject the request for extension of should be sent to Force Hqrs well in time along with the Service Records of the individual concerned."
Under the above memorandum grant of extension was a routine, non-grant was an exception.
Later on different decision was taken by the respondent- authorities.
Copy of this has been placed on the record as annexure `F'.
The relevant paragraph is being noticed as under :-  "Therefore, in light of latest instructions the question regarding grant of extension in service beyond the age of 55 years to the combatised ministerial staff in BSF has been re-considered and it has now been decided that the combatised ministerial staff will retire at the age of 55 years like other GD personnel.
Henceforth no extension in service beyond the age of superannuation will be given to any member of the combatised ministerial staff by the IG Frontier, Exemptions can be made only for officials with outstanding record, but such cases may be recommended by the Frontier/Trg.
Institutions to FHQ for consideration."
Thus extensions are not to be granted as a routine.
These are to be granted only to those officers who have outstanding record.
7.
The above two memorandums make it apparent that the age of retirement of the category to which the petitioner belongs is 55 years.
This supports the basic contention raised by the respondents.
Only in exceptional circumstances, extension can be granted.
Earlier grant of extension was a rule, now it is an exception.
The case of the petitioner has been sent to the Higher authorities.
As to whether extension is to be granted or not is a matter on which some decision is going to be given.
As to whether extension should be granted or not is a matter which falls within the domain of administrative authorities.
The record of the concerned officer is to be perused.
If the record of the officer permits grant of extension then the same would be granted.
This Court is not to act as a superior Administrative Authority with a view to determine as to whether extension is required to be given or not.
This is a matter which as indicated above falls within the purview of administrative decision to be taken by the Executive Authorities.
Judicial review is not permissible under these matters.
It is further hoped that such a decision would be taken before 31st of March, 1998.
8.
Before parting with this order, another aspect of the matter may also be noticed.
The petitioner was initially governed by Rules which fixed the age of retirement at 58 years.
By combatising the petitioner and he having become member of the regular Force, his age of retirement came to be reduced to 55 years.
To this no exception can be taken.
The Governmental authorities are within their rights to adopt this course.
In K Nagraj v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1985 SC 551, the age of retirement was brought down from 58 to 55 years.
The course so adopted by the Government of Andhra Pradesh was held to be in accordance with law and within the four corners of rule making Legislative power.
It was observed that the power conferred by the Article 309 of the Constitution is of a Legislative character.
This power is of a plenary nature and can be exercised retrospectively also.
Therefore, no fault can be found with the course adopted by the respondent-authorities in bringing down the age of retirement from 58 to 55 years.
9.
The fact that the ministerial secretarial staff was combatised and was given all benefits which were available to the members of the Force, also stands recognised by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Union of India v. B Prasad BSO, AIR 1997 SC 1920 : 1997(2) SCT 691 (SC).
The petitioner in this case was enjoying the rank of Assistant Commandant.
He was given uniform also.
As such, he would be governed by the rule of retirement which fixes the age of retirement at 55 years.
10.
The Rules of retirement was also considered by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Union of India v. SS Ranade, 1995(4) SCC 462 : 1995(3) SCT 626 (SC).
It was observed that all officers who are enjoying the rank of Assistant Commandant have to retire at the age of 55 years.
It is only a Commandant and above who would retire at the age of 58 years.
11.
When the judicial precedents notice above are taken notice of, nothing can be said in favour of the petitioner.
This petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.