M Katju, J - Heard Sri Vineet Saran, learned counsel for the petitioner, learned Additional Advocate General and Sri HR Mishra for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Sri Murlidhar and Sri V.C.
Tripathi for respondent No. 3.
2.
The petitioner by means of this writ petition has challenged the orders dated 2671997 and 20.1.1998.
3.
The facts of this case are that the petitioner claimed to be the Chairman of the Committee of Management of the UP Co-operative Federation which is a State Level Apex Co-operative Society registered under the UP Co-operative Societies Act, 1965.
The petitioner was suspended by order dated 26797 against which he filed a writ petition No. 25346 of 1997, Chandra Pal Singh and Committee of Management v. State of UP and others which was dismissed as withdrawn by order dated 6897, copy of which is Annexure-5 to the petition.
Subsequently it appears that the petitioner filed a representation praying for withdrawal of the suspension order and that representation has been rejected by the impugned order dated 20198, hence this writ petition.
4.
A perusal of the order dated 6897 of this Court shows that the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn without giving liberty to the petitioner to file a fresh writ petition.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in AIR 1987 SC Page 88, Sarguja Transport Service v. S.T.A. Tribunal and in 1997(2) SCC 534 para 13, Avnish Nagra v. Navodaya Vidyalaya, that if writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn without liberty to file a fresh petition then a second writ petition for the same relief is barred.
Sri Vineet Saran, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the above mentioned rulings do not apply as the petitioner has challenged the order dated 20198 which is the order rejecting the representation praying for withdrawal of the suspension order.
In our opinion, the order dated 20198 has only affirmed the earlier suspension order dated 26797 and hence the submission of Sri Vineet Saran is not tenable, and this second petition is not maintainable.
5.
Sri Saran then has sought to challenge the deletion of the second proviso to Section 35(2) of the UP Co-operative Societies Act by Amending Act No. 1 of 1997.
Prior to this amendment, this second proviso to Section 35(2) stated that if proceedings under sub-section (2) of Section 35 could not be completed within six months then it will be deemed to have been dropped and the suspended committee of management shall be re-instated.
Sri Vineet Saran challenged the deletion of the second proviso to Section 35(2) on the ground that now there is no time limit for continuing the suspension and hence there is arbitrariness.
We cannot accept his contention because it is settled law that if no time is fixed for doing something it is implicit that it shall be done within a reasonable time, vide Regional Provident Fund v. M/s. KT Rolling, AIR 1995 SC 943 Para 4 : 1995(2) SCT 676 (SC).
Hence we uphold the constitutional validity of Amending Act No. 1 of 1997.
Moreover, it is always open to a person to approach this Court for a direction that the proceeding be completed expeditiously.
We have also been informed by learned Additional Advocate General that nine members of the Committee of Management had approached the Lucknow Bench of this Court in writ petition No. 2805 of 1997, Anil Kumar and others v. State of UP and others against the impugned suspension order, and this petition is still pending.
In our opinion, this amounts to bench hopping which cannot be appreciated.
6.
On the facts and circumstances of the case we direct that the enquiry against Committee of Management must be completed within three months from today positively, and the petitioner and the other members of the committee of management shall co-operate with the enquiry and shall not seek adjournments.
Photo copies of any documents required by the petitioner shall be supplied to him within 10 days of his demanding the same.
The petitioner will be given opportunity of hearing in the enquiry.
7.
The writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.