THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner, who is seeking to quash the order dismissing him from service in this writ petition was enrolled as a Constable in the State of Punjab on 8.11.1981.
During 1986-90 he was posted in Anti- Terrorist Staff.
While so, certain complaints have been received against the petitioner by his superiors.
Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana on being satisfied that in the interest of security of the State, it is not expedient to hold an inquiry against the petitioner, dismissed him from service in exercise of his powers conferred by Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 read with rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India vide order dated 2851990 (Annexure P-1)  2.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range, who dismissed the same on 2131991 (vide Annexure P-3).
The revision petition filed by the petitioner was also dismissed by the Inspector General of Police on 26121991 (vide Annexure P-5).
3.
Challenging the above orders, the petitioner filed this writ petition to quash the same by issuing a writ or cetiorari.
4.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that there is no material to dispense with the enquiry under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, there is a total non-application of the mind by the Senior Superintendent of Police while passing the original order.
In support of his argument, the learned Counsel placed reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others reported in 1991(1) SLR 180 ; 1991(1) SCT 125 (SC) and argued that there is no material justifying to dispense with the inquiry.
Therefore, the order of dismissal is liable to be quashed.
5.
It has been held in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) that the decision to dispense with the departmental enquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those to support the order to show that this satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned officer.
It is, therefore, necessary to see whether there is any material before the Superintendent of Police passing the original order which is the subject matter of this writ petition.
6.
In the written statement, the respondent contended that the Punishing Authority, who was at the spot is well equipped with the facts of the case, thought it fit and proper to invoke the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India considering that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the departmental enquiry and that the activities of the petitioner were such as to warrant his dismissal from service and it was not expedient to hold departmental enquiry against the petitioner in the interest of security of the State.
7.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, placed before me the file relating to the case of the petitioner.
The said file contains a letter dated 22.5.1990 addressed to the Senior Superintendent of Police by the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
This letter clearly shows that he petitioner was indulged in poppy husk which is a narcotic substance and also threatened the people.
It further discloses that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists and leaking out the departmental secret information to the terrorists and the people are afraid of speaking against him and to give evidence against him and hs associates.
Therefore, he submitted a report that no departmental action could be taken against the petitioner and two other police officials.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana considered the material placed before him and on a consideration of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police alongwith the other material on record, the petitioner was dismissed from service after being satisfied that it is not possible to hold a departmental inquiry against the petitioner and that the continuance of the petitioner in the Police Force is not conducive to the interests of the State.
8.
After going through the file placed before me, I am convinced that this is not a case of non-application of mind by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
The satisfaction of the authority concerned is based on objective facts and it is not the outcome of the whims and fancies of the Senior Superintendent of Police.
This case squarely comes within the parameters laid down by the Supreme Court in Union Territory, Chandigarh v. Mohinder Singh, AIR 1997(1) 1201 : 1997(2) SCT 39 (SC) wherein their Lordships held as follows:-  "Clause (3) of the Article 311, it may be noticed, declares that where a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable as contemplated by clause (2), the decision of the authority empowered to dismiss such person shall be final on that question.
The Tribunal has not referred to clause (3) at all in its order.
We are not suggesting that because of clause (3) the Court or the Tribunal should completely shut its eyes.
Nor are we suggesting that in every case the Court should blindly accept the recital in terms of the said proviso contained in the order of dismissal.
Be that as it may, without going into the question of extent and scope of judicial review in such a matter, we may look to the facts of this case.
The Superintendent of Police, Intelligence, has reported that the respondent "is a terror in the area" and more important, in his very presence, the respondent "intimated (intimidated ?)
the complianant Shri Ranjit Singha who appeared to be visibly terrified of this Sub Inspector".
It is also reported that the other persons who were arrested with Ranjit Singh and who were present there, immediately left his office terrified by the threats held out by the respondent.
In such a situation and keeping in view that all this was happening in the year 1991 in the State of Punjab the Senior Superintendent of Police cannot be said to be not justified in holding that it is not reasonably practical to hold an inquiry against the respondents."
In this view of the matter, I do not find any ground to quash the impugned order of dismissal dated 2851990 (Annexure P-1) and the consequential orders dated 2131991 (Annexure P-3) and dated 26121991 (Annexure P-5)  9.
The Writ petition, therefore, fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.