HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15790 of 1989, 5298 of 1986, 2594 and 2595 of 1992.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 15790 of 1989.
2.
The petitioners joined as Clerks or as Accounts Assistant in the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh (hereinafter called "the Markfed") on various scales of pay prior to 111978.
It appears that general scales of pay for Clerks in Markfed up to 111978 was Rs. 110-250/-, although the petitioners joined on a lower scale of pay.
The promotional post from Clerk was to the post of Assistant, Accounts Assistant/Store/Time Keeper in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400/- which was raised to Rs. 525-825/-.
It is the petitioner's case that whereas the Assistants had been given the higher scale of Rs. 570-1080/-, the Accounts Assistant such as the petitioners and the other categories such as Store Keepers/Time Keepers/Godown Keepers were retained in the pay scale of Rs. 525-825/-.
It is the admitted position that whereas the petitioners are now in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100/-, the Assistants who were initially given the scale of Rs. 570-1080/- now stand in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200/-.
The petitioners are aggrieved by the fact that though the Assistants/Accounts Assistant, Store Keepers, Time Keepers and Godown Keepers had at one time been equated for the purpose of pay inasmuch as they were in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400/-, yet on the revision of pay scales, the Assistants had been given preferential treatment, whereas the other categories had been left out.
The petitioners as also others similarly situated, accordingly, filed a representation before the Markfed, claiming that once identical scales of pay had been given to the various categories of employees aforementioned, parity could not be disturbed on the subsequent revision of pay scales.
It was also represented that they be given the pay scales applicable to Assistants in the Punjab Government Secretariat and other A Class offices in the State (i.e. Rs. 570-1080/-).
The matter was referred to the Anomalies Committee, but after consideration, the representation was rejected, inter alia, on the ground that the demand for parity in the pay scales was being sought with the posts of Assistants in the Punjab Civil Secretariat or other A Class offices of the Punjab Government, but as no such post existed in those set ups, no anomaly could be spelt out and as there were no posts in the Head Office of the Markfed in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400/- prior to the revision of pay scales for this reason as well, the scale of Rs. 570-1080/- was not admissible to the petitioners.
Aggrieved thereby, the present set of writ petitions have been filed by various categories of employees on the principle that as pay parity had been maintained earlier, the same should be maintained throughout.
3.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the Markfed.
In the written statement, the reasons advanced by the Anomalies Committee have been reiterated.
It has been pleaded that there had been a recasting of the cadre in the Accounts Section and the petitioners who were, as a matter of fact, Accounts Assistants (designated as Assistant Accountants) were not entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/- which was permissible only to Accountants B Grade in terms of the decision of the Markfed Annexure P-2 dated 26111979.
4.
A replication was, thereafter, put in by the petitioners and it has once again been pleaded that the promotional avenue from Clerks was to Assistant/Accounts Assistant, Store Keeper, Time Keeper etc. and as the promotion was only a fortuitous circumstance depending upon the number of vacancies and seniority as a Clerk, the mere fact that one Clerk was promoted as a Assistant, whereas another one was promoted as a Store Keeper, could not be taken as a good reason to deprive the employees equally situated of similar pay scales.
It has, accordingly, been urged that this anomaly should not be allowed to continue.
5.
A rejoinder to the replication has been put in by the Markfed and the fact that a Clerk was liable to be promoted to one of the posts mentioned above has not been denied, but an attempt has been made to show that the petitioners had not been Clerks in the pay scale of Rs. 110-250/- prior to 111978 and as such, they could not claim parity subsequently.
It has also been averred once again (reliance has been placed on the various documents put on the record) that as per the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Markfed that as there had been a major recasting of the Accounts Branch and re-designation of posts with identified duties, functions and qualifications, the petitioner's claim to pay parity was no longer relevant.
6.
Mr. MM Kumar, the learned counsel for the petitioners has raised a two fold argument before me.
He has first argued that at one stage, parity had been maintained in the pay scale admissible to Assistants, Store Keepers, Time Keepers and Godown Keepers etc., and as such on revision of pay scales w.e.f.
111978 all those employees who had been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 525- 825/- were entitled to the pay scale of Assistants which was Rs. 570-1080/- and to the further revision thereafter on that basis.
In support of this plea, Mr. Kumar has relied upon Haryana State Biologists Association v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(4) RSJ 444 : 1994(3) SCT 198 (P&H)and Ashok Rathi v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(2) SCT 321 (P&H).
He has in addition urged that as per the decision taken by the Markfed as also the State Government, pay parity between similar posts in the Markfed and of the State Government was to be retained and as the Accounts Assistants in the Punjab Government were getting a pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/- (as would be evident from Annexure P-10 dated 13th September, 1988), the petitioners too, were entitled to that pay scale.
7.
As against this, Mr. Anil Malhotra, the learned counsel for the Markfed has pointed out that the petitioners had not been equated at any time whatsoever in the pay scale of Rs. 110-250/- and as they had been working on the plant side, they could not claim parity with the general side as these were two separate cadres.
He has also urged that even assuming that there was parity of pay scales at one point of time, the same could be set aside and modified by the authorities concerned as held in State of UP and others v. Ministerial Karamchari Sangh, 1998(1) Supreme Court Cases, 422.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
9.
To my mind, the argument raised by Mr. Kumar is to be accepted.
It is not disputed by the respondent that the promotional post from the feeder cadre of Clerk was to the post of Accounts Assistants, Store Keeper, Time Keeper or Godown Keeper and that promotion from this cadre, was a purely fortuitous happen stance, but it was nevertheless provided at the time of revision of pay scale w.e.f 111978 that the Assistants were to get a pay scale of Rs. 570- 1080/-, whereas the other categories were awarded a pay scale of Rs. 525-825/-.
To my mind, no cogent reasons have been spelt out as to why this has been done.
It was in this situation that a Division Bench of this Court in The Haryana State Biologists Association's case (supra) observed as under :-  "After going through the pleadings of the parties and various judgments cited on their behalf, we find that once a parity in the pay scale of the employees in two categories is granted, the same cannot be withdrawn and the parity disturbed.
Once the State is shown to have made a conscious decision of providing parity in the pay scales of employees falling in two different cadres, they cannot be permitted to deprive one class of category by disturbing the parity.
Any order passed or action taken which results in deprivation of the parity in the pay scales would be discriminatory being violative of the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution requiring interference."
To my mind, the observations clearly apply to the facts of the present case.
The observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ministerial Karamchari Sangh's case (supra) were made on a completely different set of facts and cannot be universally applied.
The decision aforesaid was based on the premise that the down-gradation of the pay scale in the case of one category of employees was justified on account of the difference in the educational qualifications between the two categories of employees.
In the present case, however, the facts are substantially different.
10.
The second argument of Mr. Kumar also has equal merit.
In this connection, it is to be noted that in paragraphs 1(b) and 4 of the replication filed by the petitioners, it has been specifically mentioned that there were posts of Accounts Assistants in the Punjab Government and reference in this connection has also been made to Annexure P-8, an extract from the report of the Punjab Pay Commission 1977-79 and to Annexure P-10, a decision of the State Government asking for the removal of anomalies in the pay scales "only strictly as per government pattern".
Further the averments in the replication are as under :-  1(b) That the contents of sub-para (b) are absolutely wrong and vehemently denied.
The decision to revise the pay scale is not an administrative decision as is sought to be projected by respondent No. 1 in this para.
According to the common cadre rules, the Managing Director has been empowered to revise the pay scale of the staff working in the Markfed on the same pattern as that of the Punjab Government.
However, respondent No. 2 has given a step-motherly treatment to the petitioners.
Despite the fact that there are recommendations of the Punjab Government (Annexure P-8), the Anomaly Committee preferred to record to the contrary that there was no post of Account Assistant/Assistant Accountant to which the case of the petitioners could be compared.
Nothing can be far from the truth as Annexure P-8 specifically takes a note of the post of Account Assistant."
4.
That the contents of para 4 of the written statement as stated are absolutely wrong and vehemently denied.
In the Common Cadre Service Rules, 1990, it has been categorically provided that fixation of pay of the members of service shall be regulated under the provisions of Punjab Civil Service Rules as applicable to the State Government Employees.
Rule 33 is reproduced hereunder for the facility of the reference :-  "33.
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in these Rules, fixation of pay of the members of service(s) shall be regulated under the provisions of Punjab Civil Services Rules as applicable to the State Government employees".
It is significant that these facts have not been denied in the rejoinder to the replication leading to the inference that the posts of Accounts Assistants did exist in the Punjab Government.
It is, therefore, apparent that the primary reason that weighed with the Anomalies Committee in refusing to accept the representation filed by the petitioners is based on a wrong assumption.
I am of the opinion that once the Punjab Government as also the respondent had taken a decision to give equated pay scales to the employees of the Markfed and similarly situated offices in the Punjab Government, the petitioners could not be denied their legitimate claim.
11.
These petitions are, accordingly, allowed and the petitioners are granted the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/- w.e.f.
111978 and to Rs. 1500-2640/- w.e.f 111986.
Mr. Kumar's further request that these petitioners should get the benefit of the subsequent pay revision on the reasoning adopted above cannot be accepted at this stage, for the reason that there is no separate prayer to this effect and that the respondent's stand is that there has been a re- casting of the cadres with new qualifications, duties etc.
The petitioners are, however, given liberty to pursue this matter in any forum including this Court, if so advised.
A direction is also issued to the respondent to refix the pay and also pay all the arrears due to the petitioners on that account within a period of six months from the date a certified copy of this order is made available to them.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.