HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who is the daughter of Lt. Col. AK Saini, a serving member of the Indian Army, has challenged paragraph 2 of the Corrigendum, Annexure P-7, dated November 5, 1997, whereby it has been provided that candidates having passed the 10+2 class from Chandigarh (Union Territory) as well as from any Institute outside the State of Punjab were not eligible for admission to the MBBS Course of the Sri Guru Ram Dass Institute of Medical Sciences & Research, Amritsar.
It is the petitioner's case that on account of the exigencies of her father's employment, she, though a domicile of the State of Punjab, had been unable to pass her 12th class Examination from the Punjab State as her father stood posted in Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh) during the relevant period.
The petitioner took the entrance test for admission to the said course which was conducted by the Panjabi University, Patiala on 27th May, 1997, and the result whereof was declared on 10th June, 1997.
On 24th October, 1997, the admission notice (Annexure P-4) was published in the Tribune and the petitioner being fully eligible in accordance therewith as also with the admission brochure that had been issued by the respondent-Institute, applied for admission on 5th November, 1997.
The respondent-Institute, however, issued a corrigendum (Annexure P-7) on 5th November, 1997, amending Clause 2(c) of the academic qualifications given in the admission brochure with the result that the petitioner become ineligible for being considered for admission to the MBBS Course.
2.
While dealing with an identical situation in C.W.P.
No. 2731 of 1998 (Kiran Dixit v. chandigarh Administrative and another) decided on 2731990, with respect to a Notification issued by the Union Territory, Chandigarh, for admission to the MBBS Course to be conducted by the Government Medical Collage, sarai Building, Sector 32-A, Chandigarh, I have held that the condition, such as the one impugned in the present proceedings, such as the one impugned in the present proceedings, which has the effect of making a 100 per cent reservation with respect to local candidates on the basis of domicile and institutional preference, is bad in the light of various judgment of this Court as well as of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
To my mind, the ratio of the aforesaid judgment is application to the facts and of the aforesaid judgment is applicable to the facts and of the present case to that extent.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that Paragraph 2 of the Annexure-7 cannot be sustained.
3.
Mr. HS Mattewal, Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent-Institute has, however, pointed out that in Anant Madan v. State of Haryana and others 1995(1) S.L.R.
714 a condition such as the present one has been upheld by the Supreme Court.
As already discussed in Kiran Dixit's case (supra), the clause interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court was substantially different and made an exception in favour of certain categories of employees posted outside the State of Haryana on account of exigencies of service.
In the case in hand, no exception has been carved out with the result that 100 per cent reservation has been made on the basis of domicile as also institutional preference with respect to admissions to the respondent-Institute.
4.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has also argued that the admission brochure had been issued by the respondent-Institute stipulating that only those candidates were ineligible to seek admission who had done their 10+2 Examination from the Union Territory, Chandigarh, but vide Annexure P-7, paragraph 2 had been introduced by way of a corrigendum whereby even those candidates who had done their 10+2 Examination from any place outside the State of Punjab were rendered ineligible and, as much, this corrigendum was bad in law, as no amendment could be made after the admission brochure had been published.
5.
As against this, Mr. Mattewal has pointed out that the petitioner had submitted her form on 5th November, 1997, whereas the corrigendum Annexure P-7 had been put on the notice board a day earlier, and published on 5th November, 1997, with the result that the admission brochure had not attained the sanctity of binding the respondent-Institute or the candidates to the stipulations contained therein.
To my mind, Mr. Mattewal's argument has merit.
The corrigendum has to be read along with the admission brochure in the light of the facts set out above.
It is apparent that it had been issued a day prior to the date on which the petitioner had submitted her application form.
6.
Mr. Sibal has also urged that the petitioner had sought admission against the payment seats and as the payment sought from the petitioner on that basis was contrary to the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishan JP v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993(1) S.L.R.
SC 743 : 1993(2) SCT 511 (SC), as explained in Dr TMA Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka and another, AIR 1996(5) SCC Cases 8 : 1995(4) SCT 447 (SC), demand could not be justified.
This matter is also the subject matter of a dispute in certain other writ petitions and as such, it would not be proper for me to give an opinion in the present case.
However, liberty is left to the petitioner to raise this point in some other proceeding that may arise and the fact that it has been urged in the present petition, would not preclude the petitioner from doing so.
7.
This petition is accordingly allowed; paragraph 2 of annexure P-7 is quashed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.