VS Aggarwal, J - Respondent No. 2 had been appointed as a conductor on 1631985.
He was given appointments after giving notional breaks upto 171987.
Thereafter his services were terminated.
A reference was made under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act (for short `the Act').
Respondent No. 2 had contended that no notice or charge-sheet had been issued.
He had not been given a month's notice nor was he retrenched.
No retrenchment compensation was paid in terms of Section 25-F of the Act.
The petitioner had controverted the assertions.
It was asserted that respondent No. 2 was appointed on temporary basis against the vacancy of one Moti Ram who was placed under suspension.
The services of respondent No. 2 had been dis- continued on 171987, when they were no more required.
He was kept in the waiting list for appointment as and when any vacancy arises.
2.
The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court held that no retrenchment compensation was paid.
Respondent No. 2 had worked for more than 240 days.
He was, therefore, entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
The petitioner had challenged the said award passed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Gurgaon.
3.
It was not being disputed that in a similar case this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11753 of 1992 decided on 791995 had held :-  "The termination of service of the workman on 171987 was retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act and, therefore, it was mandatory for the petitioners to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act before his services could be dispensed with.
This not having been done, the Labour Court was justified in directing the reinstatement of the workman with full back wages.
No fault can thus be found with the award.
The workman was being employed against suspension/leave vacancies and in case the Department has no regular post vacant against which the services of the petitioner can be regularised, it will be open to it to retrench him in accordance with law."
It is obvious from the facts narrated that termination of services of respondent No. 2 was retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
It was mandatory for the petitioner to comply with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
This was not done.
In these circumstances, the impugned award was justified.
Since the respondent No. 2 was employed against a suspension/leave vacancy, therefore, in case department has no regular vacancy against which respondent No. 2 could be regularised, it could retrench his services in accordance with law.
It would be desirable to accommodate him, however, if there is a vacancy.
4.
Subject to aforesaid, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.