Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On April 30, 1975, the petitioner represented to the School that he is an ex-serviceman and a Matriculate.
He requested for appointment as a Physical Training Instructor.
On May 1, 1975, the School appointed him subject to the condition that he must produce the Matriculation certificate.
In spite of repeated communications during the last two decades, the petitioner has not produced the certificate.
In this situation, the School has not given the petitioner the benefit of the revised scale of pay and allowances.
Consequently, the petitioner has filed this petition.
He complains that the action of the respondent-School in not giving him the benefits of the revised scale of pay, dearness allowance, house rent allowance, city compensatory allowance and provident fund etc. wef.
the date of the completion of the period of probation, is illegal and arbitrary.
Is it so ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner applied for the post of a Physical Training Instructor to the Principal of Mukand Lal National Senior Secondary School, Yamuna Nagar.
He submitted that he was an ex-serviceman and was a Matriculate.
Vide order dated May 1, 1975, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, the petitioner was offered appointment as a Physical Training Instructor in the pay scale of Rs. 120-5-250 with usual allowances.
He was placed on probation for a period of two years.
In this order, it was categorically stipulated that before assuming the charge of his post, the petitioner will be required to produce inter alia the attested copy of the Matriculation Certificate.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner did not produce the certificate, he was allowed to join duty.
On the revision of pay scales, the petitioner was placed in the scale of Rs. 480-760.
On May 1, 1990, the pay scale was further revised to Rs. 1,200-2,040 with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioner states that "arrears on account of revision of pay scales as also on account of Additional Dearness Allowances, House Rent Allowance, City Compensatory Allowance......as were given to the other similarly situated Physical Training Instructors working in the respondent- School" have not been given to him.
Vide letter dated July 15, 1993, the petitioner was asked to submit proof of his educational qualification failing which his appointment was liable to be treated as irregular.
He was asked to even show if he was eighth class pass so that the approval regarding his appointment could be obtained from the Education Department.
Vide letter dated August 14, 1993, he was directed to submit the proof so as to enable the School to claim grant regarding the post of Physical Training Instructor held by him from the Department.
The petitioner submits that "although qualifications prescribed for a post are no doubt a factor to be reckoned with at the time of initial entry into service but once the appointment is made and the appointee allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be harsh and hard to deny him the benefits of the post by alleging that the employee does not fulfil the requisite qualifications".
He further submits that "the question of obtaining grant is the responsibility of the employer.
The petitioner is entitled to all the benefits sought by him in view of the terms and conditions of appointment as also the provisions of the Act and Rules".
Vide letter dated August 31, 1993, the petitioner informed the respondent-School that his educational qualifications were "Indian Army Certificate Class II in Hindi, English and his Army Trade/Class was D-II (M.P.) with 15 years military service and that the same had been recognised by the Haryana Govt. as equivalent to be middle i.e. 8th class vide letter No. 47/25/80-Edu III(5) dt. 27.3.1985".
According to the petitioner, he had completed the period of probation satisfactorily on May 1, 1977.
Consequently, it was incumbent on the School as also the District Education Officer to start deduction for the Contributory Provident Fund.
However, the deduction was started only with effect from the year 1991.
He further states that 97% Dearness Allowance had been released and paid to the teachers working in aided schools.
However, "the petitioner has only been paid 51% Dearness Allowance i.e. uptil 171991 and thereafter the remaining instalments of Dearness Allowance as have been paid to other employees working in the respondent-school" have not been paid to him.
The petitioner alleges that "no opportunity of hearing was given" before withholding the payment of enhanced Dearness Allowance instalments as released from time to time.
Aggrieved by these actions of the School, the petitioner served a notice on September 29, 1993.
A copy of this notice has been produced as Annexure P-9 with the writ petition.
The School sent its reply vide letter dated December 16, 1993, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
It rejected the petitioner's claim.
Consequently, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the action of the respondents is arbitrary, illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner prays that the letter dated December 16, 1993, a copy of which is at Annexure P-10 with the writ petition, be quashed and the respondents be directed to pay the arrears "on account of revision of pay scales, Additional Dearness Allowance, House Rent Allowance etc...." with interest at the rate of 24%.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
A written statement on behalf of the official respondents has been filed by the District Education Officer, Yamuna Nagar.
It has been averred that the petitioner was appointed by the respondent-School against the "unsanctioned post".
He was paid salary by the School "from their own resources and no grant-in-aid for the person appointed against unsanctioned post is admissible".
Reference has been made to Article 67 of the Haryana Education Code which inter alia provides that "the grant will be admissible only against those members of the staff who are trained and appointed against the posts which are sanctioned by the department".
By referring to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 908 of 1993 (Ajai Kumar Sexena and others v. State of Haryana), it has been stated that the Education Department is under no liability to pay anything to persons appointed against unsanctioned posts without its approval.
5.
A separate written statement has also been filed by the School through its Manager.
It has been submitted by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner has concealed material information from this Court.
According to the respondent, the petitioner had "mis-represented at the time of his appointment" that he was a Matriculate.
A condition was put whereby he was directed to produce his educational certificate "which he has not produced till date.
As per the rules, he was not possessing the requisite qualifications..." On merits, the respondent submits that the petitioner's application was "taken on its face value" and the appointment was given to him on the promise that he will produce the certificate.
It was also subject to the approval of the Department.
In spite of repeated requests, the petitioner has not produced the certificate on one pretext or the other.
On October 1, 1977, the petitioner had requested for his confirmation.
Vide letter dated January 21, 1978, he was asked to produce his "academic certificate for having passed the 8th class".
He was informed that the Education Department does not approve the appointment of a person who is not qualified and that he would be treated as temporary unless he produces the certificate.
Repeated communications were sent to him in this behalf.
In spite of that, the certificate has not been produced.
The Education Department did not grant the sanction qua the petitioner and ultimately no aid was sanctioned for the post held by him.
It has been further pointed out that the other person who is posted as a Physical Training Instructor in the School possessed the requisite educational qualifications and had been appointed against a sanctioned post.
Since the petitioner is not fulfilling the educational qualifications, he should "thank his stars that he is still in service..." It has also been pointed out that the petitioner is taking "no interest in his duties, leaving the School without permission and creating other indiscipline..." According to the respondent, various letters had been sent to the petitioner.
These had only elicited curt or blunt replies.
The respondent maintains that the "work and conduct of the petitioner was not satisfactory".
He does not fulfil the requisite educational qualifications.
Consequently, he is not entitled to the reliefs as prayed for by him.
6.
The petitioner has filed separate replications to the two written statements.
In reply to the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, he reiterates his claim of appointment against a sanctioned post.
According to him, he was the only Physical Training Instructor posted in the respondent-School in 1975, the former PTI having left the school after a few months of his joining.
Thereafter another PTI was appointed "allegedly on a sanctioned post".
The petitioner having joined earlier, was entitled to the benefits attached to the sanctioned post.
The petitioner further avers that he was not afforded any opportunity of hearing by the official respondents before taking action detrimental to his interest.
Consequently, the action cannot be sustained.
7.
A separate replication to the written statement of respondent No. 3 has been filed.
The petitioner has trotted out an entirely new story.
He avers that he had passed the Matriculation Examination from UP in the year 1968 while he was serving in the Army.
He had submitted the matric certificate to the Army authorities in the year 1969.
On the basis of this certificate, entries were made in the records.
However, later on, this certificate was returned to him but it was destroyed in a fire which broke out in the Barracks in 1969.
He has further stated that the petitioner had answered the query made by the respondent and conveyed that "he was 8th class pass in terms of Annexure P-8 as he was Indian Army Certificate Holder Class II with 17 years of service and that the same had been recognised as equivalent to 8th class pass by the Government".
The allegations regarding unsatisfactory performance of duties have also been controverted.
8.
These are all the pleadings.
Mr. BS Walia, learned counsel for the petitioner has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been urged that under the rules, the petitioner is entitled to the payment of salary and other allowances as sanctioned by the Government from time to time.
The action of the respondents in not paying the salary to the petitioner in accordance with the revised scale of pay is violative of the rules.
Secondly, it has been contended that the action is violative of the principles of natural justice.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
9.
The two questions that arise for consideration are -  (i) Is the action of the respondents violative of the rules ?
(ii) Is the action violative of the principles of natural justice ?
Re : (i)  10.
The Legislature enacted the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971.
This was with a view to provide security to the employees of the Aided Schools.
This Act came into force with effect from April 1, 1971.
According to Section 2, an Aided School means a School receiving aid from the State Government.
An employee is defined to mean "a person in the whole-time employment of an aided school".
Section 3 prescribes the procedure for the punishment of the employees.
Section 4 authorises the State Government to prescribe a uniform Code of Service Rules "relating to pay, allowances, dismissal, removal, suspension, leave, conduct and discipline, Provident Fund, travelling allowance and other cognate matters" governing the employees.
It also authorises the State Government to lay down essential qualifications for various classes of employees and uniform scale of pay for them.
The power to frame rules has been conferred under Section 8.
11.
In exercise of the power under Section 8, the Haryana Government promulgated the rules called the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974.
These were published in the Gazette on June 18, 1974.
According to the provisions of Rule 3, the Service shall comprise "all or any of the posts shown in Column 2 of Appendix A to these rules as the Management may, from time to time after getting the previous approval of the Director decide".
Clause (2) provides that "the Government may by notification, make additions to, or reductions in the posts shown in Column 2 of Appendix `A' to these rules".
Rule 6 provides that "no person shall be appointed to the service unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix `A' to these rules.
Rule 7 provides that recruitment to the Service can be made by promotion, direct recruitment or transfer.
Provision for probation, seniority etc. have been made in Rules 8 and 9.
Rule 10 which relates to the scale of pay (sic) provides as under :-  "10.
Scale of pay, dearness allowance and payment of salary : (1) The scales of pay of the employees shall be as specified in column 4 of Appendix A to these rules.
(2) The rates of dearness allowance payable to the employees shall be the same as are admissible from time to time to Government employees."
12.
Part IV of the Rules governs the conduct of the employees.
Part V provides for the imposition of punishments and submission of appeals etc. Part VI provides for Contributory Provident Fund.
In Part VII, Rule 45 has been enacted to confer power of relaxation on the Director of Public Instructions Haryana to relax the qualifications prescribed in Column 3 of Appendix `A'.
In case, "sufficient number of persons having the required qualifications......are not available for recruitment to the Service".
The post of Physical Training Instructor is mentioned at Sr. No. (sic) in Appendix `A'.
The essential qualifications prescribed in Column 3 are :-  "Matric with one year diploma in PT from any recognised Training Institution in Haryana or its equivalent."
In Column 4, a pay scale of Rs. 125-5-150/5-250 for 85% posts and Rs. 250-10- 300 for 15% posts has been prescribed.
In Appendix `B', which is (sic) to Rule 7, the format of letter of appointment been given.
It inter alia prescribes that "before assuming the charge of duties, he/she will be required to produce the following certificates to the Head of the Institution :-  "xx xx xx (ii) attested copies of academic and professional qualifications and matriculation certificates."
On a perusal of the above provisions, it appears that the legislative intent is two-fold.
Firstly, the best out of the eligible candidates should be selected and a person who does not fulfil the prescribed qualifications should not be appointed.
This is with the object of improving the academic standards and ensuring fairplay in selection.
The second object is to provide adequate remuneration and security of tenure to those who are appointed in accordance with law.
The liability of the State Government to help the management is limited to only those posts which are specifically sanctioned and against which qualified persons are appointed.
If a person is appointed against a post which has been created by the management but not approved by the authorities, he is not entitled to protection under the Act and the rules.
13.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, it has been categorically averred in the written statement of respondents 1 and 2 that he was appointed against an unsanctioned post and no grant-in-aid is admissible.
In his replication, the petitioner has conceaded that another person was working as a Physical Training Instructor when he joined service in the year 1975.
However, he had left the school "after a few months of the petitioner joining service".
Admittedly, another person was appointed against that post.
It has not even been asserted that the petitioner was adjusted against that vacancy.
In this situation it appears to be established on the record that the petitioner's appointment was not against a post which may be said to be duly sanctioned.
The appointment was thus, not to a post in the service as contemplated under the rules.
14.
The rules further postulate that no person shall be appointed to a post in the service, unless he fulfils the qualifications prescribed in Appendix `A'.
The petitioner has not been able to show that he fulfils the qualification of Matric with (sic) course in Physical Training or any other equivalent qualification.
When he applied for the job, he asserted that he was a Matriculate.
Later on, he claimed that (sic) a person who had passed the Middle Examination was eligible.
He could not even show that he had passed the Middle Examination.
He sought to contend that the courses passed by him while serving in the Army are equivalent to the Middle Examination.
Finally, before this Court, in the replication, a new stand has been taken that he had passed the Matric Examination from Uttar Pradesh in the year 1968 and that the certificate was destroyed in a fire in 1969.
We asked learned counsel for the petitioner to specify the Institution viz. the Board or the University from which the petitioner may have passed the Matriculation examination.
Initially, there was an effort to evade the question.
Ultimately, it was said that none could be specified.
The petitioner, in spite of the lapse of two decades has not been able to prove his eligibility for the post.
He has not been able to give even a prima facie proof during the hearing before the court.
His stand has not been consistent.
He has not been able to give evidence of his having studied in any school or having passed any examination.
It may be that one learns even by experience.
It may also be that the petitioner has gained sufficient experience.
It does not, however, mean that statutory provisions can be completely ignored and even ineligible people can claim parity in the matter of pay scales or allowances with those who fulfil the qualifications.
The appointment of a person who does not fulfil the minimum qualifications required for a post cannot be legal.
It is against the rules.
Consequently, the claim for pay and allowances based on the provisions of Rule 10 cannot be sustained.
It is only those whose appointment conforms to the rules that can claim the protection of the rules for the purposes of pay scales and allowances.
The petitioner does not fall in that category.
In fact, we are left with the impression that he made a mis-representation to the School when he applied for the post and stated that he was a Matriculate.
He has thereafter shifted his stand periodically.
He has failed to establish his eligibility for the post.
He cannot complain of the violation of the rules or discrimination.
Re: (ii)  15.
It was contended that the action of the respondents in not giving him the benefits of revised scales or rates of allowances was violative of the principles of natural justice.
In the circumstances of the case, we are satisfied that it is not so.
Since the year 1975, the school has been asking the petitioner to furnish proof of his educational qualifications.
He has failed to do so.
He was given adequate opportunity.
In spite of that, he has not been able to make good his assertion.
No principle of natural justice can be said to have been violated in this situation.
16.
The petitioner asserts that once he was appointed to the post of Physical Training Instructor and was given the scale and allowances as per the terms of appointment, the respondents could not vary it subsequently to his detriment without complying with the principles of natural justice.
In our view, the petitioner was paid his salary in the scale mentioned in his terms of appointment.
He was also given the benefit of the scale of pay of Rs. 480-760 as mentioned by him in para 5 of the petition.
Subsequently, when the scales etc. were further revised, the burden of the respondents increased and they found that the petitioner was unable to give proof of his educational qualifications.
Consequently, they refused to bear the additional burden.
They cannot be blamed.
The action is not violative of the principles of natural justice.
17.
It has been asserted that the petitioner having been appointed to the post of a Physical Training Instructor, had a right to get the emoluments sanctioned for that post and the responsibility to get the aid is of the employer.
It is a mis-conception.
The petitioner's appointment was subject to his proving that he was qualified for the post.
He had to produce the certificates.
He has failed to do so.
The concession given by the management cannot be mis-construed to imply that the petitioner has a right to get the revised scale.
The revised scale is admissible to only those persons who are qualified.
The petitioner is not.
Consequently, the claim cannot be sustained.
18.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere.
Accordingly, we dismiss the writ petition in limine.
Since the petitioner has been shifting his stand and has been unable to furnish even a prima facie proof regarding his qualifications before us, we are of the view that he must bear the costs of the respondents.
Accordingly, we dismiss this petition with costs.
Petition dismissed.