NK Kapoor, J - Petitioners seeks quashing of order dated 2681997 whereby the petitioners have been ordered to be reverted from the post of Assistant Linemen to the post of work-mates with immediate effect.
It is the case of the petitioners that they were appointed as work-mates (Construction) on a salary of Rs. 800/- per month in the pay scale of Rs. 800/1150 along with allowances etc., vide order dated 2851993.
2.
Petitioner No. 1 was transferred from the Construction Division, Narwana, to Operation Circle, Jind, vide order dated 1061996.
Similarly, petitioner No. 2 was transferred from T/L(C) Division, Narwana to Operation Circle, Jind vide order dated 2661995.
These transfers were made by the competent authorities as per the request of the petitioners.
However, the petitioners have contested this fact stating that they did not make any request for their transfers and the order Annexure P-3 which records that they will lose their seniority is wrong.
Subsequently, the petitioners were promoted from officiating work-mates to officiating Assistant Linemen vide order 661997 and are presently holding the posts.
However, the respondent vide order dated 2681997 Annexure P-5 has passed order reverting them which is legally unsustainable on the precise ground that no hearing has been afforded before passing an order.
3.
In pursuance to the notice of motion issued, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
Besides controverting the various material averments made in the petition, in para 7 of the written statement, it has been specifically mentioned that the petitioners were promoted from the post of Work-Mates to that of Assistant Linemen on account of inadvertent mistake.
Thus, as soon as the same came to the notice, necessary order reverting them has been passed.
Not only this, departmental action is being initiated against the official who was instrumental in passing Annexure P-4.
Reliance has been placed on notification dated 10101988, Annexure R-1, wherein it has been mentioned that employee transferred to another circle loses his seniority.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners for a considerable time and have also gone through the pleadings as well as the annexures to the writ petition and also to the written statement.
Petitioners claim promotions to the rank of Assistant Linemen as is reflected in Annexure P-4 whereas as per the stand of the respondent No. 6, order was passed under mistaken impression.
As soon as this defect came to the notice of the authorities, another order reverting them as Work-Mates was immediately passed under Annexure P-5.
Petitioner No. 1 in Construction Division at Narwana was transferred to OP Circle, Jind.
There is a note appended to Annexure P-2, which reads as :  "The concerned SAs.
whose transfers have been notified out of circle will lose their seniority of old circle.
The respective S.Es.
will obtain necessary affidavit from these officials in this regard before accepting their arrival report.
They will be placed at the tailend in the seniority of S.A.C.
in new circle."
A bare reading of this note reveals that in case a person is transferred out of circle, he loses his seniority in old circle i.e. he is to be placed at the tailend seniority of SAO in the new circle.
Similar is the stipulation in Annexure P-3.
Thus as per Annexure P-2 and Annexure P-3, both the petitioners having been put in another circle were in fact to be placed at the tailend in the seniority in the new circle.
This note has been appended in view of notification dated 10101988.
It is not the case of the petitioners that any person junior to them has been promoted as Assistant Lineman.
It is also admitted, rather proved that the petitioners changed their circle and as per the notification Exhibit R-1, they were to be put down below the list in the seniority.
Precisely for this reason, the authorities thought of correcting this error and so passed the impugned order Annexure P-5 dated 2681997.
Much emphasis has been laid by the counsel for the petitioners that as no opportunity has been afforded to the petitioners before passing this order, the same is unsustainable in law as it visits them with civil consequences.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision of this Court in Balraj and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) RSJ 160 and upon the decision of the Apex Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269.
In State of Orissa's case (supra), the Apex Court was examining the ambit of writ jurisdiction regarding disputed question of fact as also non-granting of an opportunity of hearing while taking administrative orders.
In the aforesaid case, an order for compulsory retirement was passed, which was challenged by the petitioner on the ground that before any adverse order could be passed, an opportunity of hearing ought to have been afforded to an aggrieved person.
There is no dispute to the proposition of law that while passing of an order involving civil consequences and in this case an order of compulsory retirement passed upon the report of Enquiry Officer which was not even supplied to the petitioner, the court held the order to be violative of principle of nature justice.
5.
Similarly in Balraj's case (supra), this Court held that as the petitioners were appointed on regular basis on the basis of selection and their services were terminated without affording an opportunity of hearing to them, the same was held to be bad.
6.
The aforesaid two decisions relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners, in fact, are not applicable as per facts of the present case.
Concededly, the petitioners who were working as Work-Mates sought transfer to another circle at Jind.
This request was acceded to by the authorities.
A note appended to the transfer clearly mentions that official who will be transferred to another circle will lose his seniority in his old circle.
Such a person will be placed at tailend in the seniority in the new circle.
Examined so, the so-called promotion order per se appears to have been passed under a mistaken impression and for this precise reason, the same has been corrected vide impugned order.
To satisfy ourselves that no injustice is caused to the petitioners, it was put to the counsel as to whether the petitioners on the change of the circle were to be taken at the tailend in the new circle and so would lose their seniority in the old circle is as per the existing rules or not, did not choose to controvert.
In fact, the notification dated 10101988, Annexure R-1 clearly states that in case an employee is transferred, he will lose his seniority in his erstwhile circle and will be placed as junior most to the employees of that cadre working in the circle to which he is transferred on his request.
Consequently, we are of the view that action initiated by the contesting respondents to correct the error which had crept and being in confirmity with rules does not call for any interference.
Petition dismissed.