VK Bali, J - The dispute herein is of inter-se seniority between petitioner Joginder Pal and respondent No. 3-Paras Ram.
In wake of petitioner's request to declare him senior to respondent No. 3, he prays for a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated December 6, 1993 (Annexure P12) whereby respondent No. 3 was assigned seniority w.e.f.
April 5, 1969 as also order dated May 3, 1996 (Annexure P16) vide which the said respondent has been promoted as Assistant w.e.f.
December 12, 1974 and further promoted as Superintendent Grade II w.e.f.
November 8, 1990 as also the order reverting him from the post of Superintendent Grade-II to that of Senior Assistant.
The reliefs asked for, as have been detailed above, stem from the facts which need a necessary mention.
2.
Petitioner was initially appointed as Clerk on June 2, 1969 through Services Selection Board, Punjab.
He was thereafter promoted to the post of Head Clerk (equivalent to the post of Assistant) on December 12, 1974 and further as Superintendent Grade-II vide orders dated November 8, 1990.
Respondent No. 3 was initially appointed as clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of the Employment Exchange, Ludhiana.
His services were terminated on August 23, 1968, on joining of regular incumbent.
Thereafter, he was appointed purely on temporary basis for a period of three months in the office of the Co-operative Consumer Stores, Ludhiana.
A copy of apointment letter dated September 18, 1968 has been placed and argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that appointment of respondent No. 3 was made by the Senior Auditor of Co-operative Consumer Stores, Ludhiana.
He was appointed on a class III post i.e. of clerk which appointment could be made only by the Chief Auditor.
The services of the petitioner as also respondent No. 3 are governed by the Rules known as the Punjab Co-operative Audit Department (Ministerial) Class III Service Rules, 1972 (hereinafter to be called the Rules of 1972).
Rule 5 and 10(F) dealing with appointing authority and qualifications and mode of recruitment read as follows :-  ``5.
Appointing Authority: Appointment to service shall be made by the Chief Auditor.
10(1) Qualifications and method of recruitment:- Appointment to the posts in the Service shall be made as under :- (f) in the case of Clerks :- (i) by promotion from amongst Class IV employees in the Co- operative Audit Department of Punjab government who are matriculates of recognised University or Institution.
Provided they qualify the prescribed test within probationary period; or (ii) by transfer of an official already in the service of the Government of India or of State Government; or (iii) by direct appointment from amongst persons who have qualified the prescribed test.
(2) No person shall be appointed to service unless he is a matriculate of a recognised University or Institution and possesses such qualifications in Punjabi and Hindi Language as may be specified by the Government from time to time.
(4) All appointments to the Services whether by promotions or by transfer shall be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall have any right on the basis of seniority alone.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Punjab Civil Services (Promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists) Rules, 1961, appointments to the service by promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists shall be made in accordance with provisions laid down in this Rule.''
3.
The services of respondent No. 3 were, however, extended by the Chief Auditor vide orders dated April 5, 1969.
He was thereafter promoted as Assistant w.e.f.
December 26, 1989 but he preferred to forego his promotion as his family was settled in Ludhiana and he did not want to disturb his family from there.
A copy of the promotion order dated December 26, 1989 and request made by respondent No. 3 whereby he had foregone his promotion, have been placed on records as Annexures P.3 and P.4.
Initial seniority list of Clerks was circulated on April 4, 1979 as stood on February 28, 1974.
Whereas petitioner was assigned seniority at Sr. No. 32, respondent No. 3 figured at Sr. No. 41, in the said seniority list.
It was mentioned in the seniority list that was circulated amongst the employees that they could send representation, if any, within a period of fortnight.
Respondent No. 3 did file his representation on July 23, 1974 wherein he claimed seniority over and above the petitioner and some others.
His representation was, however, rejected vide orders dated August 28, 1975.
Aggrieved, respondent No. 3 filed an appeal before the Secretary to Government, Department of Cooperation which too, after consideration, was rejected vide orders dated April, 6, 1979.
Respondent No. 3 thereafter never challenged the order rendered in appeal preferred by him anywhere.
Another seniority list of Clerks was issued on August 8, 1983 as it stood on September 30, 1982.
Whereas, petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 22, respondent No. 3 was shown at Sr. No. 29 in the said seniority list.
Once again, the Clerks figuring in the seniority list, referred to above, were asked to file representation, if any, within 15 days.
It is the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 did file his objections but vide order dated September 30, 1983 his representation was accepted to a limited extent as against his name in the seniority list, word `SC' was added.
Based upon orders dated September 30, 1983 vide which representation of respondent No. 3 was accepted, he filed civil writ petition No. 296 of 1992 in this Court praying for issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents, in the said writ, to grant him promotion, arrears of pay and other consequential benefits w.e.f.
the date persons junior to him were promoted and for counting his ad hoc service towards seniority.
The said writ was opposed by the respondents and number of preliminary objections were raised.
The matter came up for hearing on November 1, 1993 when following order was passed:-  ``Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the authorities have assured the petitioner that his case would be considered sympathetically in case he withdraws the writ petition.
Accordingly, Mr. Pathela prays for permission to withdraw the writ petition.
Allowed as prayed for.
The writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn.''
Before the matter might proceed any further, it requires to be mentioned here that in the writ filed by respondent No. 3, neither the petitioner nor anyone who, as per the case of respondent No. 3 was junior to him was arrayed as party-respondent.
After decision of the writ petition in the manner as fully detailed above, the Secretary to Government passed an order dated December 6, 1993 whereby respondent No. 3 has been assigned seniority w.e.f.
April 5, 1969.
It is the case of petitioner that when he came to know about this order he along with others filed representation dated November 25, 1994.
No orders on this representation were passed and instead the Secretary to Government sought some information from the Chief Auditor, Co-operative Societies vide his memo dated May 29, 1995.
Without waiting for the information asked for, an order was passed in April, 1996 by the Chief Auditor substituting order Annexure P.1/A wherein the word `extended' was substituted with the word `regularised', meaning thereby that services of respondent No. 3 were regularised w.e.f.
April 5, 1969.
Yet another order dated May 3, 1996 was passed by the Chief Auditor whereby respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant w.e.f.
December 12, 1974 and further as Superintendent Grade-II w.e.f.
November 8, 1990.
By the same order, petitioner was ordered to be reverted from the post of Superintendent Grade-II so that respondent No. 3 could be posted on the said post.
It is these orders, as has been mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, that have been challenged in the present writ.
4.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that the orders Annexures P12, P.15 and P16 deserve to be set aside as these orders tantamount to unsettle the settled seniority not only between the petitioner and respondent No. 3 but among others also and prevailing situation is sought to be set at naught after a period of 26 years and that is not permissible, contends the learned counsel on the basis of Full Bench Judgement of this Court in P.S.E.B.
v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, 1989(4) SLR 437 as also judgment of the Supreme court in GC Gupta v. NK Pandey, AIR 1988 SC, 288.
On merits, learned counsel contends that whereas petitioner was appointed as Clerk on June 2, 1969 through Services Selection Board, Punjab, respondent No. 3 was initially appointed as Clerk on ad hoc basis on August 23, 1968 and that too by an incompetent authority.
Seniority list that came to be issued on April 4, 1974 showing the petitioner as senior to respondent No. 3 attained finality as not only that the representation of respondent No. 3 was rejected but the appeal preferred by him was also rejected.
Another seniority list that was issued in 1983 against which also respondent No. 3 raised objections, had resulted into only mentioning against the name of respondent No. 3 as SC.
The seniority reflected in this list as well was never challenged by respondent No. 3.
The next contention of learned counsel is that in any case respondent No. 3 could not steal a march over the petitioner being an ad hoc employee and even if his initial service was to count, he could not be regularised a year before his appointment and that the said date would certainly be after the petitioner was appointed.
It is further the contention of learned counsel that earlier ad hoc service of respondent No. 3, on which post his services were terminated, could not in any case count while computing his total period of service.
It is further the contention of learned counsel that while assigning seniority to respondent No. 3 over and above him, he was not heard in the matter at all.
Counsel also contends that when respondent No. 3 filed the writ petition, mention whereof has been made above, the state contested that matter on several grounds, both on law and facts.
Respondent No. 3 could not achieve his object of getting seniority over and above the petitioner through writ filed by him and it is only on account of some understanding that might have been arrived at between respondent No. 3 and the Government that writ petition was withdrawn making it convenient for the Government to benefit respondent No. 3.
5.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed in two identical written statements filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and respondent No. 3.
6.
Respondents 1 and 2 in their preliminary objections have averred that services of respondent No. 3 were regularised on April 5, 1969 to comply with the Government instructions dated March 3, 1969 because he was having more than one year ad hoc service at that time.
Petitioner joined as Clerk on June 2, 1969 whereas respondent No. 3 joined this department on August 23, 1968, when he had more than one year's ad hoc service to his credit.
It is in this manner, it has been pleaded, that respondent No. 3 is senior to the petitioner.
On merits, the order passed on a writ petition filed by respondent No. 3 has been admitted but it has been averred that on acceptance of the appeal of respondent No. 3 in accordance with the orders passed in his writ petition, various orders that have been impugned in the present petition were passed.
It is also the case of respondents 1 and 2 that while passing the impugned orders, objection were invited and full opportunity was given to the affected persons including the petitioner.
Insofar as rules are concerned, it is the case of respondents that Rules of 1972 were notified in the year 1972 whereas respondent No. 3 was appointed on August 23, 1968 ie prior to notification of the said Rules.
He was appointed by the Senior Auditor on the directions of the Chief Auditor, Co-operative Societies, Punjab and, therefore, petitioner cannot challenge the order of appointment of respondent No. 3 after a period of about 23 years.
Services of respondent No. 3 were regularised according to the instructions issued by the Punjab Government dated March 3, 1969 and subsequent instructions dated May 22, 1969 which, inter alia, provided for regularisation of ad hoc appointees who had put in at least one year service on February 28, 1969 and who were to be given preference over the persons selected by the defunct board.
Even though petitioner was selected by the Services Selection Board and was accordingly appointed, but since respondent No. 3 was regularised in service prior in point of time, according to length of service, he was to rank senior to the petitioner.
However, petitioner was wrongly shown senior to respondent No. 3 in the seniority lists of Clerks dated February 28, 1974 and September 31, 1982, wherein date of regularisation of service of the petitioner has been shown as April 5, 1969 which was never challenged by anybody at any time.
However, name of respondent No. 3 had wrongly been shown below the persons junior to him.
Respondent No. 3 had continuously been making representations/appeals and he had also filed Civil Writ Petition, mention whereof has been given above.
It is further the case of respondents that respondent No. 3 had joined the State Government service w.e.f.
March 31, 1967 in the department of Employment Exchange and it was nowhere mentioned in the instructions dated March 3, 1969 that an ad hoc employee must have put in at least one year service as on February 28, 1969, in the same department.
However, this point was clarified by the Government vide instructions dated May 22, 1969, Annexure R1 that if the service including service rendered in any other department on ad hoc basis is more than one year, the same was also to be considered for regularisation of ad hoc appointees.
Thus, the concession given to respondent No. 3 was according to the policy instructions, as he had put in more than one year service as on February 28, 1969, his services were regularised w.e.f.
April 5, 1969.
Various legal grounds taken by the petitioner so as to challenge the impugned orders have also been contested.
7.
Petitioner has filed replication to the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and has reiterated the stand taken by him in the writ petition.
By way of clarification, it has been pleaded in the replication that respondent No. 3 had joined as Clerk in the Co-operative department on temporary basis for a period of 89 days and that too by the Senior Auditor, who was not competent to make appointment as the only authority to make appointment to the post of Clerk is Chief Auditor.
As mentioned in the petition also, respondent No. 3 initially joined in the department of Employment Exchange, where too he was working on ad hoc basis and had to quit on joining of a regular hand.
The applicability of the instructions relied upon by respondents 1 and 2 in the case of respondent No. 3 has been denied.
8.
As referred to above, respondent No. 3 has filed separate written statement.
By way of preliminary objections, it has been averred that he was initially appointed in the Employment Exchange w.e.f.
March 31, 1967 and worked upto August, 23, 1968.
Thereafter, he joined as Clerk in the respondent department under the control of the Chief Auditor of the Co- operative Societies vide order dated September 18, 1968.
He too, like respondents 1 and 2, has relied upon instructions with regard to regularisation of an ad hoc appointee, who had put in more that one year service.
It has further been mentioned that even though vide instructions, reference of which has been given above, it was required by the Government to regularise him in service, while passing order, all that was mentioned was that his services were extended.
Though the word `extended' was mentioned in the order, intention was to regularise his service from the date when order of extension was passed.
9.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the records of the case.
The facts that emerge from the pleadings of the parties reveal that respondent No. 3 was initially appointed as Clerk in the Employment Exchange, Ludhiana, on March 31, 1967 and as per his own showing he worked there only upto August 23, 1968.
He came to be employed, once again, on ad hoc basis on September 18, 1968 and his services were regularised w.e.f April 5, 1969, even though, it is the case of the petitioner, that his services were only extended and no order regularising him in service was passed.
Concededly, insofar as petitioner is concerned, he came to be appointed by a process of selection through Service Selection Board and actually joined as Clerk in the respondent department on June 2, 1969.
The first question that requires adjudication is as to whether, in the facts and circumstances, as have been fully detailed above, assuming that the word `extended' is to be treated as `regularised', respondent No. 3 could possibly be regularised in view of the instructions that have been heavily relied upon by the respondents so that respondent No. 3 may be senior to petitioner.
This Court is of the considered view that respondent No. 3, having been initially appointed in altogether different department i.e. Employment Exchange, and that too on ad hoc basis without there being any selection process and had to quit when a regularly appointed person joined and there was a gap in his joining the present department, cannot possibly rely upon the Government instructions so as to reckon his seniority from the date when he was initially appointed in the Employment Exchange.
As mentioned above, he joined the present department after about 25 days when he was relieved of his ad hoc charge of Clerk in the Employment Exchange.
In the present department, he had not completed one year when his services were regularised, even though, as mentioned above, it is the positive case of the petitioner that no order of regularisation was ever passed and it is only an order of extending his services that was passed.
It is not disputed even by respondent No. 3 that the word mentioned in the concerned order is `extended' but it has been pleaded by respondent No. 3 that it was intended to mean `regularised'.
10.
Coming now to the instructions, Annexure P17, dated March 3, 1969, it will be seen that it is a circular letter issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab to all the heads of Departments.
The subject deals with absorption of the candidates selected by the Board/Secretariat Committee/ Departmental Committee.
The reading of the instructions would clearly reveal that the earlier instructions that were to terminate the services of the persons appointed on ad hoc basis, were reconsidered and it was decided, in supersession of all earlier instructions, that such ad hoc appointees, who were eligible for recruitment in accordance with the prescribed qualifications and age, at the time of initial appointment to the service and had put in one year's service on February 28, 1969 and whose work and conduct was considered satisfactory, should be given preference for regular appointment over (a) the persons selected by the defunct board and have also been found suitable after screening by the Departmental Committee; and (b) persons selected by the Secretariat Committee and the Departmental Committee.
The instructions deal with the absorption of the candidates selected by the Board/Secretariat Committee/Departmental Committee.
Nothing at all has been pointed out by the respondent as to by which selection committee etc. respondent No. 3 came to be appointed in the Employment Exchange.
That apart, respondent No. 3, as per instructions, Annexure P17, could be regularised after having put in one year's service, if his work and conduct was conserved satisfactory.
In fact, he was to be given preference for regular appointment over others, mentioned above, if his work and conduct was considered satisfactory.
There is nothing at all on the record that his work and conduct was considered satisfactory for a period that he had worked in the Employment Exchange.
That such a satisfaction came to be recorded by the concerned authority in the Employment Exchange has neither been pleaded nor actually shown.
The matter does not rest at that as nothing at all has been mentioned in Annexure P17 that the services that a person renders on ad hoc basis in a different department would also count for regularly absorbing him in altogether different department.
A very vain attempt has been made by respondent 1 and 2 to show that such a service i.e. service on ad hoc basis in one department can count in different department as per instructions, Annexure R1, dated May 22, 1969.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the matter and are unable to accept this contention of the respondents.
The instructions, Annexure P17, clearly mention that a person, i.e. the one who is working on ad hoc basis, has to be given preference for regular appointment over others, mentioned above, if his work and conduct is considered satisfactory.
How can work and conduct of a person in one department automatically be satisfactory in other department as well ?
One may understand that if an employee has been showing good conduct in one department, the same may be presumed of him in the other department as well.
However, insofar as work is concerned, one may be very efficient while discharging one set of duties and totally inefficient while discharging altogether different duties.
11.
Coming now to the so-called clarification given in Annexure R1, i.e. instructions dated May 22, 1969, it shall be seen that it deals with absorption of the Board/Secretariat Committee/Departmental Committee(s) recommendees.
That is the subject of the instructions, Annexure R1.
first paragraph of the instructions runs thus :-  ``The services of some of the ad hoc employees who had or would have completed one year's satisfactory service on 28.2.1969 and fulfilled the conditions regarding qualifications and age, had already been terminated in accordance with the instructions contained in Punjab Government Circular No. 11633-S(II) 4(2)-68 dated the 1st January, 1969.
With a view to ensuring that all ad hoc employees, who were in service on 1.1.1969 are accorded uniform and equitable treatment, it has been decided that such ad hoc employees should also be taken back in Government service and their services regularised in terms of circular letter dated the 3rd March, 1969.''
These instructions, as is clear from the para reproduced above, deal with those persons whose services have been terminated and who had obviously completed one year satisfactory service as on February 28, 1969.
Certain departments had sought clarifications in relations to instructions dated March 3, 1969 on various points as have been detailed in Annexure R1.
After dealing with such clarifications, in paragraph 4 something not asked for was added by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab.
It is this addition incorporated in paragraph 4 that has been relied upon by respondents to say that ad hoc service of an employee in one department could count in another department as well.
Para 4 of the instructions, Annexure R1, reads thus :-  ``I am to add further that there may be some cases where an ad hoc appointee, on his selection by the Board/Secretariat Committee/Departmental Committee, might have joined another department on regular basis.
In such a case the total service as ad hoc appointed and approved candidate should be taken into account and if it comes more than one year, he should be protected under the terms of the letter dated the 3rd March, 1969.''
Assuming that respondent No. 3 was selected by the Board/Secretariat Committee/Departmental Committee, in both the departments i.e. Employment Exchange and Co-operative Department, yet before he could take advantage of the instructions referred to above, he had to be regularly appointed in the subsequent department.
Concededly respondent No. 3 came to be appointed even in the present department on ad hoc basis.
In any case, the instruction are not very clear so that it could be positively said that they might come to the rescue of respondent No. 3.
Further, the conditions precedent for regularising a person i.e. his work and conduct being satisfactory are lacking in the present case.
No such satisfaction ever came to be recorded either by the department of Employment Exchange or the present department where he is working, before the order extending his services, which is now being stated to be an order of regularisation, was passed.
The matter may be examined from yet another angle and that is that the instructions, Annexure R1, stated to be clarification of original instructions, Annexure P17, came into being on May 22, 1969 and the order extending the services of respondent No. 3, which is termed to be an order of regularisation, came about on April 5, 1969.
The order was passed earlier and the instructions, Annexure R1, came into being later and, therefore, the same could not possibly apply for the purpose of regularising the services of respondent No. 3.
12.
Since the petitioner succeeds on the first point canvassed by him, there is no necessity at all to go into other points raised by Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner.
We may, however, mention that all earlier representations/appeals of respondent No. 3 for claiming seniority over and above petitioner were turned down.
Respondents 1 and 2 made him senior to the petitioner after a lapse of 27 years.
This belated action is sought to be defended on the ground that respondent No. 3 had filed a writ petition in which same favourable orders were passed.
We have reproduced the order passed in the writ petition filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in the said case, had simply stated that the authorities had assured the petitioner that in case he was to withdraw his petition, his matter shall be considered sympathetically.
On his aforesaid statement, the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
Even though such was the order, respondent No. 1 and 2 have pleaded that on the orders passed in the writ petition and on acceptance of the appeal filed by respondent No. 3, impugned orders were passed.
The order passed by this Court in the writ petition filed by respondent No. 3 could not provide a handle to respondents to pass an order in favour of respondent No. 3.
As mentioned above, his writ petition was simply dismissed as withdrawn and it is clearly made out that respondents 1 and 2 had hotly contested the writ petition and controverted the pleas raised by respondent No. 3 by raising number of even preliminary objections.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow this petition and set aside the impugned orders, upholding the seniority lists circulated by the department on various occasions before giving promotion to respondent No. 3 on various posts and reverting the petitioner.
Parties shall however bear their own costs.