Arun Madan, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
2.
The petitioner, who is the widow of late Shri Krishan Dutta has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India on the grounds inter alia that the late husband of the petitioner was an employee of the Social Welfare Department of the State of Rajasthan and continued to discharge his services with the said department till the year 1977.
Before joining the Social Welfare Department, the late husband of the petitioner had rendered his services in the Community Development Scheme, Pisangan in Ajmer, where he continued to discharge his duties till 1966.
From 1966 to 1970, the petitioner's late husband rendered his services (sic) thereafter in 1970, the petitioner was transferred from the aforesaid department to Inspectorate of Schools in Sirohi District after having been declared surplus from the erstwhile department and died on 17.7.1988.
3.
It has further been contended that the late Krishna Dutta Sharma was incapacitated from rendering services to the Inspectorate of Schools on account of his ill-health and as a consequence of which he had also exercised his option under Rule 228 of RSR which deals with the conditions for grant of invalid pension and provides inter alia :-  ``An invalid pension is awarded, on his retirement from the public service, to a Government servant who by bodily or mental infirmity is permanently incapacitated for the public service, or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs.''
4.
In pursuance of the above request made by late Krishna Dutta Sharma, the Collector, District Sirohi vide his communication dated November, 1993 (Annexure 4) addressed to the Director, Department of Social Welfare, Rajasthan, Jaipur had requested the Department of Social Welfare for finalisation of the petitioner's case for family pension expeditiously but with no result.
Thereafter on 191995, the Secretary, Public Redressal Grievances Forum sent a communication to the Director of Social Welfare Rajasthan Jaipur that the pension case of late Krishna Dutta Sharma should be expedited at the earliest since on the relevant date, the said employee had rendered 16 years of qualifying service with the erstwhile Department of Social Welfare.
Thereafter vide communication dated 1651995 (Annexure-6) the Secretary of the Public Redressal Grievances Department again directed the Social Welfare Department to finalise the pension case of late Krishna Dutta Sharma in any case not later than one month from the date of receipt of the said communication, failing which disciplinary action in accordance with the rules shall be initiated against the erring officials of the said department.
Thereafter on 571995 vide (Annexure-7) in pursuance of the letter dated 2861995 of the Department of Social Welfare as referred to above, the necessary clarification was conveyed to the Director, Social Welfare Department regarding the relevant period of qualifying service, rendered by the late Krishna Dutta Sharma.
From the perusal of the said document it is clear that the late husband of the petitioner had rendered the qualifying period of service for the entitlement to the grant of family pension w.e.f.
5.1.1954 to 31.12.1969 and had thus become eligible for grant of family pension.
Thereafter the petitioner did not hear anything in this regard and failed to elicit any response from the respondents till the 23rd Sept 1993 when this writ petition was filed in this Court.
Incidentally I would like to mention that the late husband of the petitioner had already become eligible for the grant of family pension on account of having rendered more than 16 years of qualifying service in the erstwhile Department of Social Welfare as referred to above and clarification, which was sought for by the respondents in terms of their letter dated 9.12.1993 vide (Annexure-10) stood already clarified in terms of the letter dated 571995 vide (Annexure-7) as referred to above.
5.
In the reply, the respondents on being noticed by this Court have controverted the contentions of the petitioners on the grounds inter alia that this writ petition deserves dismissal on the ground of jurisdiction alone since the petitioner should have filed this writ petition before the Principal Seat of this Court at Jodhpur and also on account of the failure of the petitioner for having not impleaded Mahila Sadan of Social Welfare Department, Jaipur where late husband of the petitioner had worked till 1970 and he was also drawing his salary from the said date till 1970.
On merits the respondents have opposed the maintainability of the writ petition on the grounds that since no salary had been drawn by the petitioner from answering respondents, thereafter, the question of payment of any arrears on account of pension does not arise.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and also perused the relevant document on the record as well as the pleadings of the parties on the record.
7.
Prima facie, I am of the opinion that once an employee having rendered qualifying period of service in the erstwhile department, which is Social Welfare Department in this case and thereafter his services stood transferred to the Inspectorate of Schools would not by itself disentitle the legal heirs of the said employees for grant of family pension for the reason that the transfer of an employee from one department of the State to another is by itself no ground to deprive the legal heir of the deceased employee of their entitlement to grant of pensionary benefits since there is no embargo in the rule in this regard.
The contention advanced by learned counsel for the respondent that since the petitioner had failed to draw any salary from the transferee department his legal heirs are not entitled to the grant of pensionary benefits as admissible to the deceased employee would by itself not be a ground to disentitle the legal heirs of the petitioner for the said benefit.
8.
I am further of the opinion that the benefit of pension and/or family pension becomes admissible to an employee or his legal heirs, if he continues to be in service of the transferee department after having rendered the qualifying service in the parent department from where his services stood transferred to another department of the State.
So also the benefit of family pension to the legal heirs of the deceased should automatically be extended once it is proved on the record that the petitioner had rendered qualifying period of service so as to entitle him or his legal heirs for grant of pensionary benefits.
9.
Law has been well settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the matter of DS Nakara v. Union of India, reported in 1983(47) Fac LR 42, wherein the Constitution Bench of the Apex court observed as under :-  ``(i) Pension is neither a bounty nor a matter of grace depending upon the sweet will of the employer and that it creates a vested right subject to 1972 rules which are statutory in character because they are enacted in exercise of powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 and Clause (5) of Article 148 of the Constitution (ii) that the pension is not an ex gratia payment but it is a payment for the past service rendered; and (iii) it is a social welfare measure rendering socio-economic justice to those who in the hey date of their life ceaselessly toiled for the employer on an assurance that in their old age they would not be left in lurch.
This division which classified pensioners into two classes is not based on any rational principle and if the rational principle is the one of dividing pensioners with a view to giving something more to persons otherwise equally placed it would be discriminatory.
Further the classification is wholly arbitrary because we do not find a single acceptable or persuasive reason for this division.
This arbitrary action violated the guarantee of Article 14.''
10.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, I deem it appropriate to observe that the petitioner deserves to succeed.
The Department of Social Welfare (respondent No. 2) is accordingly directed to forward the petitioner's case for her entitlement to family pension due on account of late Shri Krishna Dutta Sharma to respondent No. 4 (Pension Department) within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
11.
The petitioner is also directed to complete necessary formalities, if any, as may be required in this regard for finalisation of her case by respondent No. 4.
On completion of necessary formalities as required, the respondent No. 2 shall release the pensionary benefit, as may be admissible to the petitioner within a period of four weeks thereafter.
On the amount of pensionary benefits, the petitioner shall also be entitled to payment of interest @ 12 per cent from due date till payment and in the event of default in payment being made within the period of 4 weeks from the date when her case is forwarded for finalisation by the competent authority to the pension department i.e. respondent No. 4, the due amount shall carry interest @ 14 per cent.
12.
With the above observations, the writ petition is accordingly allowed and disposed of.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.