Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On June 5, 1989, the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab directed that the petitioners' pay shall be reduced to the minimum of the scale.
The appeal and the memorial submitted by the petitioners having been rejected, they have approached this court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners had joined service in the year 1974 as Sub Inspectors.
On December 18, 1985, the petitioners alongwith two other persons were placed under suspension.
A charge sheet was issued.
It was inter alia alleged that 285 bags had been wrongly removed.
Out of these, 25 bags of wheat were actually mis-appropriated.
The remaining 260 bags were found lying in Jyoti Rice Mill under paddy bags.
These had been placed there with the intention to misappropriate.
Wrong entries had been made in the record.
The charges were enquired into.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report on August 17, 1988.
He held that out of the total of five, four charges were proved against Mr. Prabh Dayal Gabha.
The two petitioners were exonerated by him.
The disciplinary authority, however, disagreed with the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer.
It considered the matter and ordered that Mr. Gabha shall be dismissed from service.
Mr. Sukhpal Singh (he is not the petitioner) was ordered to be reduced in rank.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, it was observed that "both Sub Inspectors have also acted in careless and irresponsible manner and in their case, they ae reduced to basic pay of Sub Inspectors permanently and (shall be) eligible for drawal of increment one year after passing of the order."
The petitioners filed an appeal to the Government.
It was dismissed.
Even the memorial submitted by the petitioners was rejected vide order dated December 24, 1996.
Consequently, the petitioners have approached this court through the present writ petition.
The petitioners pray that the orders dated June 5, 1989, March 4, 1993 and December 24, 1996, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P2, P.4 and P.9 with the writ petition, be set aside.
3.
We have heard counsel for the petitioners.
Firstly, it has been submitted that the disciplinary authority had acted illegally in passing the order of punishment without affording any opportunity to the petitioners.
Secondly, the counsel submitted that the impugned orders were discriminatory inasmuch as the Government had set aside the order of punishment passed in the case of Sukhpal Singh but had refused to do so in the petitioners' case.
4.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Did the disciplinary authority pass the impugned order without the grant of a due and reasonable opportunity to the petitioners ?
(ii) Does the action of the respondents suffer from the vice of discrimination ?
Reg : (i)  5.
The petitioners have produced a copy of the order dated June 5, 1989 passed by the disciplinary authority as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this order shows that the Enquiry Officer had submitted his report on August 17, 1988.
Thereafter, the disciplinary authority had afforded an opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioners.
They were heard on December 7, 1988.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the disciplinary authority had passed the impugned order of punishment without affording any opportunity to the petitioners.
6.
Counsel for the petitioners contended that the disciplinary authority had not supplied a copy of the enquiry report to them.
It had not given any show cause notice or even conveyed the reasons of disagreement with the findings of the enquiry officer.
Consequently, the counsel submitted that the order of punishment is vitiated.
7.
This contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, it deserves mention that on June 5, 1989, when the punishing authority had passed the impugned order, the amended provision of Article 311 was in force.
Under the law as it then existed, it was not mandatory for the authority to furnish a copy of the enquiry report or to give a show cause notice to the employee before passing the order of punishment.
It is only after the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India and Ors. v. Mohammad Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) that a copy of the enquiry report and a show cause notice were required to be given to the delinquent employee.
The Apex Court having categorically held that the decision would operate prospectively, the petitioners were not entitled to the issue of a show cause notice or the supply of a copy of the enquiry report.
8.
Secondly, it also deserves notice that in the writ petition, the petitioners have not even cared to disclose that they were granted personal hearing by the disciplinary authority on December 7, 1988.
They have repeatedly stated that the Enquiry Officer had exonerated them.
However, the fact that they had been granted personal hearing has not been disclosed.
It seems reasonable to assume that during the course of personal hearing, the views of the disciplinary authority would have become apparent to the employees.
9.
Still further, the petitioners had filed an appeal against the order passed by the disciplinary authority.
A copy of the petition of appeal has been produced as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
Still further, they had also filed a memorial dated April 4, 1996, a copy of which is at Annexure P.8 with the writ petition.
Neither in the appeal nor in the memorial have the petitioners complained that they were not informed of the reasons on account of which the disciplinary authority had disagreed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
10.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the contention of the petitioners that there was denial of a reasonable opportunity cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the first question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the order was not passed without the grant of any opportunity to the petitioners.
It was not violative of the principles of natural justice.
In any case, no prejudice was shown to have been caused.
Reg : (ii)  11.
According to the learned counsel, the orders of punishment passed in the case of M/s Prabh Dayal Gabha and Sukhpal Singh had been set aside by the Minister.
The action of the Government in rejecting the memorial submitted by the petitioners was discriminatory.
12.
A copy of the order dated December 24, 1996 passed by the Government is at Annexure P.9 with the writ petition.
It has been inter alia observed that - (a) The memorial was not in conformity with Clause 4(c) of the instructions as the orders passed by the punishing and the appellate authorities had not been produced therewith; (b) As per Clause 5(i), the memorial had to be submitted to the Head of the Department with a request for its transmission to the Government or the Governor as the case may be.
The memorial was actually submitted to the Minister; (c) The memorial was time- barred and no explanation for the delay had been given.
Consequently, it was withheld by the Head of the Department in accordance with Clause 6 of the instructions issued by the Government.
Learned counsel was unable to show that any of the objections was wrong.
13.
It is true that two other officials who had been punished alongwith the petitioners were exonerated by the Minister.
In case of Sukhpal Singh, the order passed by the Minister as quoted in Annexure P.5 reads as under :-  "I have gone through the file of Inspector Gr.II Sh. Sukhpal Singh Brar and have found that injustice has been done to him.
He was reverted fro Inspector Gr.I to Inspector Gr.II w.e.f.
561989 for three years.
He was reinstated after obtaining his reply of the charge sheet served to him.
It is also evident from the file that Enquiry Officer did not found him guilty.
Therefore, Sh. Sukhpal Singh may be given all benefits w.e.f.
561989 of the post of Inspector Gr.I."
Similarly, in the case of the other official, Mr. Prabh Dayal Gabha, the order was passed by the Government on June 26, 1995.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.7 with the writ petition.
14.
On a perusal of the record, it is clear that serious charges had been levelled against all the officials.
The Director, Food and Supplies had considered the matter at length.
He had examined the evidence carefully.
It was after a thorough examination that he had awarded different punishments to the various employees.
It is a refreshingly detailed order.
It was confirmed by the appellate authority.
We are pained to see the manner in which the orders passed by the competent authority were reversed by the Minister in one case and the Secretary in the other.
We record our displeasure.
However, the arbitrary orders passed by the Government would be no ground to exonerate the petitioners or to set aside the orders passed by the competent authority in their case.
In State of Haryana v. Ram Kumar Mann, JT 1997(3) SC 450 : 1997(3) S.C.T.
135,it has been held that ``a wrong decision by the Government does not give a right to enforce the wrong order and claim parity or equality".
Following this rule, we are unable to uphold the charge of discrimination as levelled by the petitioners.
15.
Before parting with the case, we may observe that the basic purpose behind the provision for memorial is to enable the Government to undo injustice.
It is not meant to be used in a case where an employee has mis- appropriated public property, or even attempted to do so.
It is rarely that charges are established and the guilty are punished.
In the present case, the disciplinary authority had done well to take action against the guilty officials.
We are not satisfied that there were sufficient grounds for interference by the Minister or the Administrative Secretary especially after the appeal had been dismissed by the Government itself.
In view of the above, both the questions are answered against the petitioners.
There is no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.