Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the respondent-Bank debarred from taking action on the enquiry report against the petitioner merely because even a criminal case is pending against him ?
This is the short question that arises in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner is working as a Special Assistant with the Bank of Baroda.
On certain irregularities having been detected he was placed under suspension vide order dated October 16, 1991.
Thereafter on August 4, 1992 a charge sheet was issued to the petitioner.
A copy of this charge sheet has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
It appears that some time later even a report was lodged with the Police as a result of which a criminal case was registered against the petitioner.
On November 23, 1995 the Chief Judicial Magistrate Faridabad framed charges against the petitioner.
The trial is still pending.
However, in the meantime, departmental proceedings were continued.
On February 18, 1997 the Enquiry Officer had submitted the report.
On the basis of this report a notice dated February 24, 1997 was served on the petitioner.
By this notice the petitioner was supplied a copy of the Enquiry Report.
He was called upon to make a representation if he so wanted against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
On March 14, 1997 the petitioner submitted his reply.
However, before any order could be passed, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He prays that the order of suspension and the Enquiry Report be quashed and the respondents be restrained from taking any further action in pursuance of the report.
3.
Mr. MS Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that since a criminal charge founded on the same facts as are involved in the departmental enquiry is already pending trial, the departmental proceedings are initiated and cannot be continued.
In any event, these proceedings should be stayed till the criminal trial is concluded.
4.
We have perused the record of the case.
The perusal of the charge sheet dated August 4, 1992 shows that broadly the following three charges had been levelled against the petitioner :-  (1) He managed to fraudulently obtain payment of Rs. 20,000/- "by preparing/writing a withdrawal slip for Rs. 20,000/- drawn on Bank of Baroda, NG Faridabad Savings Bank A/c No. 9864 in the name of Mr. HC Gandhi, forging the signatures of the account holder thereon, passing the same for cash payment...... and entering the same in the payment scroll."
With an intent to remove the evidence, he "managed to destroy all the relevant records like withdrawal slip, relevant pages of the payment scroll etc." This was alleged to have been done on November 18, 1989.
(2) On June 28, 1990 he "also managed to fraudulently obtain payment of Rs. 10,000/- by preparing/writing a withdrawal slip for Rs. 10,000/- drawn on Bank of Baroda, Nehru Ground, Faridabad Savings Bank A/c No. 6979 in the name of Mr. KK Sehgal, forging the signatures of the account holder thereon...... passing the same for cash payment..... and entering the same in the payment scroll."
With "an intent to remove the evidence," he "managed to destroy all the relevant records like withdrawal slip, relevant pages of the payment scroll etc." He "had also deleted/struck off the relative entry for Rs. 10,000/- in the supplementary book, after the cash book was written."
(3) He "had not checked the Savings Bank supplementaries on daily basis and had not checked/verified the postings of several cash payments of cheques/withdrawal forms for large amounts before passing them for payments."
On the above it was alleged that the petitioner had committed fraud, showed lack of integrity and honesty, did acts prejudicial to the interest of the Bank and unbecoming of an employee as a result of which he was liable to be proceeded against departmentally.
5.
On the other hand the charge framed in the criminal court is primarily to the effect that the petitioner in his capacity as an employee of the Bank and entrusted with the "property i.e. Rs. 1,05,000/- committed criminal breach of trust in respect of said property and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 409 IPC"  6.
Secondly, it was alleged that the petitioner and Sudesh Shankar Chakraworthy "during the above said period cheated Bank of India, Nehru Ground, Faridabad Branch by dishonestly inducing him to deliver Rs. 1,05,000/- and which was the property of the said Bank and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 420 IPC"  7.
Thirdly, it was alleged that both had forged "certain documents purporting to be a valuable security i.e.
Saving Bank ledgers, book balances with intent and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 467 IPC" Two other charges relating to offences under Sections 486 and 471 were also framed against the petitioner.
8.
A comparison of the charge sheet issued to the petitioner and the charge framed by the Court shows the wide disparity in the matters which have to be examined in the two separate proceedings viz. the departmental enquiry and the trial by the Court.
Consequently, it cannot be said that both the proccedings are founded upon the same facts.
Still further, it is clear from the record of this case that the departmental proceedings have virtually concluded.
The Enquiry Officer has already given his findings.
The petitioner has already submitted his objections thereto.
At this stage no ground for interference in the departmental proceedings is at all made out.
Moreover, as observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Sh. BK Meena and Ors, 1997(1) SLJ 86 : 1996(4) SCT 708 (SC) the purpose of the departmental proceedings is primarily "to keep the administrative machinery unsullied by getting rid of bad elements."
It is not merely to punish the guilty.
In the present case the purpose of the departmental proceedings is to ensure that an employee like the petitioner who is alleged to have withdrawn money from the accounts of two customers for himself by resorting to wrong means is not allowed to sully the `administrative machinery'.
The continuance of the departmental proceedings does not in any way interfere with the criminal case which is pending against the petitioner.
It also deserves mention that the investigation has already taken a lot of time.
The charge was framed in the year 1995.
On the petitioner's own showing the trial has not made any headway so far.
It has been stated by the learned counsel that even the evidence of the prosecution has not yet been started.
In this situation, no ground whatsoever for interference with the departmental proceedings is at all made out.
9.
Mr. Jain as referred to the decision in Kusheshwar Dubey v. M/s Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and others, 1988 SC 2118.
In this case their Lordships were pleased to hold that no hard and fast rule can be laid down.
Each case has to be examined on its own facts.
On examination of the facts of the present case it does not appear that the petitioner can derive any advantage from this decision.
Mr. Jain has also referred to PJ Sunderrajan and another v. Unit Trust of India and another, 1993(3) SLR 21.
On examination of the record of that case the directions were given by the Bench.
No rule of universal application was laid down which may require that even in a case like the present one, the departmental proceedings have to be quashed.
Mr. Jain has also referred to the order dated March 23, 1995 passed in Managing Director, PRTC.
Patiala etc. v. S Harpal Singh and another etc. wherein their Lordships were pleased to direct that the disciplinary proceedings may be stayed till the statement of the accused is recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.PC Learned counsel is unable to state as to what was the stage of the departmental proceedings in that case, He is not in a position to state as to whether enquiry proceedings had been concluded as has happened in the present case.
If the departmental proceedings have already been concluded and only the final order has to be passed why should the passing of the final order be stayed till the petitioner makes the statement under Section 313 CrP.C ?
Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to explain.
In any event, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case the learned counsel can derive no advantage from the observations in this case.
10.
The petitioner was placed under suspension in October, 1991.
The departmental proceedings have already taken almost six years.
The petitioner did not object to the continuance of the proceedings till now.
When these are about to conclude, the petitioner has filed this petition.
It is only a device to delay.
The petitioner is being paid out of public funds.
Delay suits him.
However, this Court cannot come to his aid.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is wholly frivolous.
No ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.