ML Koul, J - The petitioner who is a member of the Backward Class was appointed in the service of the Government of Haryana in Health Department with effect from 1791971.
He was granted Selection Grade in the cadre of Pharmacists with effect from 2931985.
2.
Claiming himself to be eligible for promotion to the post of Chief Pharmacist with a rider that being a member of the Backward Class he has preferential right to be considered for promotion against the roster point reserved for a member of the Backward Classes, the petitioner has filed this petition on 3151995 and has prayed that the orders dated 2311989 (Annexure P-7) and dated 23.12.1993 (Annexure P-11) be quashed and a direction be issued to the respondents to promote him as Chief Pharmacist with effect from 2311989 and also to grant him all consequential benefits along with interest at the rate of 24% per annum.
3.
A look at the averments made in the writ petition shows that as many as 26 posts of Chief Pharmacists were created on 1821987.
Against these posts, sixteen persons were promoted vide order dated 2311989.
Another person was promoted to the said post vide order dated 3041989.
The petitioner himself was promoted as Chief Pharmacist by way of stop-gap arrangement in the vacancy occurred because Shri Chander Singh who was senior to him amongst the Pharmacists belonging to Backward Classes had been facing some enquiry and proceedings were pending against the said Pharmacist.
As soon as Shri Chander Singh was exonerated the competent authority issued order dated December 17, 1993 (Annexure P-11) and by invoking the condition contained in the order of the petitioner's promotion, the competent authority reverted the petitioner in order to make room for Shri Chander Singh.
Thereafter, another order dated 311994 was issued promoting (sic) five Pharmacists as Chief Pharmacists.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that while granting promotion to the aforesaid persons, the competent authority did not consider his candidature and in this manner, his right of preferential promotion has been violated.
5.
Shri Amrit Paul, learned counsel for the petitioner, argued that even though the writ petition is delayed by about six years and four months qua the orders dated 2311989 and 3041989, this Court should overlook this delay in view of the fact that the petitioner has been constantly making representations to the departmental authorities for giving him the benefit of reservation.
He further argued that the petitioner was patiently awaiting the decision by the competent authority on his representations and the very fact that the Government promoted him as Chief Pharmacist, though by way of stop gap arrangement in the year 1992, is a factor sufficient to explain the delay in filing the writ petition.
6.
In our opinion, the explanation sought to be offered by the petitioner for the long delay of over six years insofar as the orders dated 2311989 and 3041989 are concerned, is wholly unsatisfactory.
The delay of over six years in challenging the promotion of as many as 16 persons, which has not been explained, is by itself sufficient to disentitle the petitioner from claiming any relief.
If the petitioner was to institute a suit on 3151995 to challenge the promotions made on 2311989 or on 3041989, his suit was bound to be dismissed as barred by limitation.
If that would have been the fate of the suit filed by the petitioner, we find little justification to exercise our extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
We are not unmindful of the fact that the persons who had been promoted and have enjoyed the status of Chief Pharmacists for the last more than six years and any order by this Court directing that the petitioner should be treated as promoted with effect from 2311989, would unsettle the settled position.
7.
In State of Madhya Pradesh and another v. Bhailal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that a petition filed after the period of limitation prescribed for a civil suit should ordinarily be dismissed on account of delay and laches.
8.
A similar view has been expressed in Roshan Lal and others v. International Airport Authority of India and others, AIR 1981 SC 597.
9.
In view of the above referred position, we do not find any ground to entertain the writ petition insofar as the orders dated 2311989 and 3041989 are concerned.
10.
Even against the order dated 311994 the writ petition will have to be treated as belated.
11.
In PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that a writ petition challenging the promotion/seniority must be filed within a period of six months of the accrual of the cause of action or at the most within a year.
Failure of the petitioner to challenge the promotion of five persons for a period of more than one year is a sufficient ground for declining the requisite relief to him.
12.
Notwithstanding the dismissal of the writ petition qua the claim of the petitioner for retrospective promotion, we do find some substance in the grievance made by him for not considering his candidature for promotion against the vacancies which are available with the department in the cadre of Chief Pharmacists.
The record of the case does show that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of reservation made for Backward Classes and unless there are compelling reasons like pendency of some enquiry or ineligibility, the petitioner cannot be denied a fair consideration for promotion to the post of Chief Pharmacist against the post reserved for Backward Classes.
13.
We, therefore, dismiss the writ petition in regard to the challenge to the promotion of other persons but direct the respondents to duly consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Chief Pharmacist against the existing vacancies as well as the vacancies which may occur in future.
If the petitioner is otherwise found eligible and suitable for promotion, there should be no impediment in passing appropriate order promoting the petitioner.
Government should, therefore, consider his case for promotion to the post of Chief Pharmacist in accordance with the rules and pass necessary order within a period of four months from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order.