VK Bali, J (Oral) - By this order I propose to dispose of two writ petitions bearing No. 5505 of 1986 and 273 of 1987 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
The facts have, however, be extracted from Civil Writ Petition 5505 of 1986.
2.
Petitioners seek quashing of appointment of respondents 3 to 9 on the post of Arrival Recorder by styling the same to be wholly illegal and against the Rules.
It may be mentioned here that respondents 3 to 9 were appointed by way of promotion from class IV Posts.
Petitioners as also respondents 3 to 9 were working in different Market Committees in the State of Haryana.
The petitioners joined on their respective posts in the respondent Board on different dates between the years 1975 and 1983.
It is the positive case of the petitioners that their conduct during their service career was found to be satisfactory by their superiors and nothing was found against them.
In June/July, 1986 respondent-Board issued a circular stating that for appointment to the posts of Arrival Recorder/Clerks/Care-takers/Auction Recorder from Class-IV employees of Market Committee in Haryana State, applications be invited and a type test be held for that purpose.
In view of the circular aforesaid, 17 vacant posts of Arrival Recorders had to be filled.
Typing test was actually held on July 17, 1986 and about 116 candidates including the petitioners appeared in the test, out of whom only five candidates could qualify the same.
It may be mentioned here that the candidates, who had qualified, have not been arrayed as party-respondents in this petition.
It is only respondents 3 to 9, who were admittedly junior to the petitioners on the lower rank that they have been so impleaded.
It is the positive case of petitioners so pleaded in favour paragraphs of the petition that despite the fact that respondents 3 to 9 also did not qualify the test as was, of course, true with regard to them as well, they (respondents 3 to 9) could not have been appointed by way of promotion being admittedly junior to the petitioners.
3.
It is in wake of these facts and circumstances that the relief asked for, as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment, has been prayed.
4.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 all that has been stated is that respondents 3 to 9 even though failed in the type test, were better and had secured more marks than that of the petitioners.
To be precise, it is pleaded in para 5 of the written statement that respondents 3 to 9 had shown some knowledge of type on the basis of speed which varied from 20 to 30 words per minute, whereas petitioners even failed to show speed of 20 words per minute.
It is for that precise reason that the petitioners were not found suitable for appointment on Class-III posts.
It is not denied that respondents 3 to 9 were given one year to come up to the required standard in the type test.
5.
Respondents 3 to 9, even though served have neither chosen to file written statement nor cause appearance on there behalf.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and respondent, this Court is of the considered view that order promoting respondents 3 to 9 is wholly illegal and cannot sustain.
As mentioned above, both petitioners and respondents 3 to 9 failed to qualify the type test.
It is also conceded position that petitioners were senior to respondents 3 to 9.
If a chance was given to respondents 3 to 9 to clear the type test within a year from the date of promotion, the same chance could also be given to the petitioners.
A year was more than enough for a person seeking promotion to improve upon the requisite qualification prescribed for being promoted on a higher post.
It is not unknown that people have worked hard and clothed them with the qualification so prescribed to get promotion.
The Court could understand if the petitioners as also respondents 3 to 9 were given a chance to improve within a year and the petitioners had still failed.
But giving a chance to improve to respondents 3 to 9 and denying the same to the petitioner was wholly arbitrary.
7.
The order promoting respondents 3 to 9 has been held to be illegal but in the context of the fact that more than a decade has gone by, it really baffles this Court as to what meaningful relief can possibly be granted to the petitioners.
Respondents 3 to 9, it appears, must have improved within one year given to them for the purpose and it is for that precise reason that nothing has been heard about their reversion to the post from which they were promoted.
They have, thus, continued to occupy the promotional post for about 11 years as on today.
It will be inequituous at this stage to set aside their promotion.
In the context of the facts, as are available in this case, the only meaningful relief that appears to this Court that can be granted to the petitioners is that the department should be directed to take type test from the petitioners within six months from today and if they do qualify the same, they should be promoted from the date their immediate juniors i.e. respondents 3 to 9 were so promoted.
It is possible that some vacancies in the promotional avenue are still vacant and if petitioners do qualify the type test, within six months from today, they shall be adjusted against those vacant posts.
However, if it might become impossible to accommodate the petitioners after they have qualified the type test, there being no vacant post, in that event alone, respondents 3 to 9 be reverted in order of their seniority.
At this stage learned counsel for the respondent Board informs the Court that petitioner No. 5, who was handicapped, was promoted during the pendency of this writ petition.