GC Garg, J.- Pritam Singh, plaintiff-respondent filed suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 22 1 1991 passed by the Director Food and Supplies Punjab, Chandigarh imposing penalty of recovery of Rs. 56, 06119 from him was illegal, void, arbitrary, unconstitutional and against the principle of natural justice.
He further prayed for a decree of permanent injunction for restraining the defendants from recovering said amount by implementing the order.
Trial Court by judgment and decree dated 2381993 decreed the suit, primarily after coming to the conclusion that copy of inquiry report was not furnished to the plaintiff and he was not afforded any hearing before passing the order imposing penalty of recovery.
The trial court further came to the conclusion that the plaintiff was not afforded the assistance of his co-employee for defending the matter which prejudiced his case.
It was on the basis of the above that the trial court came to the conclusion that the order imposing penalty of recovery was nothing but illegal, ultra vires, against the principle of natural justice and was liable to be set aside.
However, while granting declaration above said, the trial court in the concluding paragraph of the judgment restrained the defendants permanently from recovering the amount of penalty from the plaintiff.
Appeal carried by the State against the judgment and decree of the trial court was dismissed by Addl.
District Judge, Bhatinda by judgment and decree dated 7.3.1995.
It is in this situation the State has filed the present appeal.
2.
In response to notice of motion, the plaintiff has put in appearance.
3.
On a consideration of the matter and after hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that no exception can be taken to the view taken by the courts below to the effect that the proceedings culminating into the order of imposing penalty of recovery are vitiated as neither the principle of natural justice nor the provisions of Rules were followed during the course of inquiry and even the punishing authority did not afford an opportunity to the plaintiff of being heard before passing the said order especially when the Inquiry Officer exonerated the delinquent official.
To that extent the findings recorded by the courts below are affirmed.
4.
Faced with the above situation, learned AAG Punjab appearing for the appellants submitted that even if the conclusion arrived at by the courts below about the illegality of the inquiry is accepted, the State could not be debarred permanently from initiating inquiry proceedings afresh after following due procedure of law and observing the principle of natural justice.
In my opinion, no exception can be taken to the contention of the counsel for the appellant.
The courts below while decreeing the suit could not permanently restrain the State authorities to proceed afresh in the matter after coming to the conclusion that the inquiry was vitiated.
Nothing could be brought to my notice by counsel for the respondent to support the view taken by the courts below in that behalf.
It was rather held in Devinder Partap Narain Rai Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, A.I.R. 1962 SC 1334 that in such a situation, second inquiry is not barred.
It was rather concluded that adjudication on merits by a quasi-judicial order may or may not debar commencement of another inquiry in respect of the same subject matter.
The courts below did not exonerate the plaintiff from the charge levelled against him.
The courts below only concluded that the delinquent official was not afforded fair opportunity of defending himself and he was not heard before passing of the order imposing penalty of recovery.
In other words, it was only concluded that procedure for imposing penalty of recovery.
In other words, it was only concluded that procedure for imposing penalty was irregular.
In this view of the matter it cannot be said that such a decision can prevent the State from commencing another inquiry in respect of the same subject matter.
The things would have been entirely different if the courts below had come to the conclusion that the plaintiff was not guilty of the charges or he was exonerated of the charges levelled against him.
5.
For the view I have taken above, this appeal is partly allowed and judgment and decree of the courts below is modified only to the extent that it shall now be open to the defendant-appellants to proceed in the matter afresh and conclude the same after following due procedure as contemplated by Service Rules, the provisions of the Constitution of India and principle of natural justice.
Appeal partly allowed.