Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On September 6, 1992, the Director of Technical Education advertised various categories of posts including five posts of Instructors in the Trade of Cutting and Tailoring.
Two posts were to be filled up from the general category.
Three posts were reserved for the categories of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner was one of the candidates.
She was not selected.
She has filed this writ petition with the grievance that the respondents have actually appointed 14 persons.
It is alleged that appointment of Instructors in excess of the advertised posts is illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim, primarily on the ground that in the advertisement a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement filed by respondents 1 and 2, it has been categorically stated that "the number of posts are subject to variation."
It has also been submitted that the petitioner's claim having been duly considered, she cannot complain of denial of equality of opportunity.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that the respondents having advertised five vacancies in the cadre of Instructors (Cutting and Tailoring), they could not have given appointment to 14 persons.
As such, the appointments in excess of five posts which had been made cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
It is undoubtedly correct that while advertising the posts, it had been indicated that the number of posts can vary.
However, the meaning of this provision is only that there can be a marginal deviation.
The Department can fill up four posts or fill up six but it does not mean that the Department has the liberty to fill up almost three times the number of posts which had been actually advertised.
5.
The purpose of advertising the posts is primarily to ensure equality of opportunity to the eligible candidates.
It is intended to enable them to submit their applications so as to be able to compete.
It is not unlikely that certain persons who had appeared in the examination may be awaiting their results.
There may be many others who may not have completed the prescribed experience of three years by the last date of submission of applications.
If an authority fills up three times the number of advertised posts at the time of one selection, it obviously shuts out the doors to those who may become eligible subsequently.
It is on account of this reason that the Courts have repeatedly taken the view that the department should not fill up more than the advertised posts.
The rule in this behalf was eunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Hoshiar Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, JT 1993(5) SC 63 : 1996(3) SCT 29.
It was reiterated in the case of State of Bihar and another v. Madan Mohan Singh and others, 1993(5) SLR 601.
It was on the basis of these decisions that a Full Bench of this Court in Bijender Singh etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., 1994(3) PLR 1 : 1997(1) SCT 756 (P&H)(DB), had inter alia observed that "a wholesale departure from the number of posts advedrtised by the Board is not at all permissible".
It is no doubt true that in Prem Singh and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, 1996(3) RSJ 98 : 1996(3) S.C.T.
563, it was observed that "it would not be just and equitable to invalidate all the appointments made against posts in excess of 62."
However, even in this case it was held that the Electricity Board "was not justified in making more than 62 appointments pursuant to the advertisement published on 2.11.1991 and the selection process which followed thereafter."
Consequently, there appears to be no departure from the rule eunciated by the Apex Court in the cases of Hoshiar Singh and Madan Mohan Singh (supra).
In fact, the rule appears to have been reiterated in Ashok Kumar and others v. The Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board and others, 1996(1) SCT 660.
It was held that the "recruitment of the candidates in excess of the notified vacancies is a denial and deprivation of the constitutional right under Article 14 read with Article 16(1) of the Constitution".
The position in the present case being similar, the action is clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
6.
Mr. Dhillon, however, submits that the petitioner can have no legitimate grievance as her claim had been duly considered.
He is actually right to the extent that the petitioner was one of the candidates and was rejected.
However, her right to compete again cannot be taken away by filling up the posts from amongst the candidates who have already appeared in the selection conducted by the respondents.
Indeed that was the view expressed by the Full Bench in Bijender Singh's case (supra).
7.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 16, submits that she belongs to the category of Majbi Sikhs.
She had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7190 of 1994.
It was in pursuance of the notice given by this Court that she had been appointed.
8.
According to the advertisement, only one post was reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
Who should get it ?
The respondents shall consider the claims of qualified candidates in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government and the law laid down by this Court.
If in view of those instructions the 16th respondent has to be preferred to other candidates, she will be allowed to continue.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the action of the respondents in making appointments in excess of the five posts which had been advertised is illegal.
The respondents are directed to appoint persons from each of the categories viz. general, Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes in accordance with the advertisement and the law.
The appointments of the persons who were in excess of the advertised posts shall stand quashed.
These posts shall be filled up after issuing afresh advertisement.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.