BA Khan, J - Petitioner was selected by the Subordinate Services Recruitment Board (SSRB) for appointment to the post of teacher in Poonch district vide selection list dated 21111995.
He claims that he thereafter approached the Distt.
Education Officer (DEO), Poonch, who directed him to report to the Zonal Education Officer (ZEO).
He further asserts that he reported in the ZEO's office on 5.12.1995 and ever since has been attending that office but he was neither being allowed to work as a teacher nor paid any salary till date.
He also submits that in the meanwhile, he was detailed for examination duty and then election duty in the Kashmir valley and in support has placed certificates on record.
He accordingly prays for a direction to the respondents to release his salary from 4121995, the date when he reported to respondent No. 2.
2.
Respondents have filed objections admitting that the petitioner figured at S. No. 124 of the select list of the SSRB and pursuant thereto he reported before respondent No. 2 who by order dated 4121995 directed all selected candidates including the petitioner to report to the ZEO concerned who had to examine their credentials.
The candidates were told that formal order of appointment/adjustment would be passed by respondent No. 2 after verification of the certificates and on the satisfaction of the appointing authority regarding the candidate's character and antecedents in terms of Rule 17(d) of the J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 (1956 Rules) and the J&K Civil Services (Verification of Character and Antecedents) Instructions of 1969 sanctioned vide Government Order No. Home-559-IS of 1969 dated 1891969 which empowered an appointing authority to satisfy himself about the character and antecedents of a candidate before making his appointment.
3.
In this context it is pointed out that after the petitioner's case was referred for such verification, ``law enforcing agency'' intimated that he was involved in FIRs No. 233/90, 97/91, 99/91, 49/93 and 15/95 for offences under Sections 148, 149, 353 and 336 RPC and that the challans in respect of these FIRs were pending in the court and in one of the cases, a fine of Rs. 50 was imposed on him.
It is accordingly projected that the verification of the character and antecedents of the petitioner did not qualify him for appointment to the post of teacher and accordingly the appointing authority did not issue any appointment order to him.
4.
At one stage under orders of the court granting liberty to the parties to support their rival contentions by any documentary evidence, petitioner filed an application or 1121997 bringing on record a communication of the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Poonch dated 1171996 indicating that no challan was produced in cases under FIRs No. 99/91 and 97/91 which were declared untraced.
It was also stated in the communication that only cases relating to FIRs 49/93 and 15/95 were pending before the court and that no fine was imposed on the petitioner in case FIR No. 233 of 1990.
Thereafter learned counsel for the respondents was asked to produce the relevant record from the ZEO's office to verify whether the petitioner had attended that office.
The record was produced which contained the correspondence between the ZEO, DEO, SSP and Inspector General of Police (CID).
The first communication is addressed by the DEO to the Chairman of SSRB informing the latter that the verification of the antecedents of the petitioner by the Police Station had ``negated his appointment as he was involved in as many as 5 FIRs''.
The record also bears a communication from the ZEO to respondent No. 2 (CEO) certifying that the petitioner had reported to the ZEO's office on 5.12.1995 and that he was pressing hard for the ``issuance of attendance certificate from this date''.
It also contains the communication of the IGP (CID) dated 2571996 which only states that the character certificates issued by the Deputy SP, Hqrs.
were invalid and adverse reports given earlier be treated as final.
This appears to be in response to the Dy.
S.P.
having cleared some of the candidates.
The record also contains the crucial communication of the SSP Poonch dated 1171996 contents whereof stand already referred to hereinbefore and which amongst other things pointed out that there was nothing adverse against the petitioner except the pendency of two cases under FIRs No. 49/93 and 15/95 in the Court.
5.
In this scenario, all that remains to be seen is: whether the respondents were justified in withholding the appointment order of the petitioner in the facts and circumstances of the case in light of rule 17(D) of the 1956 Rules and the Government instructions contained in Government Order No. Home-559/IS of 1969 ?
6.
The case of the petitioner is that once he was selected by the SSRB, he could not be refused appointment save otherwise on the ground of his unsuitability or unfitness for the post.
Any verification conducted at his back could not deprive him of appointment more so in the circumstances when the appointing authority had not passed any reasoned order applying its mind to the matter and declaring him unfit and unsuitable for the post.
In other words, it is submitted that the action of respondent No. 2 in withholding the appointment order was arbitrary and unreasonable and violative of his right of equal opportunity of employment guaranteed to him under Article 16 of the Constitution.
7.
The stand of the respondents, on the contrary, is that the appointing authority was within his rights to verify the character and antecedents of the petitioner and that since the IGP (CID) had reported adversely against him because of his involvement in as many as 5 FIRs for various offences, it was not bound to pass any appointment order in favour of the petitioner.
It is also submitted that the fact of the petitioner's involvement in criminal offences rendered him unsuitable for the post of a teacher whereby he was required to impart education to the students.
Reliance in this regard is placed on AIR 1958 Calcutta 654, AIR 1964 Kerala 238, AIR 1965 Kerala 18 and State of Kerala v. KA Balan and another, 1979(1) SLR 91.
8.
It goes without saying that the appointing authority reserves the right to inquire into and verify the character and antecedents of a candidate for appointment to any service by direct recruitment.
Rule 17 of the 1956 Rules leaves no scope for doubt in this regard by providing that no person shall be eligible for appointment to any service by direct recruitment unless be satisfied the appointing authority that his character and antecedents were such as to qualify him for such service.
This rule surely vests a power in the appointing authority to satisfy himself about the character and antecedents of a candidate seeking appointment and to ascertain whether he qualifies for such appointment in the service.
The Government instructions contained in Government Order No. Home-559-IS of 1969 dated 1891969 provide a procedure for verification of the character and antecedents of the job seekers.
9.
Therefore, it is not in dispute that an appointing authority can refuse appointment to a candidate if the verification of his character and antecedents leads to the conclusion that he does not qualify for the post.
It is also not the case that the selection of a candidate entitles him or her, as a matter of course, to appointment.
But, where a selected candidate, figuring in a select list which is operated upon by the appointing authority in order of merit, is to be deprived of an appointment in reference to the verification of his character and antecedents, the appointing authority is under an obligation to pass appropriate orders on the basis of the available material and to declare him unsuitable and disqualified for the post in service by a reasoned order.
The appointing authority cannot keep the matter in cold storage and hold the available ``adverse material'' close to his chest without formation of any opinion on such material and taking appropriate action supported by reasons to disentitle a selected candidate from appointment.
Such a course of action would be wholly and grossly arbitrary infringing the right of equality of employment of a candidate at his back.
The judgments cited by learned counsel for the respondents reiterate the well settled propositions in this regard and do not lay down any principle to the contrary.
These judgments, as a matter of fact, support the view proposed to be taken by me.
10.
The requirement of passing of the order by the appointing authority on the basis of available material becomes necessary to ensure that the selected candidate is not deprived of his employment on an extraneous consideration or relevant material.
The verification of antecedents and character of a candidate through the police agency may throw up material which may not be relevant to his suitability for the job or which may be extraneous to the nature of his duties attached to the post.
The selected candidate in such a situation, cannot be shown the door merely because the verification had disclosed some secret information about him.
11.
Applying this to the present case, it is not difficult to reach the conclusion that the respondents had arbitrarily and unjustifiably withheld the appointment order of the petitioner to his prejudice and detriment.
It is not anybody's case that the appointing authority had passed any order in the matter on the basis of the information gathered from the police agency to declare the petitioner unsuitable for the post.
The authority had only kept silent in the matter without taking any action constraining the petitioner to run from pillar to post to know the fate of his appointment.
Added to this is the fact that the petitioner's order of appointment was withheld on incorrect information and in contravention of the procedure prescribed for verification of the antecedents and character of the candidates seeking employment in the Government service.
It is borne by the respondents' record that out of 5 FIRs, 2 FIRs stood untraced by the concerned police agency and only two remained pending in the court.
Such pendency which could also result in acquittal of an accused, could not constitute a factor for depriving a selected candidate from employment unless he was convicted and sentenced which would earn him a disqualification for holding the post.
Similarly it is also refuted by the report of the SSP that the petitioner was convicted in one FIR No. 233/90 and imposed a fine of Rs. 50/-.
All this goes to show that the information gathered by the police agency concerned was not relevant for the purposes of disqualifying the petitioner from being appointed to the post of teacher.
In the result, I allow this petition and command the respondents to appoint the petitioner to the post of teacher in Poonch district and treat him in service with effect from 5.12.1995 with all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.