MS Liberhan, J - Our this order will dispose of civil writ petitions 3723 and 8230 of 1995 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
Skeletal facts in order to dispose of these writ petition and the question raised undisputedly are to the effect that petitioners were recruited as Sanitary Inspector.
They were conferred with the powers of Food Inspectors.
Later they were promoted to the post of Laboratory Technicians, which promotion they challenged through a civil writ petition No. 1653 of 1985 inter alia on the ground that they cannot be promoted in an ex cadre post.
The said petition was admitted for consideration and is still pending.
However, promotions of the petitioners to the said cadre post were stayed.
In the meanwhile petitioners' powers as Food Inspector were withdrawn by the State Government.
The said withdrawal of powers as Food Inspectors was challenged vide civil writ petition 2497 of 1987, inter alia, contending that powers of Food Inspectors have been withdrawn in terms of the policy which is presently also relied upon on the ground that they have refused promotions though the notification issued for withdrawal of powers was a simpliciter withdrawal and no reasons were given in the said notification.
Reference may be made to paragraphs 9 and 11 (iii) of civil writ petition 2497 of 1987 which was read over before us by the learned Additional Advocate General Haryana, appearing for the State.
This has not been refuted by learned counsel for the petitioners.
2.
The petitioners were privity to the above referred lis.
The writ petition was dismissed on 151987 upholding the validity of withdrawal of food powers from the petitioner.
This order was further affirmed by Hon'ble the Supreme Court on 1691987 in a S.L.P.
The State for reasons best known to them again conferred powers on the petitioners which resulted in withdrawal of powers by the impugned Notifications Annexure P9 which is pari materia with the earlier notification in all respects.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners vehmently contended that since juniors are continuing with powers of Food Inspectors, in case of petitioners the same have been withdrawn, consequently the impugned order suffers from arbitrariness and discrimination.
Since the policy of conferring the food powers is in the nature of procedural fairness the same has to be followed in its letter and spirits.
The policy is binding in nature in its entirety and Food powers cannot be taken away from the petitioners.
We may hasten to add that it was contended that in view of the reasons that powers were withdrawn from the petitioners as they refused to accept promotion outside the cadre for which they cannot be compelled apart from the fact that same question of law has been decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of M.P. and others v. Ramesh Kumar, 1995(4) SCT 330(SC).
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents refuted the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner, inter alia, contending that withdrawal of powers of the petitioners has not adversely affected them in any manner whatsoever.
Neither it has affected in their rank, seniority, chances of promotion or any allowances.
It is for the employer to get a particular job from a particular person in a manner most suitable to him in the interest of administration and proper functioning.
Forcing the State to confer particular power to a particular person in a particular manner would be freezing the administrative skill and meeting of the exigencies of the administration.
The policy at the most may be guideline.
It does not confer any right on the petitioners to enforce the same in exercise of writ jurisdiction particularly, when they have already invoked the jurisdiction of the Court and the Court declined to interfere in the similar facts and circumstances, secondly, it does not affect the petitioners adversely in any manner whatsoever.
A question of law and fact inter se the parties, once decided cannot be re-agitated time and again solely on the ground that same act was repeated after a lapse of 2/3 years.
Otherwise also since no adverse order affecting the interest of the petitioners has been passed, mere withdrawal of powers or exercise of powers by some juniors persons who may be more efficient, by itself would not confer any right on the petitioners because of their seniority to exercise a particular power.
Petitioners are further estopped by their own act and conduct in view of the order already passed in CWP No. 2497 of 1987 wherein their powers were withdrawn on the same ground as taken up now and their right to enforce their claim was declined right upto Hon'ble the Supreme Court.
5.
There is no dispute with the law laid down by the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
6.
The law laid down and the observations made cannot be read out of the context in the text of the facts in these cases.
Facts of the precedents cited are not even remotely pari materia with the facts and circumstances of the present case.
We may hasten to add that the petitioners are neither in any manner adversely affected either in their status, salary, seniority, chances of promotion nor in any other manner nor any right of the petitioners protected by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India has been violated.
Conferring of powers by itself and taking of a particular duty from a particular person in a cadre cannot be treated as violative of Article 16 of the Constitution amounting to discrimination especially when there is no statutory duty prescribed for the petitioners.
What job has to be taken or what duty is to be entrusted to a particular person in the cadre is the sole prerogative of the State.
An employee cannot be given a licence or permit to say that he will discharge particular functions or he should be conferred with particular powers to function.
Taking other view would be nothing else but perpetuating the draconian rule of law, conferring powers on the employees, to direct the employers to permit the employees to perform a particular duty in the manner they desire.
7.
In view of the peculiar facts and circumstances referred to above, we do not find it a fit case to interfere in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
The writ petition is dismissed with costs.