Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioners have prayed for quashing the order dated 22nd June, 1981 (Annexure P-3) and they have also prayed for a direction to the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 not to give effect to the aforesaid order.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that Nirmal Singh, petitioner No. 1 was appointed as a Clerk on ad hoc basis on 6th July, 1967 and Gurnam Singh (Petitioner No. 2) was appointed as Clerk on ad hoc basis on 28th February, 1968.
As per averments made in the writ petition, the name of petitioner No. 1 was sent by the Employment Exchange along with certain other persons and petitioner No. 2 was promoted.
The proposed seniority list (Annexure P-1) was circulated on 7th December, 1978 and the petitioners were shown to have been appointed on regular basis with effect from 1st March, 1969.
They were, however, shown senior to the private respondents in that provisional seniority list.
Vide Annexure P-2, dated 27th July, 1979, another provisional seniority list of Clerks was circulated and in this list, both the petitioners were shown senior to the private respondents.
In this circular letter, it was further stated that any official feeling aggrieved by the same, might submit his objections within one month.
In para 5 of the writ petition, it is stated that the respondents Nos. 3 to 15 had submitted their representations against the seniority list (Annexure P-2) but the said representations were rejected by the Director, Public Instruction, Punjab.
According to the petitioners, the seniority list (Annexure P-2) had thus become final.
Thereafter another seniority list dated 22nd June, 1981 (Annexure P-3) was circulated and in that seniority list both the petitioners were shown junior to all the private respondents.
In this circular letter, it was specifically stated that pursuant to the acceptance of the appeal of Sarvshri Som Nath Gupta etc. against the seniority of Sarvshri Nirmal Singh and Gurnam Singh (Petitioners herein), it was decided that those employees whose names had been recommended by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board prior to 3rd March, 1969 would be senior to those employees whose service had been regularised from 3rd March, 1969.
Since the services of the petitioners were regularised from 3rd March, 1969 and the names of the private respondents had been recommended by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board prior to 3rd March, 1969, the names of the private respondents were shown senior to the petitioners in the seniority list, Annexure P-3.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid seniority list (Annexure P-3) the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioners.
3.
In reply to the writ petition, separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2; respondents Nos. 3 to 6, 9 and 10 to 13; and respondents Nos. 14 and 15, respectively.
4.
Mr. Agnihotri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, drew my attention to para 1-A of the writ petition and submitted that the appointment of petitioner No. 1 was made on the recommendation of the Employment Exchange and he continued working on this post with effect from 12th July, 1967 till his services were regularised and his appointment was against an existing vacancy and as such he ought to have been given seniority with effect from 12th July, 1967.
He further submitted that similarly petitioner No. 2 was promoted to the post of Clerk on ad hoc basis with effect from 28th February, 1968 and continued working against this post till his services were regularised and his promotion was also against an existing vacancy and as such, he should also have been given seniority with effect from 28th February, 1968.
In support of his submissions the learned counsel placed reliance on the following judgments;  (i) Malook Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(2) SCT 133(P&H) : 1991(7) SLP 367; (ii)State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734(SC); and  (iii)Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(4) SCT 800 (P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 1.
5.
The Learned counsel further submitted that the private respondents had been given seniority from the date when their names were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board but on that date they were not even in service.
He, therefore, contended that either the private respondents should be given seniority from the date when they actually joined or in the alternative the petitioners should be given seniority from the date when they joined and had been continuously working against the post.
Lastly, the learned counsel contended that the seniority list circulated vide Annexure P-3 should be set aside as no opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioners before finalising the seniority list (Annexure P-3).
In support of this submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in PS Sadasivaswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) SLR 53.
6.
Mr. Vashisht, Learned AAG appearing on behalf of the State referred to Para 2 of the written statement and submitted that the services of the petitioners were regularised as Clerks with effect from 3rd March, 1969, as per Government instructions contained in the letter dated 22nd May, 1969.
In this connection, he also drew my attention to Annexure R-1, wherein it is clearly stated that the petitioners were appointed on ad hoc basis in make- hift arrangement and their services were regularised in terms of the Punjab Government letter No. 1726-SII-4 (2)-69 dated 28th February, 1969.
It is further stated in this letter that vide the Punjab Government letter dated 22nd May, 1969, it was made clear that the services of such employees were to be regularised from 3rd March, 1969 and they will rank junior to those persons whose names were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, prior to 3rd March, 1969 notwithstanding their joining earlier than the recommendees of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
It may be relevant to point out here that the petitioners have not challenged the instructions contained in the Punjab Government Letter date 22nd May, 1969 in this writ petition.
The learned AAG further drew my attention to para 8 of the writ petition and Annexure R-4 and submitted that the petitioner No. 1 was fully aware of the fact that the private respondents had filed an appeal against their seniority and he had even submitted the representation that the appeal filed by the private respondents should be rejected.
7.
Mr. Jatinder Sharma, Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents Nos. 3 to 6, 9, and 10 and 13, and Mr. PL Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents Nos. 14 and 15, reiterated the submissions made by the learned AAG.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
The matter regarding fixing of seniority of the employees who were appointed on ad hoc basis was examined by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Chambel Singh (supra).
In this case, the Full Bench referred to the following observations in the case of State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey, (supra):  ``PARA 22.
There can be no doubt that these two conclusions have to be read harmoniously and conclusion (B) cannot cover cases which are expressly excluded by conclusion (A).
We may, therefore, first refer to conclusion (A).
It is clear from conclusion (A) that to enable seniority to be counted from the date of initial appointment and not according to the date of confirmation, the incumbent of the post has to be initially appointed ``according to rules''.
The corollary set out in conclusion (A) then is, that `where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as to stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority'.
Thus the corollary in conclusion (A) expressly excluded the category of cases where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules being made only as a stopgap arrangement.
The case of the writ petitions squarely falls within this corollary in conclusion (A), which says that the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for counting the seniority'' ``25.
In our opinion, the conclusion (B) was added to cover a different kind of situation, wherein the appointments are otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural requirements laid down by the rules.
This is clear from the opening words of the conclusion (B), namely, `if the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules' and the later expression `till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules'.
We read conclusion (B) and it must be so read to reconcile with the conclusion (A) to cover the cases where the initial appointment is made against an existing vacancy, not limited to a fixed period of time or purpose by the appointment order itself, and is made subject to the deficiency in the procedural requirements prescribed by the rules for adjudging suitability of the appointee for the post being cured at the time of regularisation, the appointee being eligible and qualified in every manner for a regular appointment on the date of initial appointment in such cases.
Decision about the nature of the appointment, for determining whether it falls in this category has to be made on the basis of the terms of the initial appointment itself and the provisions in the rules.
In such cases, the deficiency in the procedural requirements laid down by the rules has to be cured at the first available opportunity, without any default of the employee, and the appointee must continue in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules.
In such cases, the appointee is not to blame for the deficiency in the procedural requirements under the rules at the time of his initial appointment, and the appointment not being limited to a fixed period of time is intended to be a regular appointment, subject to the procedural requirements of the rules being fulfilled at the earliest.
In such cases also, if there be any delay in curing the defects on account of any fault of the appointee, the appointee would not get the full benefit of the earlier period on account of his default, the benefit being confined only to the period for which he is not to blame.
This category of cases is different from those covered by the corollary in conclusion (A) which relates to appointment only on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement and not according to rules.
It is, therefore, not correct to say that the present case can fall within the ambit of conclusion (B) even though they are squarely covered by the corollary in conclusion (A).''
Following the above observations, the full Bench held as follows :-  ``(i) that the period as an ad hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of incumbent; (ii) it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop-gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered will be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre; (iii) In the absence of Rules, it would have to be kept in view as to whether the appointment so made is against an existing vacancy and not for a limited period and in that case the period so spent by an incumbent can be considered to determine his seniority in the cadre; (iv) if the appointment is otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural defects, such defect/defects stand cured with the subsequent regularisation; (v) mere long stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of delinquent officer or on account of interm direction of the Court will not clothe an appointee with any right to tag such a period to determine his seniority in the cadre.
Period of service as a stop gap arrangement shall be ignored while determining his seniority in the cadre.
The above points are only illustrative and not exhaustive in content.''
9.
Mr. Agnihotri, learned counsel for the petitioners has relied on conclusion (ii) of the Full Bench and submitted that since the appointment of the petitioners was as per rules and not by way of stop gap arrangements and only procedural formality was required to be complied with and as such the services rendered by the petitioners on ad hoc basis should have been taken into account towards the seniority of the petitioners.
I, however do not find any merit in the contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Admittedly, the private respondents were appointed pursuant to the recommendations made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, whereas the names, of the petitioners were not recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and on the contrary, they were appointed purely on ad hoc basis in make-shift arrangement and their services were regularised with effect from 3rd March, 1969, in terms of the Punjab Government instructions contained in letter dated 8th February, 1969.
By a bare reading of Annexure P-1, dated the 5th December, 1980, it is clear that the Punjab Government vide instructions contained in 22nd May, 1969 had decided that the services of the employees like the petitioners were to be regularised w.e.f.
3rd March, 1969 and they would rank junior to those persons whose names were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board prior to 3rd March, 1969.
It is not disputed that the names of all the private respondents were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board prior to 3rd March, 1969.
As stated herein above, the Punjab Government instructions contained in the letter dated 22nd May, 1969, have not been challenged by the petitioners in this writ petition.
It was only by inadvertance that the private respondents were shown junior to the petitioners by the proposed seniority lists, copies of which have been annexed as Annexures P-1 and P-2 and after the attention of the authorities was drawn by the private respondents to the instructions dated 22nd May, 1969, the seniority list was correctly issued by the official respondents vide Annexure P-3.
10.
There is no merit also in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the seniority list (Annexure P-3) was liable to be set aside as the petitioners were not given an opportunity of hearing.
By a reading of the seniority lists Annexures P-1 and P-2, it is clear that both these seniority lists were provisional and were not final seniority lists, wherein the petitioners have been shown senior to the private respondents.
In Annexure P-1, it is clearly stated that if any official feels aggrieved against the proposed seniority list, he could submit his objections in writing within one week of the date of the said letter.
Similarly, Annexure P-2 itself indicates that the seniority list annexed with this letter was provisional seniority list and not final seniority list.
Since in these two seniority lists, it was clearly stated that any official feeling aggrieved by the same could submit his objections within the time prescribed in those letters, the question of granting any opportunity to the petitioners before issue of the final seniority list, (Annexure P-3) did not arise.
Even otherwise, Annexure P-4 shows that petitioner No. 1 was aware of the appeal filed by the private respondents against the proposed seniority lists Annexure P-1 and Annexure P-2 and the said petitioner had in fact submitted representation against the appeal filed by the private respondents.
In view of these facts, this contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is also rejected.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners had also relied on the order dated 10th January, 1996 passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court in C.M.
10999 of 1995 and CWP 3371 of 1981 (Rattan Pal v. State of Punjab).
From the records, I find that this order was passed on the basis of the consent of the learned counsel for the parties.
From the records, I further find that all the private respondents in the present case except one were not being represented by any counsel in that case and even the service of those respondents was not complete.
Further by this order, the learned Single Judge had only directed the official respondents to hear the petitioners in that case after affording an opportunity of hearing to all the private respondents.
The learned AAG Punjab has produced in the Court photo copy of the order dated 6th May, 1996 which also indicates that after the hearing of the concerned officials, the seniority list issued vide Annexure P-3 has been upheld.
For the reasons recorded hereinabove, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the writ petition is dismissed accordingly.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.