B Rai, J - This appeal has been preferred by Ex-Assistant Sub Inspector Pritam Singh against the judgment dated July 28, 1979 of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, confirming the judgment and decree, dated April 29, 1978 of Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, dismissing his suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated April 30, 1975 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, and confirmed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jullundur Range, Jullundur Cantt., was bad in the eye of law and that he still continues to be in the service of the Punjab State.
2.
Facts, in brief, are that the appellant joined service as Constable in the Police Department of the Punjab Government on March 20, 1960.
According to him, in February 1975, he was posted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police in Police Lines, Amritsar.
It was alleged against him that on February 1, 1975 he was absent from duty at night time and was found in drunken condition in the area of Police Station, `B' Division, Amritsar, and was creating nuisance.
Some public men informed the Moharrir Head Constable of Police Station, `B' Division, Amritsar, to that effect.
Constables of the Flying Squad were deputed who reached the spot and the person found in drunken condition came out to be Assistant Sub Inspector Pritam Singh.
At that time, he was bare, headed and was bleeding from his head.
On receipt of information, Inspector Anup Singh Incharge, Police Station Civil Lines, also reached Police Station `B' Division.
Inspector Anup singh and Sub Inspector Dalip Singh found him not in his senses being in drunken condition.
He was taken to VJ Hospital, Amritsar by Inspector Anup Singh where he was medically examined by Dr. Sawinder Paul Singh, who found that he was under the influence of liquor.
According to Pritam Singh Assistant Sub Inspector No. 195/Jull, these allegations were false.
Inspector Anup Singh made a detailed report to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar.
Departmental Enquiry was conducted by Om Parkash, Deputy Superintendent of Police/Hqrs.
Amritsar.
The Enquiry Officer returned the finding that Pritam Singh had absented himself from the Police Lines at night time on February 1, 1975.
He was found unconscious under the influence of liquor, in the jurisdiction of Police Station `B' Division, Amritsar.
He was found dead-drunk and was creating nuisance in the area of Bagh Ramanand at the relevant time.
The Senior Superintendent of Police agreed with the report of the Enquiry Officer and issued Show Cause Notice dated April 4, 1975 to Pritam Singh as to why penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed on him.
Reply dated April 12, 1975 to that Show Cause Notice was furnished by Pritam Singh, which was not found satisfactory by the Senior Superintendent of Police, who formed an opinion that penalty of dismissal from service would meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, Pritam Singh A.S.I.
No. 195/Jull was dismissed from service with effect from April 30, 1975 afternoon, vide order of even date.
Against the order, dated April 30, 1975 of Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, Pritam Singh filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jullundur Range, Jullundur Cantt, but the same was dismissed vide order, dated November 6, 1975.
3.
Feeling aggrieved, Pritam Singh filed Civil Suit No. 293 of 141076/22977 for declaration to the effect that order dated April 30, 1975 of Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, dismissing him from service which was affirmed in appeal, was wrong, illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, capricious and void, and that he still continues to be in the service of the Punjab State on the ground that the allegations levelled against him were false and un-founded, the charge-sheet was not legal and valid; reply to the charge-sheet was not properly considered; the departmental enquiry was defective inasmuch as the procedure adopted by the Enquiry Officer was not in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short, the Police Rules) the Show Cause Notice was invalid; proper opportunity was not afforded to him to defend his case in the Enquiry as no independent witness was examined during the course of Enquiry to substantiate the allegations that he was in drunken state; and that the order of his dismissal from service was not a speaking one.
The suit was contested by the defendants and by way of written statement, all the pleas taken by him were controverted and it was asserted that the order, dated April 30, 1975 was valid in the eye of law and did not suffer from any infirmity.
The parties litigated on the following Issue :  ``Whether the impugned order dated 30.4.1975 passed by Defendant No. 2 is illegal, wrong, etc. on the grounds mentioned in para No. 2 of the plaint ?
OPP'' Both the parties led evidence and consequently finding on the issue was returned against Pritam Singh and his suit was dismissed with costs by Subordinate Judge First Class, Amritsar vide his judgment dated April 29, 1978.
Feeling aggrieved, he preferred Civil Appeal No. 170 of 1978 against the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
The appeal was heard by the learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar who vide his judgment, dated July 28, 1979 dismissed the same with costs, as stated in the earlier part of the judgment.
4.
Undaunted by his failures before the Departmental Authorities and the two Civil Courts below, Pritam Singh preferred the present Regular Second Appeal.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have carefully gone through the material available on the record.
6.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that allegation against Pritam Singh was that once he was found drunk in a public place while posted in the Police Lines, Amritsar, which entailed his dismissal from service under Rule 162 of the Police Rules.
It was further argued that before awarding the punishment of dismissal from service, it was obligatory on the part of the Senior Superintendent of Police to come to a firm finding that the alleged conduct of the delinquent found unconscious under the influence of liquor, in the jurisdiction of official was gravest act of the misconduct.
It was solitary act of the delinquent official and there is no finding that the cumulative effect of continued misconduct had rendered him incorrigible and completely unfit for Police service.
That part, the punishing Authority was required to take into consideration the length of service of the official and his claim to the pension.
On the date of dismissal from service, the appellant had more than fifteen years of service to his credit and by putting in 4/5 years more of service, he could claim pension under the Rules, but the Senior Superintendent of Police neither applied his mind to these aspects nor did he record a firm finding that the appellant had committed gravest act of misconduct.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the order of dismissal from service is bad in the eye of law and, as such, is liable to be quashed.
In support of his arguments, he has cited Narinder Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) SCT 222 (P&H) and State of Punjab v. Gurdip Singh, 1994(3) SCT 480(P&H).
7.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the State reiterated all the pleas taken in the written statement and relied upon State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex. Constable, 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 2188,  to contend that the order of dismissal from service, dated April 30, 1975 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police which was affirmed in appeal is quite legal, in conformity with the provisions of Rule 162 of the Police Rules and does not suffer from any infirmity.
8.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions, I am of the firm view that the punishing Authority failed to take into consideration the intent and content of Rule 162 of the Police Rules before passing the order of dismissal from service, dated April 30, 1975, and on that short ground, the said order and that of appellate Authority are liable to be quashed.
Rule 162 of the Police Rules ibid reads as under :  ``162 Dismissal - Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.''
Rule 162 of the police Rules was considered by their Lordships of the Supreme court in Ram Singh's case (supra) and it was held that the word `misconduct', though not capable of precise definition, its reflection receive, its connotation from the context, the delinquency in its performance and its effect on the discipline and the nature of the duty.
It may involve moral turpitude, it must be improper or wrong behaviour; unlawful behaviour, wilful in character; forbidden act, a transgression of established and definite rule of action or code of conduct but not mere error of judgment, carelessness or negligence in performance of the duty; the act complained of bears forbidden quality or character.
Its ambit has to be construed with reference to the subject-matter and the context wherein the term occurs, regard being had to the scope of the statute and the public purpose it seeks to serve.
The police service is a disciplined service and it requires to maintain strict discipline.
Laxity in this behalf erodes discipline in the service causing serious effect in the maintenance of law and order.
Rule 162(1) was analysed in two parts.
The first part is referable to gravest acts of misconduct which entails awarding an order of dismissal.
Undoubtedly there is distinction between gravest misconduct and grave misconduct.
Before awarding an order of dismissal, it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
As stated, the first part relates to gravest acts of misconduct.
The second part of the Rule bears out the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service and that the length of service of the offender and his claim for pension should be taken into account in an appropriate case.
Second part is referable to a misconduct minor in character which does not by itself warrant an order of dismissal but due to continued acts of misconduct would have insidious cumulative effect on service morale may be a ground to take lenient view of giving an opportunity to reform.
Despite giving such opportunities, if the delinquent officer proved to be incorrigible and found completely unfit to remain in service then to maintain discipline in the service, instead of dismissing the delinquent officer, a lesser punishment of compulsory retirement or demotion to a lower grade or rank or removal from service without affecting his future chances of re-employment, if any, may meet the ends of justice.
It was further held that the word `acts' would include singular ``act'' as well and colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
9.
In Gurdip Singh's case (supra), the learned Single Judge of this Court, following the dictum in Ram Partap Singh Constable v. State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) RSJ 566 and Ram Kishan Constable v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) RSJ 637, observed that no doubt, even a single act of misconduct can, in a given situation amount to the gravest act of misconduct, but the mandate of the rule-making authority is clear that the punishment of dismissal from service has not to be awarded in case of a misconduct of ordinary nature, and held that dismissal on the ground of a single stray case of taking liquor, though misconduct, was wholly arbitrary and illegal.
A Division Bench of this Court in Narinder Kumar's case (supra) placing reliance on Ram Singh's case (supra), State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174 and Bhagwat Prasad v. Inspector General of Police, 1967 SLR 807 held that, ``This non-consideration of the past record of the petitioner and non-application of mind to the provisions of rule 162 by the disciplinary authority has resulted in injustice to the petitioner and therefore the order of punishment deserves to be quashed.''
Accordingly, the order of dismissal was quashed.
10.
A perusal of order, dated April 30, 1975 of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, dismissing the appellant from service would show that the punishing Authority viz. Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, after considering the report of the Enquiry Officer, came to the conclusion that the defaulter was found unconscious, bare headed and bleeding from his head in a public place.
He had told the public that he was a ``Thanedar'' and on this, some public men had informed the Moharrir Head Constable at Police Station `B' Division, Amritsar to that effect, the defaulter was wearing service revolver; and the he had lowered the image of the Police Department by having been found in such like state in a public place.
It is on this basis that the order of dismissal from service was passed.
No doubt the appellant was posted in Police Lines, was found absent therefrom and in drunken condition in a public place.
It is not the case of the Punishing Authority that after taking liquor, the appellant had abused his colleagues or his superiors; or he refused to perform a specific duty assigned to him at Police Lines, Amritsar.
No doubt a single stray act of misconduct may amount to gravest act of misconduct, such as, while in drunken condition, to refuse to perform the gate duty, to abandon duty as a security guard to a VIP; to commit embezzlement or defalcation of public money; to commit an act which shall amount to moral turpitude; to accept bribe in performance of official duties; to enter into criminal conspiracy, or, to overthrow the Government established by law while in performance of the affairs of the State, may a gravest act of misconduct and on that basis, the Punishing Authority would be fully justified in dismissing the delinquent official.
These instances are illustrative and not exhaustive, but other acts may be not be gravest acts of misconduct calling for severe punishment of dismissal from service.
Keeping in view the length of service of the delinquent official in the light of second part of Rule 162 of the Police Rules, the punishing Authority may award punishment lesser than dismissal from service.
In the instant case, the disciplinary Authority did not firmly find that the act for which the punishment of dismissal from service was awarded, was a gravest act of misconduct on the part of the appellant.
Undisputably, the appellant was appointed as a Constable in the Police Department on March 20, 1960 and by April 30, 1975 when the order of dismissal from service was slapped on him, he had put in more than fifteen years of service and by putting in 4/5 years more, he would have qualifying service to his credit for pension etc., but these aspects were not taken into consideration either by the Punishing Authority or by the Appellate Authority.
That goes a long way to show that the punishing Authority as well as the Appellate Authority were quite oblivious to the provisions of Rule 162 of the Police Rules, and they did not look into the intent and content thereof, and in that a great violence was done by the Authorities concerned to Rule 162 of the Police Rules which is mandatory in nature.
That shows non-application of mind by the department authorities.
It would not be out of place to mention here that these aspects were also not taken into consideration by both the courts below while dismissing the suit of the appellant.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, the order, dated April 30, 1975 of the punishing Authority and order dated November 6, 1975 of the Appellate Authority being in contravention of Rule 162 of the Police Rules and illegal, cannot be allowed to stand.
Accordingly, the same are quashed.
The appeal succeeds.
The judgment and decree dated April 29, 1978 of the trial Court and that of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar dated July 28, 1979 are set aside.
The suit of plaintiff-appellant is decreed to the effect that had he not been dismissed from service, he would have continued in service and is deemed to be in continuous service of the Police Department.
The disciplinary authority shall, however, be at liberty to pass fresh order, if so advised.
Before doing so, the punishing Authority should give an opportunity of personal hearing to the appellant.
Parties to bear their own costs.