VK Bali, J (Oral) - Dr Madan Gopal Gupta through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash order Annexure P7 dated December 31, 1981, vide which he was charge-sheeted under section 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
The charge framed against him was that while posted at BK Hospital, Faridabad, he had opened Gupta Nursing Home and carried on private practice there in violation of the Government instructions issued vide Memo dated 16/17121971.
2.
The facts so far as the same are relevant on limited question posed by Dr. Balaram Gupta, learned Counsel representing the petitioner reveal that the petitioner was appointed on January 25, 1952, as Assistant Surgeon Class II and was confirmed as such on January 25, 1954.
On December 7, 1960, he joined PCMS Class II as Medical Officer through the Punjab Public Service Commission.
On the re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab, he was allocated to the State of Haryana.
Consequently, he became a member of HCMS Class II and was confirmed as Medical Officer on November 1, 1966.
In the year 1974, he was posted in BK Hospital, Faridabad.
While posted there, the allegations on the petitioner for carrying on private practice were made by some persons.
Consequently, on December 23, 1974, Dr. DR Varmani, Assistant Director (Planning) and Dr. SB Madan, Deputy C.M.O.
alongwith various other persons visited the petitioner's residence.
Dr. Varmani submitted a report suggesting that he was doing private practice.
3.
On the report made by Dr. Varmani, the petitioner was issued show-cause notice on March 23, 1977, Annexure P-1.
An Inquiry Officer was appointed who went into the allegations levelled against the petitioner and found the same to be correct.
Th findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer have been reproduced in the written statement at page 6.
It has further been mentioned in the written statement that the matter was initiated on 4121980 and was concluded on 22101981 and the petitioner was given full opportunity to defend his case which he did.
Besides this, the petitioner was also supplied relevant documents which were demanded by him before the Inquiry Officer.
The relevant part of the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer read thus :-  ``From the above, some facts stand out as established beyond doubt.
From 121972, private medical practice could be done by Govt. Medical Officers in paying clinics only and not outside the paying clinics in the Govt. hospitals.
The respondent had not been drawing non-practising allowance after 851970 and was therefore entitled to do private practice after 121972 in the paying clinic set up in Hospital to which he was posted but not outside such paying clinic.
However, on 23121974, he did not attend paying clinic concerned in the BK Hospital at Faridabad and was instead found examining patients in the private clinic in the building in which he has his residence at Faridabad.
The clinic, titled as ``Gupta Nursing Home'' belonged to him and has obviously been established by him for doing private medical practice of the kind which has been prohibited by Govt. w.e.f.
121972.
His being found examining patients in the said clinic on 23121974 was, therefore, sufficient proof of the fact that he was then doing private practice outside the paying clinic of the BK Hospital in contravention of the Govt.'s instructions on the subject.
His subsequent conduct in seeking voluntary retirement form Govt. service proved that he attached more importance to his private medical practice than to his continuation in the Govt. service.
This conduct corroborated the fact that he had deliberately decided, at the time relevant to this enquiry to do private practice in his private clinic in violation of the Govt. instructions.
The charge under enquiry is, therefore, proved against him.''
After the report was submitted against the petitioner second show cause notice was given to the petitioner on December 31, 1981, Annexure P-7.
It appears that the petitioner during the inquiry pending against him served a notice seeking his retirement from service.
The said notice was given on 7111980.
On the facts as detailed above the only contention of Mr. Gupta is that once the petitioner had served a notice seeking his voluntary retirement and the same became effective before final order could be passed against the petitioner pursuant to the departmental inquiry, the inquiry could not to be taken to its logical end.
In other words after the retirement of the petitioner he could not be departmentally proceeded against, contends the learned counsel.
With a view to buttress the argument referred to above it is further stated that in the present case Inquiry Officer was appointed after notice seeking voluntary retirement had become effective.
4.
I have heard the learned Counsel representing the parties and have gone through the record.
I find absolutely no substance in the sole contention of the learned Counsel noted above.
No rule or instructions have been brought to the notice of the Court which may show that departmental proceedings cannot be taken against a government employee after notice given by him seeking voluntary retirement becomes effective.
No case law has been brought to the notice of this Court that may tend to show that continuation of departmental proceedings in such a situation would be illegal.
In fact, Mr. Bhinder, learned Counsel representing the State has brought to my notice instructions dated September 29, 1980 (Annexure P7) clause (vi) of paras reads thus :-  `` A notice of voluntary retirement, given after completion of 20 years qualifying service, will require acceptance by the appropriate authority if the date of retirement, on the expiry of the notice would be earlier than the date on which the Govt. employee concerned could have retired from service under clause (d) of rule 326 of Punjab C.S.R.
Volume I, Part I, voluntarily.
Such acceptance may be generally given in all cases except those (a) in which disciplinary proceedings are pending or contemplated against the Govt. concerned for the imposition of a major penalty and the disciplinary authority, having regard to the circumstances of the case is of the view that the imposition of the penalty of removal or dismissal from service would be warranted in the case; or (b) in which prosecution is contemplated or may have been launched in a Court of law against the Govt. employee concerned.
If it is proposed to accept the notice of voluntary retirement even in such cases, approval of the Minister-in-charge should be obtained in regard to Class I and Class II Govt. employees and that of the Head of the Department in the case of Class III and Class IV government employees.
Even where the notice of voluntary retirement given by a Govt. employee requires acceptance by the appropriate authority, the Govt. employee giving notice may presume acceptance and the retirement shall be effective in terms of the notice unless the competent authority issues an order to the contrary before the expiry of the period of notice.''
5.
The relevant instructions quoted above would, thus, reveal that an employee can be proceeded departmentally despite his having served a notice for his voluntary retirement.
The Court is of the considered view that these instructions have wholesome purpose and interest of justice cannot be served if an employee on having been caught indulging in corruption, cheating or other serious acts of omission and commission may get away by simply serving a notice seeking his voluntary retirement.
If such a course is permitted, having qualifying service, which might earn him pension any one indulging in corruption or other serious matters would simply get away without getting any punishment.
He would be entitled to all post retiral benefits.
This would be nothing short of premium on fraud.
There is absolutely no merit in this petition which deserves to be dismissed.
No costs.
6.
Before I part with this judgment I would like to mention that by virtue of interim order passed on May 11, 1982, the passing of the final order was stayed even though proceedings were to be continue.
Mr. Bhinder has informed me that it is only on account of stay granted by this Court that the final orders have not been passed.
It shall now be open to the respondent department to pass final orders in the matter.
The petitioner died during the pendency of the writ and his legal representatives were duly brought on record of the case.
It shall be for the department to find as to in what way and manner the adverse orders that may be passed against the petitioner shall affect the legal representatives of the deceased.
Petition dismissed.