VK Bali, J (Oral) - Satwant Kaur through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India complains about unsettling the settled matter with regard to her seniority vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 as also that on the dint of her recommendation to the post of Steno-typist on 11.3.1977 prior to regular absorption of respondents 5 and 6 into service, she is senior to the said respondents.
2.
This Court after hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, finds merit in the first relief asked for by the petitioner i.e. for setting aside the order Annexure P-16 vide which the petitioner has been shown junior to respondent No. 4 whereas it finds no merit whatsoever so far as prayer of the petitioner with regard to seniority over and above respondents 5 and 6 is concerned.
3.
Brief facts of the case reveal that respondent department circulated tentative seniority list on 16121977 (Annexure P-6) wherein concededly petitioner was shown at Serial No. 16 followed by respondent No. 4 who was at Serial No. 17.
Objections to the tentative seniority list were obtained and after considering the same, final seniority list was circulated (Annexure P-7) in March, 1978.
Once again the petitioner was shown senior to respondent No. 4.
On account of some additions made in the seniority list which it appears were necessitated on account of confirmation of some ad hoc employees, yet another tentative seniority list was circulated on 1881978.
Respondents 5 and 6 find their mention in the said seniority list and have been shown senior to the petitioner.
Once again objections were invited and final seniority list thereof circulated (Annexure P-11) on 841981.
It is relevant to mention at this stage that respondent No. 4 had filed two representations against the tentative seniority list (Annexure P-8).
Her said representations were rejected on 261979 and 28.9.1979 vide Annexures P-9 and P-10 respectively.
In the aforesaid seniority list (Annexure P-11) the petitioner was again shown senior to respondent No. 4.
However, there is a mention in the final seniority list (Annexure P-11) that there were some representations filed by respondent No. 4 which were pending.
These representations even though it is the case of Mr. Arora, learned Counsel representing the petitioner were on similar lines as earlier made by the said respondents and, in fact, were no more pending but in any case these representations too wee rejected vide order dated 1491981 (Annexure P-12).
Even though the position is the one as already mentioned above, vide orders dated 121982, without either inviting any kind of objections or even hearing the petitioner in the matter, her seniority vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 was changed and she was shown senior to the petitioner.
In pursuance of this order, respondent No. 4 was given senior scale on 831982 (Annexure P- 15).
The petitioner had filed representation against order dated 121982 (Annexure P-13) and a direction was issued by this Court to decide her appeal against the order dated 121982 in this very petition at the motion stage.
Vide orders passed on that behalf, this appeal of the petitioner has been dismissed on 2451982 (Annexure P-16).
The orders challenged in the petition are thus Annexures P-16, P-15 and P-13.
In consequence of these orders, further prayer of the petitioner is to declare petitioner senior to respondents Nos. 4, 5 and 6.
The petitioner claims seniority over and above respondents 5 and 6 on the sole ground that she was recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board on the post of Steno-typist on 831977 whereas respondents 5 and 6 who were earlier working on ad hoc basis were confirmed later in point of time i.e. 141977.
4.
The matter with regard to inter se seniority between petitioner and respondent No. 4 has been contested.
An effort has been made to show that respondent No. 4 was senior to petitioner.
In view of this Court, there is no necessity at all to go into the merits with regard to seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 as seniority between these two having been settled at least on two earlier occasions and was continued to be shown in the same fashion i.e. petitioner being shown senior to respondent No. 4 has been disturbed after five years without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
On the principle of audi alteram partem, therefore, the order Annexures P-13 and P-16 deserve to be set aside in so far as these orders make petitioner junior to respondent No. 4.
The matter is remitted to the concerned authority to reconsider seniority vis-a-vis petitioner and respondent No. 4 after affording a proper opportunity of hearing to both of them.
Inasmuch as fixation of seniority between the petitioner and respondent No. 4 has taken a very long time, it is ordered that concerned authority shall determine the matter as early as possible and preferably within three months from the date a copy of this order is handed over to the concerned officer who is stated to be Director Technical Education, Punjab respondent No. 3 herein.
So far as the claim of the petitioner with regard to her seniors vis-a-vis respondents 5 and 6 is concerned, this Court is of the view that there is no merit therein at all.
Respondents 5 and 6 concededly were working on the post on which the petitioner started working far earlier even though on ad hoc basis.
Under the instructions of the Government, their services were regularised earlier to when the petitioner came to occupy the post on 831977.
Mere recommendation by the Subordinate Services Selection Board does not clothe the petitioner with any right to claim seniority over and above respondents 5 and 6 who actually started functioning on the post earlier to her recommendation.
No statutory rule or instruction or precedent has been shown by which the petitioner could legitimately claim seniority over and above respondents 5 and 6.
5.
Consequently, this writ petition against respondents 5 and 6 is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
6.
Before I part with this judgment I would like to mention that in case on reconsideration the authorities concerned determine that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 4, she would obviously be entitled to senior scale which it appears to this Court was given to respondent No. 4 considering her senior to petitioner.
Till such time the matter is redetermined with regard to seniority of petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 4, status quo shall be maintained.
Order accordingly.