RS Mongia, J - Primarily two questions have been raised by the petitioners which call for our answer in this writ petition.
The same are:-  (i) Whether the seniority of the petitioners who were appointed as Inspectors in the Haryana Co-operative Department prior to promulgation of the Rules known as Haryana Co-operative Group C (Reserve) Rules 1980 (hereinafter called the 1980 Rules) is to be determined under the said Rules or the Punjab Co-operative Subordinate Services Rules, 1936, (hereinafter called the 1936 Rules) which were repealed by the 1980 Rules ?
(ii) Whether rule 6 of the 1936 Rules dealing with the determination of seniority of the post of Inspector is ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
Briefly, the facts of the case that are relevant for answering the aforesaid questions may be noticed :  Having been selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for the posts of Inspectors, Co-operative Socieities, the names of the petitioners and private respondents were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board to the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana.
The petitioners and private respondents were deputed to 46 weeks of training which they successfully completed and also passed the Departmental examination after the completion of the training.
It was after the completion for the training and passing of the departmental examination that appointment letters were issued to the petitioners and the private respondents as Inspectors on June 30, 1972.
It has been averred in the petition that the petitioners were placed at Serial Nos. 1, 7, 12, 19, 21, 22, 25, 26, 29 and 34 in the merit list by the Subordinate Services Selection Board whereas the private respondents were placed at Serial No. 10, 15, 18, 23, 24, 27, 31, 32, 36, 37, 39, 42, 43, 44, 48 to 52.
The seniority of Inspectors under the 1936 Rules was governed under rule 6 of the 1936 Rules, which is in the following terms:  ``Seniority - 6.
(i) The seniority of directly recruited candidates for the post of Inspector will, in the first place, be determined by the date of passing the departmental examination, or by the date of completing the prescribed period of training whichever is later, if, on applying this standard, the date is the same in the case of two or more candidates, seniority will be determined by the date on which training began, or if training began on the same date, by age.''
The State of Haryana had issued a circular on April 5, 1971, copy Annexure P-3, on the subject of fixing of seniority of the persons selected directly through Haryana Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Reference was made in the circular to the earlier instructions issued by the erstwhile State of Punjab dated March 16, 1962, and November 24, 1962, which were to the effect that the seniority of the persons appointed through Public Service Commission and Subordinate Services Selection Board be recommended as per merit list prepared by the Commission/Board.
It was mentioned in the circular dated April 5, 1971, that ``it has come to the notice of the government that the seniority of those employees who have been selected through the Public Service Commission/SS Board, is being reckoned on the basis of their age or the date of joining in the Department.
This provision in the Rules is against the instructions and model Service Rules.
You are, therefore, requested to go into the rules relating to every post and if in the Rules, there is provision to determine seniority in accordance with age, the same be rectified in view of Rule 6 of the Model Service Rules.
This action should be taken positively within two months of the issue of this letter and information of the same be given to the Chief Secretary at the earliest.
If any Department does not take action to amend the Service Rules accordingly, the Government would take it very serious.''
2.
As observed above, it was only in 1980 that 1936 Rules were repealed and 1980 Rules came into being.
Rule 11 of 1980 Rules pertaining to determination of seniority is in the following terms (Relevant extract) :  ``SENIORITY.
- Seniority, inter se of members of the Service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the Service.
Provided that where there are different cadres in the Service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre : Provided further in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission or the Board, as the case may be, shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority.''
3.
Some tentative seniority lists of the Inspectors which had been circulated were based on the aforesaid circular and not strictly in accordance with rule 6 of the 1936 Rules.
On May 20, 1994, vide order (Annexure P-8), certain Inspectors including some of the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Registrars on ad hoc basis with immediate effect.
It was stipulated in the order as follows:  ``2.
These promotions are purely ad hoc and they will have no right to claim any seniority or any other benefit except pay.
They can be reverted to their former post of Inspector/Statistical Assistant at any time without assigning any reason.
The above promotions are made on the basis of existing seniority list of Inspector/Statistical Assistant on administrative grounds as stop-gap arrangement and are subject to the re-fixation of seniority which is being done separately.
These promotions are also subject to the approval of Haryana Public Service Commission.''
On July 20, 1994, another tentative seniority list of Inspectors was issued showing the position as on June 1, 1994.
It was mentioned in the covering letter (Annexure P-9) that the earlier seniority list of the Inspectors which was issued on December 20, 1990, showing the position as on October 31, 1990, had been determined on the following criteria:  ``The seniority of directly recruited Inspectors has been fixed as per merit list supplied by the Subordinate Services Selection Board/date of passing the Inspectors Training Class.''
Some Inspectors had raised objections that in fact the seniority should be determined not on the aforesaid criteria but strictly in accordance with the provisions of rule 6(1) of the 1936 Rules which, inter alia, provided that in case the date of passing the departmental examination or the date of completing the prescribed period of training is the same of two candidates and further in case the training also began on the same date, the seniority be determined by age.
Against the said tentative seniority list issued on July 20, 1994, petitioners and others filed objections which were dealt with and final order was issued on October 4, 1995, copy Annexure P-11, determining seniority according to Rule 6 of 1936 Rules.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the seniority of the Inspectors after 1980 had to be determined by the 1980 Rules irrespective of the date of appointing of Inspectors, i.e., whether they were appointed prior to or after the promulgation of 1980 Rules, inasmuch as w.e.f.
March 14, 1980, the 1936 Rules stand repealed and seniority should be determined afresh of all the Inspectors in the Department in accordance with 1980 Rules.
We do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
1980 Rules have not been enforced with retrospective effect.
Consequently, the seniority of the Inspectors who were appointed prior to March 14, 1980, would be governed by the 1936 Rules which were in vogue prior to the promulgation of 1980 Rules.
The seniority of the Inspectors who are appointed after March 14, 1980 would be determined according to 1980 Rules.
Learned counsel for the respondents cited judgment in C.W.P.
No. 589 of 1982, decided on April 6, 1989, in which similar point arose.
The learned Judge observed as under:  ``The question as to whether after amendment of the service rules with regard to the mode of fixation of seniority the same is to be fixed under the amended Rules or under the unamended Rules, has been decided by the Supreme Court in BS Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1980(3) SLR 591.
The Supreme Court held that seniority of the officers joining the service before the amendment was to be determined under the unamended rules and the seniority of the members of service joining after the amendment of the rules would be determined under the amended service rules keeping in view the ratio of the decision referred to above.''
We are in respectful agreement with the ratio of the aforesaid judgment.
In DP Sharma and others v. U.O.I.
and another, 1989 Supreme Court Cases (L&S) 353, it was observed by the apex Court that where prior to the promulgation of the Rules, the seniority of the employees was determined under a memorandum of instructions, the seniority would still be determined under that memorandum and instructions of those employees who were appointed prior to the promulgation of the Rules and the seniority in a particular rank under the Rules would only be determined of those employees who were appointed after the promulgation of the Rules.
Consequently, our answer to the first question is that the seniority of the Inspectors who were appointed prior to March 14, 1980, the date of promulgation of the 1980 Rules would be determined by the provisions of 1936 Rules.
5.
Now coming to the question of vires of rule 6 of the 1936 Rules pertaining to seniority, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that in case the date of passing of the departmental examination of two directly recruited Inspectors is the same and the date of completing the prescribed period of training is also the same and the date of the start of the training is also the same, then the Rule which provides that the seniority shall be determined by age is ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The seniority should be in accordance with the merit as initially determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
According to the counsel, if all things are equal, then merit cannot be ignored and a person older in age just cannot be made senior.
In may be observed here that had the Rule been that in case the date of passing of the departmental examination the date of completing the prescribed training and the commencement of the training of two candidates is the same, the fixation of seniority on the basis of merit initially determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board may have been the better rule as compared to determining the seniority by age.
But the question is whether the determination of seniority by age of two directly recruited persons in the light of rule 6(i) is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
It may be observed here that on mere selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, the candidate does not get a right to be appointed.
It is only after completion of the prescribed training and passing the departmental examination that a candidate gets right to be appointed.
The appointment is not based on the merit that is determined initially by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
All persons who are selected upto the number of advertised post are sent for training and are subjected to departmental test irrespective of their merit determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The sine qua non for appointment is the passing of the departmental examination and successful completion of the training.
Under these circumstances, if all things are equal, determination of seniority by age cannot be said to be arbitrary or violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
As observed above, it would have been better if the rule had provided that all things being equal, the initial merit would determine seniority.
This has now been done under the 1980 Rules.
There are service rules which lay down that the seniority would be by length of service or by date of confirmation.
So it is not necessary that in all cases, it should be determined by the merit initially determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board by a selecting body though, as observed above, that may be a better criteria.
The determination of the seniority of the Inspectors appointed prior to 1980 was being made under the circular dated May 4, 1971, to which reference has been made above.
The circular itself envisages that the relevant rules be amended to provide that in the circumstances where all things are equal between two directly recruited candidates, the seniority be determined on the basis of merit recommended by the selecting body.
The circular never laid down that the seniority is to be determined on the basis of merit determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Public Service Commission.
It only directed that the Service Rules be amended.
The amendment, as observed above, took place in the year 1980.
Otherwise also, the instructions if it were to say that the seniority shall be determined in accordance with the merit determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, the same would be contrary to the statutory rules made under the Government of India Act.
It is well settled now that the instructions cannot run counter to the statutory rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Consequently, we hold that rule 6 of the 1936 Rules pertaining to seniority is not ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
6.
It may be observed here that by earlier determination of seniority of the petitioners and private respondents on the basis of circular dated May 4, 1971, i.e. on the basis of merit, the petitioners or the private respondents did not get any benefit.
It is not the case that after some promotions were made on the basis of the earlier seniority list, they are being nullified by virtue of the new seniority list.
The promotion as Assistant Registrars, which was granted to the petitioners and some others on May 20, 1994, vide order (Annexure P-8) clearly envisages that promotions were purely ad hoc and would not bestow any right to claim seniority or any other benefit except pay and promotions were subject to refixation of seniority which was being done separately.
7.
In view of what has been observed above, we do not find that the determination of the seniority of the Inspectors who were appointed prior to the promulgation of 1980 Rules under Rule 6 of the 1936 Rules is in any way illegal.
For the foregoing reasons we do not find any merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.