K Sreedharan, CJ.
(Oral) - Petitioner retired from government service while he was holding the post of S.S. Master in Government Middle School, Roherianwala, District Ferozepur.
He suffered heart attack on 1681995 and was taken to Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre, New Delhi for treatment.
On 2381995, open heart surgery was conducted on him at that hospital.
He was discharged on 291995.
On account of post-operative complications, he was again admitted to the hospital.
Finally, he was discharged from the hospital on 3101995.
As per the Bill issued by this hospital, petitioner had to pay a sum of Rs. 1,46,944/-.
As per the policy adopted by the Punjab Government, petitioner claimed reimbursement of that amount.
That claim has not been sanctioned.
Hence, this writ petition.
2.
On behalf of the State, a detailed written statement has been filed.
The contention taken therein is to the following effect :-  ``Petitioner did not obtain pre-approval from the District Medical Board.
District Medical Board approved payment of medical reimbursement of Rs. 82,000/- only.
Cheque for that amount was offered to the petitioner.
He refused to receive the cheque.
Therefore, petitioner is not entitled to any relief in this case.''
3.
Petitioner had a sudden heart attack on 1681995.
Immediately he was rushed to Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre, New Delhi.
In such a situation, his claim for medical reimbursement is not to be opposed by the State on the ground that he did not obtain pre-approval from District Medical Board.
If one who suffers heart attack is to get medical reimbursement only if he had obtained pre-approval from Medical Board, then Government may not be called upon to pay compensation.
The patient if waits for pre-approval for undergoing treatment, we are sure the said approval will be given only after the patient reaches the other world.
The stand that for undergoing emergency treatment, Government will effect reimbursement only if pre-approval from the Medical Board is obtained is, to say the least unreasonable and inhuman.
Hence, the contention of the respondents that the petitioner is not to get medical reimbursement on the ground that he failed to obtain prior approval from the Medical Board has to be ignored.
4.
In the written statement it is further averred that the Medical Board recommended payment of medical reimbursement of Rs. 82,000/- to the petitioner.
Apart from making this assertion, no circumstance which prompted the Medical Board to arrive at such a decision has been placed before Court.
Medical Board's opinion should have been based on relevant materials.
In the absence of such material the so-called opinion of the Board is not of any assistance to the respondents.
It could not be their subjective satisfaction.
So, contention of the respondents that petitioner is entitled only to Rs. 82,000/- cannot be accepted.
5.
On the basis of decision of the Apex Court in Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) SCT 234(SC) : 1996(1) R.S.J.
845 : AIR 1996 Supreme Court, 1388; C.W.P.
No 10732 of 1996 Manjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1996(4) SCT 123(P&H) and (CWP No. 14562 of 1996) Prahlad Singh v. State of Punjab et cetera were decided by this Court taking the view that as per the policy adopted by the State of Punjab on Medical reimbursement, an employee or retired employee is entitled to the actual expenses incurred by him for undergoing heart treatment in Escorts, at New Delhi.
Respondents have no case that had the petitioner been treated in Escorts, he would have paid a lesser amount than the one claimed in this writ petition.
Respondents have no case that the amount claimed by the hospital in the Bill is not actually paid by the petitioner nor have they a case that the operation was not an emergency one.
Therefore, we are of the view that the petitioner is entitled to the sum of Rs. 1,46,94400, which amount was paid by him to Batra Hospital and Medical Research Centre, New Delhi.
Respondents are directed to pay the said amount to the petitioner within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
If the amount is not paid within the said period of one month, that amount will carry interest @ 18% per annum from the date of expiry of one month till the date of actual payment.
Writ petition is allowed in the above terms.