VK Bali, J (Oral) - Hawa Singh and 11 others, through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated April 17, 1980 insofar as it stipulates a condition that arrears of pay will not be paid to the petitioners, who did not actually work as Assistant Engineer.
2.
The relief asked for is sought to be buttressed on the facts that respondent-Haryana State Electricity Board advertised the posts of Graduate Technical Apprentices in the year 1976.
A regularly constituted Selection Committee interviewed and selected 84 candidates including the petitioners.
In pursuance of th selection petitioners were issued identical offers of appointment to the post of Graduate Technical Apprentices and even though selections were made in the year 1976, offers of appointment against the post of GTA to the petitioners were made in April, 1978.
It is so pleaded that there was delay in issuing appointment letters as character and antecedents could not be verified earlier.
However, 16 persons from amongst the selected candidates joined as GTA in the year 1977.
The work and conduct of all the 59 candidates, so selected, was found to be satisfactory by the respondent Board and as such they were given regular appointment against the post in question in September, 1979 in the pay scale of 450-1100.
16 persons, who had joined in the year 1977 made representation that they should have been appointed on the post of Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
the date of completion of one year in the capacity of GTA as the relevant rules entitled them to be so appointed within a year.
Before, however, the representation could come up for consideration, petitioners also represented that if 16 persons were given appointment in the manner requested by them, they would have to be given appointment in view of seniority criteria laid down under Regulation 16 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965, which govern the service conditions of the petitioners, on their appointment as Assistant Engineers.
These two representations came to be considered by the respondent-Board and vide order Dated April 14, 1980, Annexure P4, it was decided that since the GTAs who could not be appointed earlier, were not at fault and the Board took an in ordinately long time to process appointments and took ad hoc decision to offer regular appointment to certain persons, they should be given deemed date of eligibility for appointment as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
June 1, 1978.
This date of appointment i.e. June 1, 1978 as an Assistant Engineer was also made applicable to those who joined earlier.
It was, however, ordered that no arrears of pay will be paid to anybody unless he has actually worked as Assistant Engineer.
It is this later part of the order with regard to non- payment of arrears of pay that has been challenged in the present writ.
3.
Mr. Khehar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, contends that once an employee has either been given deemed date of appointment or appointment from retrospective effect, the department has no choice but for to pay him arrears with effect from the said deemed date or retrospective effect.
For his afore-stated contention, learned counsel relies up upon KK Joggia v. State of Haryana and another, 1972 SLR 578, Sri Chand Dass Chadha v. State of Punjab and others, 1980(3) SLR 702 and Asha Rani Lamba v. State of Haryana, 1983(1) SLR 400.
4.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed and it has, inter-alia, been pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-Board that the character and antecedents forms 16 candidates out of the selected batch of 84 were received earlier duly verified and they were given appointment and put on training.
It was hoped that the remaining candidates would also be given appointment immediately after their character and antecedents were verified.
However, the remaining candidates could not be offered the post of GTA till 1978 as, on complaint, the matter concerning their selection remained under investigation.
The case was finally decided in May, 1978 when it was decided to restore the original selection list and accordingly the remaining candidates were also given appointment in May, 1978.
It has further been admitted that the 16 GTAs as mentioned earlier, were appointed in the first batch and they were regularised w.e.f.
July 1, 1979 alongwith remaining 43 candidates.
These 16 GTAs had represented that they had been working as GTA for 26 months without any fault on their part whereas their counter-part has served as GTA only for 13 months.
These GTAs further contended that they had completed one year apprenticeship in May, 1978 and were given regular charge as Assistant Engineers and hence they represented for regular appointment from May, 1978 as Assistant Engineer instead of July 1, 1979.
The matter was placed before the board and as per Paras 6 and 7, the Board considered it administratively necessary that all the GTAs who were selected, should be given appointment as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
single crucial date.
The case of remaining 43 GTAs, who were appointed in March/May, 1978 was also kept in view while considering the case of 16 GTAs, who had joined earlier to them, alothough these 16 GTAs were not senior in merit list.
It was also kept in view that if these GTAs were not given deemed date of appointment as Assistant Engineer, w.e.f.
June 1, 1978, then about 100 to 125 Engineering Subordinates, who have been promoted in between May, 1978 and July 1, 1979, would become senior to these young Engineers, who have been promoted w.e.f.
July 1, 1979, without any fault on their part.
In order to remove any constant frustration amongst these GTAs, it was decided that all these GTAs should be given deemed date of eligibility for appointment as Assistant Engineers w.e.f.
June 1, 1978.
But at the same time, it was also decided that no arrears of pay should be paid to anybody unless he has actually worked as Assistant Engineer.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, even though at the first blush the points canvassed by Mr. Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioners, may appear to be impressive, on deeper examination, these seem to have no substance whatsoever.
It is an admitted position that the petitioners could not be appointed as Assistant Engineer without their having put in atleast one year as GTA.
It is not disputed that as a matter of fact whosoever might have been at fault, petitioners actually joined in April/May, 1978.
They were not entitled to be appointed as Assistant Engineer under the relevant rules before they had actually put in one year as GTA.
That being so, they could be appointed as Assistant Engineer only in April, 1979.
The question in the context of the facts, as have been mentioned above, then arises as to whether the petitioners, even though they were not entitled to be appointed as Assistant Engineer before April, 1979 should get pay scale that is admissible to Assistant Engineer for the period prior to April/May, 1979.
This court is of the considered view that the petitioners, not being eligible to be appointed under the Rules on the post of Assistant Engineer prior to April/May, 1979, cannot be permitted to have the pay scale admissible to an Assistant Engineer prior to the period aforesaid.
The judgments that Mr. Khehar has cited and, reference whereof has been made above, in considered view of this Court are distinguishable.
The fact of the cases aforesaid reveal that an employee was actually eligible and entitled to promotion which was, for some reason, withheld.
Ultimately, when the relief was granted to such an employee either by the department or by the Court and it was directed or ordered, as the case may be, that such an employee shall be deemed to have been promoted from a retrospective date, it was inherent that such an employee was both entitled and eligible for promotion.
In the present case, as mentioned above, whatever might have been the circumstances, the stark fact is that the petitioners were not eligible to be appointed as Assistant Engineer under the relevant rules before April, 1979.
Whereas, arrears of pay on the promoted post from the deemed date or retrospective date are admissibile in a case where an employee was eligible for promotion and was wrongly denied the relief, such arrears of pay are not admissible to an employee who was not eligible or entitled to such promotion from a date prior to such eligibility.
6.
The Court is convinced that in the circumstances that were available before the respondent-Board, a most equitable decision was taken as the petitioners were not at fault and it had taken little long time in their case in verifying their antecedents and, therefore, they were not made junior to their counter-parts who where selected in the same selection process and it is for that precise reason that 16 GTAs who had joined earlier and the petitioners were given the same date of appointment on the post of Assistant Engineer.
It is despite the fact that the petitioners had joined much later.
All that the petitioners have been denied is the salary of Assistant Engineer from deemed date of appointment.
That, in view of this Court, as said earlier, is wholly justified.
7.
Mr. Khehar, learned counsel, however, contends that even if the petitioners are not entitled to the pay scale and actual payment thereof, but they are certainly entitled to fixation of their pay w.e.f.
June 1, 1978, the date from which they were appointed as Assistant Engineers.
There cannot be any exception to this argument.
Even though the petitioners may be entitled to actual payment for the reasons already mentioned, they are certainly entitled to fixation of pay even though notionally which might benefit them in their future emoluments.
This petition, thus, meets with partial success.
Whereas, main relief asked for by the petitioners with regard to payment of arrears of pay of Assistant Engineer from their deemed date of appointment i.e. June 1, 1978 is rejected, it ordered that their pay shall be notionally fixed in the pay scale that was admissible to an Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
June 1, 1978 which might benefit them in their future emoluments.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.