Gita Mittal, J - The Government of NCT of Delhi issued a Notification No. F24(3612)/98.
LAB31057-62 dated 17th August, 1990 whereby the following dispute was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication :  "Whether the dismissal from service of Shri Darshan Singh is illegal and/or unjustified and if so what relief is he entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect ?"
2.
This reference had arisen from a complaint by the petitioner that he had joined Delhi Transport Corporation (hereinafter, referred to as the 'DTC'), the respondent herein, as a driver with effect from 19th January, 1981.
He contended that he worked as such till 7th March, 1988 when he had fallen sick.
He had sent his leave application through a colleague and a medical certificate by registered post.
He remained confined to bed till 7th April, 1988 and when he reported for duty on recovery, he was not allowed to resume his duties.
3.
On a presumption that the petitioner has participated in a strike seeking enforcement of the fourth pay commission to the employees of the DTC, the respondent terminated his services vide an order dated 23rd March, 1988.
These orders were challenged by the workman who claimed that his termination was illegal and the order was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
No enquiry was conducted by the DTC before dispensing with his service.
The demand notice served by him upon the DTC did not result in any favourable consideration.
As a consequence the petitioner was left with no option but to seek the afore-stated reference.
In the industrial adjudication, the petitioner prayed for reinstatement into service with full back wages and continuity of service.
4.
This adjudication culminated in an award dated 1st December, 2000.
The Labour Court noticed that the DTC had admittedly received the leave application of the petitioner as well as the medical certificate.
The respondent had been of the view that the workman had participated in the strike.
It was held that this view of the management was unsupported by any reliable or cogent material and the sole basis for this conclusion was a report purportedly given at the back of the workman without any opportunity to the workman to question or challenge the same.
5.
The industrial adjudicator also found that the DTC had taken up contradictory stand.
Whereas in the written statement before the labour court a plea was taken that a domestic enquiry was conducted and services terminated only thereafter, however, the witness on behalf of the DTC MW1 KG Sethi had admitted that no charge-sheet even was given to the workman and that no enquiry was conducted prior to the order of dismissal.
The stand taken in the written statement was contradicted even by the dismissal order dated 23rd March, 1988 which showed that the DTC had dispensed with inquiry under clause 15(2)(c) of the Delhi Road Transport Authority (Conditions and Appointment of Service) Regulations, 1952 on the ground that it was "not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry".
6.
The industrial adjudicator, in these circumstances, had granted opportunity to the DTC, which had been sought by it, to produce its evidence to prove the allegations against the workman.
However, no evidence whatsoever in this behalf could be produced by the DTC.
7.
In these circumstances the labour court had returned a finding that the termination of the workman was totally in violation of principles of natural justice, was illegal and also unjustified.
8.
Finally while considering grant of appropriate relief to the workman, the industrial adjudicator was of the view that though the workman had admitted that he could drive a TSR (auto rickshaw) however he had not made any attempt to ply a TSR after taking it on hire basis.
It was also noticed that the workman had stated that he did not apply for any alternative employment after termination of his service.
For these reasons, the industrial adjudicator laid the blame at the door step of the workman for his unemployment and so denied him the relief of full back wages.
In this background, vide the award dated 1st December, 2000, the labour Court directed reinstatement into service of the petitioner with continuity of service and only 50% of the back wages.
9.
It has been pointed out that the DTC accepted the award and reinstated the workman into service on 6th December, 2001.
The petitioner, however, was not satisfied with the award to the extent it denied full back wages and consequently has filed the present writ petition laying a challenge to the award to the extent that it has denied him full back wages.
In this behalf, reliance is placed on the pronouncement of the Apex Court in AIR 1979 SC 75, entitled Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd. v. The Employees of The Hindustan Tin Works; 2004(8) AD (SC) 444 : 2004(4) SCT 130, Nicks entitled (India) Tools v. Ram Surat & Another; 1982(1) SLJ 255 entitled Management of Delhi Transport Corporation v. Shri Ram Kumar and another, and 1995 SCC (L&S) 193 entitled Smt. Manorama Verma v. State of Bihar and others.
It is contended that having held that the termination of the employment of the workman was illegal, the award of full back wages is a rule and it is only in exceptional cases that the workman can be denied grant of the back wages.
10.
Appearing for the respondents, Mr. Ataul Haque, learned counsel has vehemently opposed the writ petition primarily on the ground that the workman had been on strike and consequently his services had been terminated justifiably by the DTC.
In any case the workman had made no effort, to either seek reinstatement or alternative employment and for this reason, the award could not be faulted whereby full back wages were denied.
In this behalf reliance has been placed on the pronouncement of this court in 114(2004) DLT 358, Management of Asiatic Air-conditioning & Refrigeration (P) Limited v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court X and another and 1989(1) DLT 23, Ramesh Chander and another v. DTC.
Further, placing reliance on the pronouncement of this Court in 2005(II) AD Delhi 285, entitled MCD v. Asha Rani and others, it is contended that no interference in the findings of fact returned by the industrial adjudicator is permitted.
11.
It is further submitted that in any case the workman's claim was grossly belated and he was not entitled to any relief.
In this behalf reliance was placed on 1999 SCC (L&S) 945 : 2000(1) SCT 353, Mahavir Singh v. UP State Electricity Board and another and 1999(3) AD SC 293 : 1999(2) SCT 667, Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Service Limited and another.
12.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and having perused the available record, I find that the finding that the workman's services were terminated illegally has not been assailed the DTC.
Accepting the correctness of the same, the DTC has reinstated the petitioner into service.
Undoubtedly the contextual erroneous presumption.
The petitioner had taken sick on 7th March, 1988 and had sent an application and a medical certificate to the DTC in this behalf.
On a sheer surmise that the petitioner had participated in a general strike resorted to by the workmen of the DTC in March, 1988, his services were terminated without an enquiry.
The demand notice of the petitioner drew no positive response.
The petitioner's appeal against the termination also did not fetch any positive results.
No enquiry even was held on the violation the principles of natural justice and that there was no evidence to prove the charges laid by the DTC against the workman.
The order of reference was made upon the complaint of the petitioner as back as on 17th August, 1990.
13.
In its written statement the DTC had denied that the service of the workman was terminated in violation of principles of natural justice.
On the other hand it was stated that an enquiry had been conducted and that the enquiry officer had given an opportunity to the workman to cross-examine the witnesses and that the enquiry was contended in the presence of the workman.
The DTC even contended that the workman had signed the proceedings and action was taken in accordance with law.
14.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties and the stand of the DTC on 14th August, 1991 the Labour Court framed the following issues :  "1.
As per terms of reference.
2.
Whether enquiry held against workmen is just and proper. ?"
15.
The DTC sought and was granted the opportunity to prove the fairness and validity of the claimed inquiry.
Mr. KG Sethi, the then Depot Manager of Kalkaji Depot had appeared in the witness box when he purported proceedings to prove some record as some enquiry.
In his cross-examination, however, Mr. KG Sethi admitted that no charge-sheet was given to the workman and that no charge-sheet was even prepared in the case.
In these circumstances on 16th September, 1998, the Labour Court had no option but to return a finding that no domestic inquiry had been held in the case before the dismissal of the workman.
In these circumstances issue No. 2 which had been framed regarding the validity of the inquiry was actually not required to be framed.
16.
It is, therefore, evident that but for the contradictory and incorrect stand set up by the DTC to the effect that an inquiry had been conducted, a wholly unnecessary issue No. 2 had to be framed on 14th August, 1991.
This required adjudication and the findings thereon were returned only on 16th September, 1998.
17.
It is thus apparent that it was only on the incorrect plea set up by the DTC that adjudication before the adjudicator was delayed, from 1991 till 1998 as the adjudicator was compelled to examine the plea set up by the DTC.
The matter, however, does not stop here.
DTC thereafter sought and was granted the opportunity to prove its case to prove the charges of misconduct levelled against the Workman.
Despite repeated opportunities, no evidence was produced by the DTC to prove these charges and vide an order passed on 14th July, 1999, the evidence of the DTC was closed by the labour court.
Only thereafter could the evidence of the workman be recorded and the proceedings culminated in the award dated 1st February, 2000.
18.
The workman has agitated his grievance right from the inception.
The workman reported for duty after sickness but was not taken on duty.
He served a demand notice upon the respondent and having failed to get justice was constrained to knock at the door of the labour authorities.
Ever since 17th August, 1990 when the reference was made by the appropriate Government, the matter was pending before the industrial adjudicator till it culminated in the award dated 1st February, 2000.
The respondents failed to heed even the directions made in the award and effected the reinstatement after a belated period of almost two years on 6th December, 2001.
I have no hesitation in holding that the fault for the delay in the adjudication has to be laid at the door steps of the DTC which cannot escape its liability for the same.
Perusal of the counter affidavit shows that the respondents have not rendered even a whisper of the explanation for the delay in reinstating the petitioner into service for the period after the award was passed on 1st February, 2000 till 6th December, 2001.
Therefore, in the instant case no delay in raising a claim can be attributable to the petitioner.
There was, in any case, no such lapse of time attributable to the petitioner which would have disentitled the workman to grant of wages for the period which he was not permitted to join on account of the action of the respondent management.
This action has been held as illegal and violative of principles of natural justice and the management has admittedly accepted the verdict given by the labour court in this behalf.
19.
The petitioner workman was obviously running from pillar to post seeking his job.
The services of the petitioner were axed mercilessly on a presumed ground that the workman had participated in a strike.
The workman has stated that he was without any financial means to prosecute further litigation and has filed the writ petition at the earliest upon getting the reinstated into service.
Obviously he found succour when he must have received wages upon getting his job back.
In these circumstances, I find no force in the submissions of the respondent that the workman deserved to be denied of back wages on the short ground that his challenge the same is belated.
20.
Perusal of the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in Mahavir Singh's case (supra) shows that in this case, the court was concerned with the initial delay in raising the dispute by the workman before the labour authorities and for this reason the court was of the view that he did not deserve to be awarded any back wages.
The services of Mahavir Singh were terminated on 12th 1976 and he raised an industrial dispute only in March, 2003.
In these circumstances, the Supreme Court set aside the order of the High Court and restored the order of the labour court awarding 50% back wages from the date of termination till reinstatement.
21.
To the same effect is the fact situation which was before the Apex Court in Ajaib Singh's case (supra).
Ajaib Singh's services were terminated on 16th July, 1974 and he had issued a notice of demand only on 8th December, 1981.
In these facts, the labour court was of the view that on account of the admitted delay the workman has to be denied some part of the back wages.
The labour court accordingly directed that upon his reinstatement into service, the appellant would be entitled to continuity of service but back wages only to the extent of 60% with effect from 6th December, 1981 when he made a demand for justice till the date of the award of the labour court i.e. 16th April, 1986.
It was further directed that he would be paid full back wages thereafter till his reinstatement.
The appellant was also held entitled to the costs of the litigation which was to be paid by the respondent management.
22.
In the light of the consideration by the Apex Court in Mahavir Singh's case and Ajaib's Singh's case, the petitioner in the instant case has to be held to be entitled to full back wages.
No delay whatsoever in raising his claim and prayer for reinstatement can be attributed to the workman.
23.
It would be noteworthy to notice the observations of the Apex Court in AIR 1979 SC 75, entitled Hindustan Tin Works (P) Ltd. v. The Employees of The Hindustan Tin Works which holds the field even today :  "9.
It is no more open to debate that in the field of industrial jurisprudence a declaration can be given that the termination of service is bad and the workman continues to be in service.
The spectre of common law doctrine that contract of personal service cannot be specifically enforced or the doctrine of mitigation of damages does not haunt in this branch of law.
The relief of reinstatement with continuity of service can be granted where termination of service to found to be invalid.
It would mean that the employer has taken away illegally the right to work of the workman contrary to the relevant law or in breach of contract and simultaneously deprived the workman of his earnings.
If thus the employer is found to be in the wrong as a result of which the workman is directed to be reinstated, the employer could not shirk his responsibility of paying the wages which the workman has been deprived of by the illegal or invalid action of the employer.
Speaking realistically, where termination of service is questioned as invalid or illegal and the workman has to go through the grant of litigation, his capacity to sustain himself throughout the protracted litigation is itself such an awesome factor that he may not survive to see the day when relief is granted.
More so in our system stupefying.
If after such a protracted time and energy consuming litigation during which period the workman just sustains himself, ultimately he is to be told that though he will be reinstated, he will be denied the back wages which would be due to him, the workman would be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault of his and it is wholly undeserved.
Ordinarily, therefore, workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Any other view would be premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer.
If the employer terminates the service illegally and the termination is motivated as in this case, viz. to resist the workman's demand for revision of wages, the termination may well amount to unfair labour practice.
In such circumstances reinstatement being the normal rule.
It should be followed with full back wages.
...... On top of it they were forced to litigation up to the apex court and now they are being told that something less than full back wages should be awarded to them.
If the services were not terminated the workmen ordinarily would have continued to work and would have earned their wages.
When it was held that the termination of services was neither proper nor justified, it would not only show that the workmen were always willing to serve but if they rendered service they would legitimately be entitled to the wages for the same.
If the workmen were always ready to work but they were kept away therefrom on account of invalid act of the employer, there is no justification for not awarding them full back wages which were very legitimately due to them.
A Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in Dhari Gram Panchayat v. Safai Kamdar Mandal, 1997-1 LLJ 508, and a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Postal Seals Industrial Co-operative Society Ltd v. Labour Court II, Lucknow and others, [1971-1 LLJ 327], have taken this view and we are of the opinion that the view taken therein is correct."
"10.
This Court held that the workmen concerned did not have any opportunity of explaining why their services should not be terminated and, therefore, reinstatement was held to be the appropriate relief, and set aside the order of the Tribunal.
It was observed that there was no justification for not awarding full back wages from the day they offered to resume work till their reinstatement.
"11.
In the very nature of things there cannot be a straightjacket formula for awarding relief of back wages.
All relevant considerations will enter the verdict.
More or less, it would be a motion addressed to the discretion of the Tribunal.
Full back wages would be the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
At that stage the Tribunal will exercise its discretion keeping in view all the relevant circumstances.
But the discretion must be exercised in a judicial and judicious manner.
The reason for exercising discretion must be cogent and convincing and must appear on the face of the record.
When it is said that something is to be done within the discretion of the authority, that something is to be done according to the rules of reason and justice, according to law and not humour.
It is not to be arbitrary, vague and fanciful but legal and regular."
"13.
Now, if a sacrifice is necessary in the overall interest of the industry or a particular undertaking, it would be both unfair and inequitous to expect only one partner of the industry to make the sacrifice.
Pragnatism compels common sacrifice on the part of both.
The sacrifice must come from both the partners and we need not state the obvious that the labour is a weaker partner who is more often called upon to make the sacrifice.
Sacrifice for the survival of an industrial undertaking cannot be an unilateral action.
It must be a two way traffic.
The management need not have merry time to itself making the workmen the sacrificial goat.
If sacrifice is necessary, those who can afford and have the cushion and the capacity must bear the greater brust making the shock of sacrifice as less poignant as possible for those who keep body and soil together with utmost difficulty."
"14.
The appellant wants us to give some thing less than full back wages in this case which the Labour Court has awarded.
There is nothing to show whether the Managing Director has made any sacrifice; whether his salary and perks have been adversely affected; whether the managerial coterie has reduced some expenses on itself.
If there is no such material on record, how do we expect the workmen, the lest affording of the weaker segment of the society, to make the sacrifice, because sacrifice on their part is denial of the very means of livelihood."
24.
The issue as to grant of an appropriate relief after holding that the termination of service was illegal, fell for consideration before the Division Bench of this Court in its pronouncement reported at 1982(1) SLJ 255, Management of Delhi Transport Corporation v. Shri Ram Kumar & Another.
The court held as follows :  "13.
Mr. Malhotra then sought to urge that even though reinstatement may be ordered the workman is not entitled to full back wages.
We cannot agree.
`Ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed, during the enforced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Any other view would be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer'.
'If after such a protracted time and energy consuming litigation during which period the workman just sustains himself, ultimately he is to be told that though he will be reinstated, he will be denied the back wages which would be due to him, the workman would be subjected to a sort of penalty for no fault of his and it is wholly undeserved' - Hindustan Tin case (supra).
Mr. Malhotra then contends that full back wages cannot be paid because it cannot be expected that the workman must have been out of employment for all this period.
Now the evidence of workman is clear wherein he has stated that ever since dismissal he had been unemployed.
Mr. Malhotra seeks to catch on to the further part of his evidence where he stated that he did not make any efforts to get a job and says that this shows an attitude of slackness on the part of the employee which should deprive him of entitlement to full back wages.
We feel that Mr. Malhotra mis-appreciated the principles on which full back wages are paid.
The principle is that when an employee after protracted litigation with the employer succeeds in showing that the termination of his services was unjustified he would normally be entitled to reinstatement with full back wages excepting of course if it could be shown that he had been gainfully employed in the meanwhile.
Thus full back wages would be normal rate (rule ?)
and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
See Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Its Mazdoor Sabha.
Thus if the employer wishes to show that workman was gainfully employed he must establish and prove that fact; no presumption of being gainfully employed can be raised.
It is not disputed that no evidence has been led or even shown on the record by the appellant which shows that the workman was at any time in between employed elsewhere.
In that view there would be no justification for denying him full back wages.
The mere fact of long time having elapsed is certainly not a reason to deny him his normal relief of reinstatement, because as said in Panitole Tea Estate case (P. 240) "if his dismissal was wrongful then merely because proceedings for adjudication of the industrial disputes have taken a long time is by itself no reason for not directing his reinstatement if it is otherwise justified being in accordance with normal rule."
25.
In a recent case before the Apex Court it was urged that existence of several industries in the area where the management was located showed the possibility for the workman to obtain gainful employment.
A prayer for grant of back wages was opposed on this ground.
In its judgment reported as 2004(VIII) AD SC 444, M/s Nicks (India) Tools v. Ram Surat and another the Apex Court held thus :  "18.
This leaves us to consider the next limb of the argument of Shri UU Lalit, learned senior counsel who contended that the Labour Court having come to the conclusion that in Ludhiana where the appellants factory is situated, there are large number of other industries, hence, it was always possible for the respondent workman to have obtained a gainful employment on that basis, was justified in confining the back wages to only 25% of the full back wages, and the High Court in this regard erred in reversing that finding by not taking into consideration the additional material produced by the management in regard to this aspect of the case, i.e. of the respondent being gainfully employed during the relevant period.
He also relied on two judgments of this Court in the case of PGI of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Raj Kumar, 2001(1) SCT 326 : 2001(2) SCC 54 and MP State Electricity Board v. Harina Bee, 2003(6) SCC 141".
"20.
Reliance placed by the learned counsel for the appellant in the case of PGI of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (supra), in our opinion, does not take the case of the appellant any further.
In that case, this Court held that the Labour Court being the final court of facts the superior courts do not normally interfere with such finding of facts unless the said finding of fact is perverse or erroneous or not in accordance with law.
In the instant case, we have already noticed the basic ground on which the Labour Court reduced the back wages was based on a judgment of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana which, as further noticed by us, was overruled by a subsequent judgment of a Division Bench.
Therefore, the very foundation of the conclusion of the Labour Court having been destroyed, the appellant could not derive any support from the above cited judgments of that Court.
Similarly, in the case of MP State Electricity Board (supra), this Court only said that it is not an inevitable conclusion that every time a reinstatement is ordered, full back wages was the only consequence.
This Court, in our opinion, did not preclude that even in cases where full back wages are legally due, the superior courts are precluded from doing so merely because the Labour Court has on an erroneous ground has reduced such back wages.
In the instant case, we have noticed that the trial court apart from generally observing that in Ludhiana, there must have been job opportunities available, on facts it did not rely upon any particular material to hold either such job was in fact available to the respondent and he refused to accept the same or he was otherwise gainfully employed during the period he was kept out of work.
On the contrary, it is for the first time before the writ court the appellant tried to produce additional evidence which was rightly not considered by the High Court because the same was not brought on record in a manner known to law.
Be that as it may in the instant case we are satisfied that the High Court was justified in coming to the conclusion that the appellant is entitled to full back wages."
26.
In a Single Bench decision of this Court reported at 114(2004) DLT 358, Management of Asiatic Air-conditioning and Refigeration (P) Ltd v. PO, LC-X and another this Court has considered the judicial pronouncements on the subject.
After a detailed consideration of the law on the subject, several factors which are required to be taken into consideration in awarding back wages have been noticed.
Inter alia, relevant factors which would weigh with the court in awarding back wages would include the time involved in the litigation and causes of the delay; the status of the management as a public body meant for public benefit; possibility of the worker being gainfully employed; nature of the alleged misconduct; ensuing financial burden; delay in raising an industrial dispute; duration of the employment and the nature of the employment.
27.
It has been held by the Apex Court in Hindustan Tin Works Limited (supra) that so far as the circumstances which would necessitate departure from the normal circumstances of grant of full back wages are concerned, the party which is objecting to such an order must establish the circumstances which would enable the court to draw the exception.
28.
In the instant case there is neither any pleading, nor any evidence to enable this Court to draw any conclusion which would disentitle the workman to grant of the full back wages in terms of the law laid down by the Apex Court or by this court.
29.
The petitioner has stated that he has remained unemployed ever since his dismissal and none of the other factors or circumstances which would have justified denial of full back wages has been brought on record.
In these circumstances, in view of the principles of law laid down in the afore noticed authoritative pronouncements by which I am bound, the workman cannot be denied the word of the full back wages.
There was no material whatsoever before the Labour Court for holding that any particular employment opportunity was available to the workman or that he rejected the same.
On a sheer surmise and conjecture based on the fact that the workman was able to drive a TSR i.e. an auto rickshaw, the labor court was of the view that he ought to have hired the same and that he is responsible for his unemployment.
It was nobody's case nor was there evidence to the effect that such a TSR or an auto rickshaw was ever available to the petitioner or that he was in a position, especially financial position, to hire the same.
30.
It is apparent that it is only where a worker had remained unemployed for a reasonably long period for 33 years [(Haryana Urban Development Authority v. Devi Dayal), 2002(3) SCT 323 : 2002 II AD (SC) 603 : 2002(3) SCC 473] that the Apex Court was of the view that it was reasonably possible that a worker being a helper doing mainly labour would have possibly got some daily wage or intermittent employment.
In the facts which were before the Court in the Management of Air-conditioning & Refrigeration (P) Limited v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court X and another, the workman had been in employment only for a period of 1-1/2 years before the parties were in litigation.
There was no material also before the court as to which party delayed addictions (?)
in the industrial dispute.
The question of back wages was, therefore, answered against the workman.
31.
In the instant case, the facts are different.
Delay cannot be attributed to the workman.
Furthermore, there is no complaint in respect of the services of the workman and he had been serving this employer for almost seven years.
He was terminated after a short medical sickness and as noticed above it was the management which was clearly responsible for the prolonged delay in adjudication.
32.
In these circumstances the factors noticed in the pronouncements on the subject cannot be held against the workman for consideration of the quantum of back wages.
33.
The workman was prevented from rejoining the service for the actions of the management.
The finding of the industrial adjudicator to the effect that the workman is responsible for his unemployment has to be set aside and quashed.
34.
In view of the afore stated facts, the industrial adjudicator has failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him and consequently the restraint prescribed by the Apex Court upon the powers of the writ court and scope of judicial review in industrial adjudication in 2002 IX AD (SC) 149 : 2002(4) SCT 900 : AIR 2003 SC 38, Essen Deinki v. Rajiv Kumar and 2005(II) AD Delhi 285, entitled MCD v. Asha Rani is of no benefit to the respondent.
35.
It has become necessary to examine the main plank of the submission on behalf of the petitioner.
It has been urged with all the vehemence at the command of learned counsel, that the industrial adjudicator has grossly urged in basing the award on sheer conjectures to the effect that opportunity of employment was available to the petitioner.
36.
The workman had fallen ill when his services were ignonimously terminated.
Undoubtedly to a workman who had been serving since 1981 and was probably the only bread earner of the family, this would have come as a rudest shock possible.
The stand taken by the respondent would have come as yet further shock when he was foisted with the allegations of having participated in a strike.
The efforts of the petitioner to seek expeditious industrial adjudication were also successfully thwarted by the management.
37.
Here was a workman who was struggling in litigation.
In a country where it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to get a job it cannot at all be believed that a person who was litigating for adjudication of his rights could have any measure of success in getting alternative employment while his industrial dispute was pending adjudication and the petitioner was involved in litigation.
The very fact that the petitioner was litigating against his employer would have been a factor which would have militated against him in getting the employment.
38.
It is noteworthy that even after having accepted the correctness of the findings in the award dated 1st February, 2000, in its counter affidavit filed before this court, the DTC has taken up the same stand before this court as is set up in its written statement which his been disbelieved by the adjudicator.
It has yet again been urged at the petitioner participated in an illegal strike which resulted in loss to the public and consequently, he ought not to have been granted back wages.
39.
This writ petition, therefore, has to be allowed.
The workman shall be entitled to reinstatement with all consequential relief and full back wages with effect from 23rd March, 1988 when his services were terminated till 6th December, 2001 when reinstated in service.
40.
All arrears in terms of the award, if not already paid and in terms of this judgment shall be computed by the respondent within the period of six weeks from today and payment shall be effect to the workman after a period of four weeks, thereafter.
41.
This writ petition is allowed in above terms.
The petitioner will be entitled to costs of the present writ petition which are quantified at Rs. 5500/- which shall be paid within the same period as the arrears above noticed.
Petition allowed.