Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a clerk on November 27, 1984.
This Appointment was on daily wages.
After having worked for some time, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2680 of 1987 claiming parity in pay with the persons who were working on regular basis.
This writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court, vide order dated September 11, 1987.
The respondents were directed to pay to the petitioner the same salary and allowances as are paid to the regular and permanent employees of the department who are similarly situated as the petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that soon after the acceptance of her claim by the court, she was transferred from Chandigarh to Kalka and thereafter vide order dated January 5, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P2, she was retrenched from service.
Three months' salary in lieu of three months' notice along with 15 days' pay for each completed year of service was paid to her as retrenchment compensation.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
She alleges that according to the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated February 19, 1979, a person who had worked for 240 days was entitled to be regularised.
The petitioner having served for more than three years had, thus, a right to be appointed on regular basis.
She also alleges that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and unfair.
She has also produced on record of the award dated May 1, 1990 given by the Labour Court in Reference No. 488 of October 28, 1988 (Babu Ram v. General Manager Haryana Roadways), to show that the order of retrenchment passed in case of a person junior to the petitioner on August 20, 1987 was held to be illegal.
Similarly, awards were given in the case of other employees as well.
The five employees were reinstated vide order dated May 11, 1991.
2.
The respondents were served long time back.
They have not filed any written statement so far.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Suresh Monga, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned action of the respondents in retrenching the petitioner is wholly arbitrary and illegal.
Learned counsel submits that the provisions of Section 25N had not been complied with inasmuch as the petitioner had not been paid the retrenchment compensation for the period of the notice viz. from January 6, 1988 to April 5, 1988.
On the contrary a draft dated January 2, 1988 given to the petitioner was towards the salary for the period from November 27, 1987 to January 6, 1988.
He further submits that the orders of retrenchment passed with regard to the various other persons who were working with the petitioner have been set aside by the Labour Court vide its award dated May 1, 1990.
It has been found as a fact, that the provisions of Section 25N of the Industrial Disposes Act had not been complied with.
In view of this finding, the respondents had accepted the award and reinstated the workmen vide order dated May 11, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 on the record.
In view of these facts, learned counsel submits that the impugned order cannot be sustained.
5.
As already noticed no written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents in spite of the fact that the case remained pending for more than 8 years.
The respondents have certainly been negligent in defending the case.
Still further, it has not been shown that either the permission of the State Government had been obtained in accordance with the provisions of Section 25N or that even the salary and compensation had been paid to the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of Section 25N Faced with this situation, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, states that if the petitioner agrees to forego the backwages the respondents shall re-instate her immediately with continuity of service.
Mr. Monga, learned counsel for the petitioner accepts this offer.
6.
In view of the circumstances of the case, the offer having been accepted by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the order of retrenchment is set aside.
It is directed that the respondents shall reinstate the petitioner within one week from the receipt of a copy of this order.
She will be entitled to the payment of salary with effect from the date she reports for duty.
Her service shall be treated as continuous as if the order of retrenchment had not been passed.
However, as agreed to by the learned counsel, the petitioner shall not be entitled to the payment of backwages.
7.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
No costs.
8.
Office is directed to issue a copy of this order dasti to the counsel for the parties on payment of requisite charges immediately.