RS Mongia J (Oral) - The petitioner belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes.
He was appointed as a Master on February 10 1972 and was confirmed as such on August 12 1975.
The petitioner according to the averments made in Paragraph 2 of the writ petition which are not denied was promoted as Headmaster in officiating capacity vide order dated May 13 1983 though w.e.f.
May 24 1978.
Learned counsel for the petitioner after getting instructions from her client who is present in Court states that no order of confirmation as Headmaster had been passed till he retired from service on August 31 1993.
2.
According to the Punjab State's policy as envisaged in its letter dated July 23 1957 if a teacher while in service or earlier had acquired higher qualifications then he would be entitled to increments from the date of acquisition of the higher qualifications.
The petitioner had acquired qualification of Post Graduation i.e. MA on August 11 1978.
The petitioner who was working as a Master was denied the grant of increments despite his having acquired the higher qualifications.
He along with some similarly situated teachers filed a Writ Petition No. 2632 of 1985 which was allowed on February 21 1986.
The LPA against the said judgment and even the SLP filed by the State were dismissed.
Despite that the petitioner and some others were not released the advance increments i.e. the benefit of aforesaid judgment which led them to file COCP No. 309 of 1987 in this Court.
During the pendency of the Contempt Petition the Punjab government initially granted the relief to the petitioner on February 9 1988 vide order at Annexure P 5.
However vide order dated march 21 1988 Annexure P-6 the earlier order dated February 9 1988 was withdrawn.
The Contempt Petition came up for hearing on September 19 1988.
A statement was made on behalf of the respondents that excepting the petitioner relief had been granted to the others.
The Bench hearing the Contempt Petition observed that it would be open to the petitioner to agitate the matter separately.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
The only ground taken in the written statement to deny the benefit of the instruction dated July 23 1957 is that since the petitioner stood promoted as Headmaster w.e.f.
May 24 1978 and he had acquired the higher qualifications on August 11 1978 he would not be entitled to the benefit of advance increments.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that:  i.
In fact the petitioner had acquired these qualifications while he was working as a Master.
It is only vide order dated May 13 1983 that he was retrospectively promoted as a Headmaster and therefore this benefit cannot be denied.
ii.
The petitioner was promoted in officiating capacity and was never confirmed and he is deemed to be having lien on the post of Master.
iii.
Even if the petitioner is to be treated as a Headmaster the benefit of two increments cannot be denied simply because he is not a Master that would amount to discrimination.
The increments were given as an incentive for acquiring higher qualifications and were not dependent on a particular scale of pay in which he was working.
Even otherwise the Headmaster would include a Master.
iv.
No opportunity was given to the petitioner while withdrawing the order dated February 9 1988.
On the other hand learned counsel for the respondents reiterated the stand taken in the written-statement that since the petitioner was already a Headmaster he could not get any increment on acquiring higher qualifications in accordance with the letter dated April 23 1957.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that writ petition is liable to succeed.
In fact the higher qualifications which the petitioner obtained was as a Master though he was promoted as a Headmaster in officiating capacity on May 13 1983 with effect from May 24 1978.
Apart from this I am of the view that the incentive as per the letter dated July 23 1957 was to give increments to encourage teachers to acquire higher qualifications.
It would not make any difference whether the petitioner acquired this qualification as a Headmaster or Master.
The petitioner without the higher qualifications was entitled to promotion as Headmaster and even if he was to acquire qualification as Headmaster he would get the increments.
An analogy can be taken from the judgment of this Court in Jagdish Chander Walia v. State of Punjab, 1984(1) SLR 441.
In that case the petitioners who were JBT Teachers wee promoted as Punjabi Teachers in Classical and Vernacular cadre.
The pay scales were revised.
The Punjabi Teachers and some other Teachers got three increments in their time scale.
The petitioners were not allowed to draw these increments on the plea that at the time of initial appointment as Punjabi Teacher they were getting more.
This Court held that though they getting more yet they were entitled to increments.
5.
The matter can be viewed from another angle.
The petitioner was never confirmed as Headmaster.
He remained as an officiating Headmaster.
His lien must be taken to have been retained on the post of Master.
On this ground also the petitioner would be entitled to the increments.
6.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed and the order dated March 21 1988 Annexure P-6 is hereby quashed and the order dated February 9 1988 passed by the Government is restored entitling the petitioner to increments in the post held by him w.e.f.
the date he acquired higher qualification i.e. August 1978.
Let the consequential benefits be given to the petitioner within three months of the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.