MS Liberhan, J - Expurgated exordium of facts for determination of questions raised which emerge from the petition and are not in dispute, can be put as under :  2.
The petitioner joined the office of the Chief Electrical Inspector, which was a wing of PWD Department (Electricity Branch) of the State of Punjab on 411966.
On re-organisation of the State of Punjab, the petitioner was allocated to State of Punjab by an order of the Central Government dated 9.4.1968 conveyed to the Chief Electrical Inspector.
The petitioner was promoted as Assistant Engineer in the office of Punjab Electrical Inspectorate with effect from 1977.
The petitioner claims that he was promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer under rule 4 of the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electrical Branch) Recruitment Rules, 1939 hereinafter referred to as 'Recruitment Rules 1939'.
On promotion as Assistant Engineer, the petitioner become the member of Class II Service of the State of Punjab.
The Services of the petitioner were governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) Conditions of Service Rules, 1939, hereinafter referred to as 'Conditions of Service Rules, 1939'.
3.
It would be expedient at this stage to notice the scheme of Recruitment Rules, 1939 and Conditions of Service Rules, 1939.
Recruitment Rules of 1939 provide for the recruitment of the Engineers to Punjab Service of Engineers in the Electricity Branch.
These rules envisage the eligibility condition, recruitment, to the said service, for direct recruits, as well as by promotion, from subordinates, to the extent of 10% of the total number of posts of Assistant Engineers Class II.
Discretion lies with the authority to fill up the posts either by direct recruits or by promotion.
Conditions of Service Rules, 1939 provide for the cadre of the service, the hierarchy of the Engineers Service as the Chief Engineers, Superintending Engineer, Electric Inspector, Executive Engineer Assistant Engineer Class-I, Senior Assistant to Electric Inspector, Assistant Engineer Class II, and Junior Assistant etc.
Transfer to similar post, promotion to the post of higher pay scale by selection and not by seniority alone has been provided.
Rules further provide for determining the seniority.
The eligibility qualification for the service provided for in Recruitment Rules, 1939 runs as under :  APPOINTMENTS : 4(1) No person will be appointed to the service unless he : (a) xxxxxxxxxxxx (b) xxxxxxxxxxxx (c) has passed the Examination making him eligible for obtaining a degree, diploma or a certificate mentioned in Appendix A, or is a Corporate Member either of Institution or Mechanical Engineers or of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, or has passed Parts A and B of the Associate Membership Examination of the Institute of Engineers (India) or possesses qualification which exempt him from passing Parts A and B of the Associate Membership Examination of the Institute of Engineers (India) or has passed the Graduateship Examination of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (London) and has obtained practical traning for at least two years after passing the above Examination, in some reputed Electrical Engineering Firm, Government Hydro Electric Works Etc." 4.
The State of Punjab in exercise of the powers conferred on it by Article 309 of the Constitution of India, promulgated the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (State Service Class II) Rules, 1979, hereinafter referred to '1979 rules'.
The rules defined the service as Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (State Service Class II) constituted by Assistant Electrical Inspectors.
The feed to the cadre was provided, 60 per cent by direct appointment and 40 per cent by promotion, from amongst the Line Superintendents, with 10 years service in case of Diploma holders and five years in case of degree holders, in the Electrical Inspectorate.
These rules further provide that all promotions to the posts in the service shall be made by selection on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Conditions of Service Rules, 1939 and Recruitment Rules, 139 were repealed.
In 1992 the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (Class-I) Service Rules, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as 'Rule 1992') were promulgated.
These rules define service of Punjab electrical Inspectorate (Class-I) Service, which would comprise of Chief Electrical Inspector, permanent and temporary Executive Engineers.
The mode of recruitment to the service and qualification for the same are provided by Rule 8, which the petitioner challenges in this petition, to be dealt within the later part of the judgment.
The Chief Electrical Inspector can only be appointed by promotion from amongst the Executive Engineers with 10 years experience as such.
The post of Executive Engineer is primarily to be filled i.e. 100 per cent from amongst the Assistant Electrical Inspectors who are degree holders and having experience as such for a minimum period of 8 years.
5.
Under the Electricity Act, Rules known as Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 were framed, hereinafter referred to 'Rules 1956'.
The rules provide the qualification for appoint ment as Electrical Inspector and for Officers to assist him.
It runs as under :  "4. qualifications of inspectors.
No. person shall be appointed to be an Inspector unless - (a) he possesses a degree in electrical engineering or its equivalent from a recognised University or Institution; and (b) he has been regularly engaged for a period of at least eight years in the practice of electrical engineering, of which not less than two years have been spent in an electrical or mechanical engineering workshop or in generation or transmission or distribution of electricity, or in the administration of the Act and these rules, in a positions of responsibility : Provided that the appropriate Government may, for a period of seven years commencing on the date of Indian Electricity (Amendment-4) Rules, 1956, are brought into force, also appoint a person possessing recognised diploma in Electrical Engineering and having prescribed experience to be an Inspector in respect of low and medium voltage installations only."
Pari-material eligibility qualification for appointment of the officers to assist the Inspector were provided, though alternative qualification viz. diploma with six years experience in practice of electrical engineering has also been provided.
Powers to relax the requirement of experience of an otherwise well qualified person vest in the State Government.
6.
The petitioner challenges the validity and constitutionality of Rule 8 of Rules, 1992 which provided eligibility condition, prescribing minimum qualification of graduation for promotion or appointment to the post of Executive Engineer.
While putting his case counsel for the petitioner concentrated, his emphasis for the rules being ultra-vires, on the ground, that the petitioner acquired right of promotion under Conditions of Service Rules, 1939 and Recruitment Rules 1939 on his promotion in October 1992, with effect from 1977 and the same cannot be taken away or rendered nugatory by prescribing eligibility qualification for next higher post, rendering the petitioner ineligible.
Accrued right to promotion cannot be restricted by imposing any unreasonable restriction with respect to eligibility qualifications.
The experience cannot be sacrificed at the altar of academic qualification of degree.
Rules, of 1979 equated diploma holder with degree holder for promotion from Supervisor to Assistant Engineer Class II, by providing longer experience for the purpose of promotion from Supervisor to Assistant Engineer Class II.
By providing degree as qualification for further promotion in the eligibility condition the concept of putting degree at par with diploma with longer experience, provided in case of promotion to Assistant Engineer, cannot be undone, for the purpose of further promotion to Class I service.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in order to support his contentions relied on Sukhdev Raj v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1980(3) SLR 75, DP Pathak v. State of Punjab, 1980(1) SLR 346, P.S.E.B.
Patiala v. Ravinder Sharma, 1986(3) SLR 778 and TR Kapur v State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 415.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner has no vested right to promotion.
The chances of promotion did not form part of conditions of service.
It is for the appointing authority to prescribe qualification for the post.
The classification on the basis of educational qualification is a constitutionally valid classification.
Recruitment Rules, 1939 did not recognize the diploma acquired by the petitioner for the purpose of promotion to Class II service and did not even remotely confer any right of consideration for promotion, much less right of promotion.
The petitioner did not have right of promotion in accordance with Conditions of Service Rules, 1939, Class II Service Rules, 1979 or Class I Rules, 1992.
The rules were amended by the authority in exercise of its legislative power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The authority is well within its jurisdiction to prescribe the eligibility qualification for promotion/recruitment.
Consequently, the competent authority is entitled to vary the eligibility qualification.
The amended rules are prospective in nature.
There is no bar on the legislature's power to frame rules retrospectively or prospectively.
In support of his contentions learned counsel for the respondents has relied on AS Parmar v. State of Haryana, 1984(1) SLR 454, Balwant Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1992 Service Cases Today 620, VK Sood v. Secretary, Civil Aviation and others, JT 1993(3) SC 520 : 1993(3) SCT 574(SC), State of West Bengal etc. etc. v. Ratan Behari and others, JT 1993(4) SC 501 : 1994(1) SCT 96(SC), The State of MP and others v. Raghuveer Singh Yadav and others,JT 1994(5) SC 235 : 1994(4) SCT 244(SC), Union of India v. Shri Yogendra Singh, JT 1994(3) SC 642 : 1994(3) SCT 176(SC) and B.D Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 546(P&H).
Conspectus of the law as emerged from the judgments cited is to the effect :  (i) That in case promotion to next higher cadre as provided from a cadre, and if any rule provides quota for promotion solely on the basis on qualification, it would be violative of equality clause.
(ii) The authority competent to prescribe or lay down qualifications for suitability for promotion, is competent to change them.
However, neither the acquired right can be taken away nor a vested right can be impaired.
(iii) Where graduates and non-graduates are both regarded as fit and, therefore eligible for promotion, it is difficult to see how, consistently with the claim or equal opportunity any differentiation can be made between them by laying down a quota of promotion for each and giving preferential treatment to graduates over non-graduates in the matter of fixation of such quota.
Reference may be made to Vinod Kumar v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1981(2) SLR 346 and Mohammad Shujat v. Union of India, 1974(2) SLR 508.
8.
In VK Sood v. Secretary, Civil Aviation and others, JT 1993(3) SC 520 : 1993(3) SCT 574(SC), it was hold that in exercise of rule making power President or the authorised person is entitled to prescribe method of recruitment and qualifications both educational as well as technical for appointment or conditions of service to an office or a post under the State.
It was further observed that no motive can be attributed to the Legislature in making the law, the Courts have no assistance of experts, the eligibility qualification provided by the authority is presumed to be in the interest of public or is a matter of public policy.
In State of West Bengal etc. etc. v. Ratan Behari Dey and others, JT 1993(4) SC 501 : 1994(1) SCT 96(SC), it was observed that it is open to the State to change the conditions of service unilaterally.
The authority has power to specify the date from which the same shall take effect, Prescribing the conditions of service particularly Government service is a concomitant of Govt. affairs and the Govt. has the jurisdiction to change the conditions of service unilaterally.
Not permitting the Govt. to change the conditions of service would whittle down the administrative zeal for better governance, Administration would freeze, experience gained would be lost and the State would be deprived to lay down any innovative policy, scheme or conditions of service and resulting in depriving the State and the Public to have efficient service rather the administration would be freezed.
In the State of MP and others v. Raghuveer Singh Yadav and others, (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the State can prescribe qualification, withdraw selection, withdraw notification and the candidates who passed the examination had only legitimate expectation to the considered according to the rules then in vogue.
To similar effect is the law laid down in Union of India and another v. Shri Yogendra Singh, JT 1994(3) SC 642.
9.
It would be expedient to reproduce Rule 8 of Rules of 1992, the vires of which are under consideration :  Rule 8.
Method of appointment and qualifications :- 1.
Appointment to the service shall be made in the manner as specified in Appendix 'B' to the these rules.
Provided that if no suitable candidate is available for appointment to a post in the service by promotion or by direct appointment, as the case may be such a post shall be filled in by transfer of a person holding identical or similar post in a State Government or Government of India.
2.
No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he possesses the qualification and experience specified against that post in Appendix 'B' to these rules.
3.
All promotions to a post in the service shall be made by selection on the basis of merit-cum-seniority in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Service (Appointment by Promotion) Rules, 1962 and no person shall be entitled to claim as a matter of right promotion to such post on the basis of seniority alone.
4.
No persons shall be recruited to any post in Service by direct appointment unless he possesses knowledge of Punjabi language of Matriculation standard or its equivalent or passes test of Punjabi Language of Matriculation Standard to be held by such authority as may be specified by the Government of Punjab in this behalf from time to time : Provided that in the case of a person who does not possess the knowledge of Punjabi Language of Matriculation standard or its equivalent at the time of appointment, his appointment to the service may be made subject to the condition that he acquire the aforesaid qualification within a period of six months from the date of appointment failing which his services shall be liable to be terminated without any notice".
10.
Plain reading of the rules makes it clear, that it is prospective in nature.
State's experts, taking into consideration the scientific advancement, nature of duties to be performed and keeping in view the past experience, present conditions and future expectations, provided graduation as the minimum qualification for the post of Executive Engineer.
There is no gain- saying that the acquisition of higher academic educational qualification does put a person in class by itself.
In this era of expertise, higher academic qualification for holding a post of higher responsibility is usually the sine qua non for appointments.
11.
The power to provide educational qualification by rules is beyond question and is permissible.
Reference may be made to AS Parmar v. State of Haryana, 1984(1) SLR 454.
It is again well established that classification on the basis of educational qualification is patently permissible.
12.
In our considered view, Recruitment Rules, 1939, Conditions of Service Rules, 1939 or Rules, 1979 nowhere provide a vested right for promotion either from Class II service to Class I or from Supervisor to Assistant Engineer Grade-II.
Rule 4(2) of Recruitment Rules, 1939 which provided that 10 per cent seats could be filled in by promotion in accordance with eligibility qualification was repealed by Rules of 1979, according to which methodology for recruitment provided is, 40% by promotion from amongst Engineer subordinates with 10 years' experience in case of diploma holders and 5 years in case of degree holders on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
The rules do not confer any right to further promotion.
A person may have a chance of promotion on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Mere chance of promotion would not be termed as a vested right for promotion.
13.
We may hasten to add that providing eligibility condition of graduation for recruitment to the post of Executive Engineer is a question of policy brought out by way of change in old policy.
The courts ordinarily would not interfere in the policy decision of the State, unless it has resulted in failure of justice or violated any well established principle like just expectations etc.  14.
The petitioner was promoted under Rules of 1979 which do not confer any right for further promotion to post of Executive Engineer as a matter of right on the basis of seniority etc.  15.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, JT 1993(2) SC 115 : 1993(2) SCT 416(SC), observed that prescribing quota for promotion in a cadre on the basis of being graduates or diploma holder supervisor is not permissible.
So far as the judgments cited by learned counsel for the petitioner Sukhdev Raj v. Punjab State Electricity Board,1980(3) SLR.
75, DP Pathak v. State of Punjab,1980(1) SLR 346, P.S.E.B.
Patiala v. Ravinder Sharma, 1986(3) SLR 778 and TR Kapur v, State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 415, are concerned there is no dispute with the proposition of law to the effect that reservation for promotion from a cadre cannot be made on the basis of educational qualification alone.
The observations relied on by counsel for the petitioner have been read by him out of context of the text of the case.
Reading of the judgments makes it clear that the Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down the law to the above effect only when eligibility conditions for promotion from a cadre to higher cadre continue to be the same.
Then no reservation can be made on the basis of educational qualification.
It is in fact in view of the eligibility condition where the different education qualifications - different experience was provided for further promotion that the Apex Court observed that higher educational qualification stood equalized by recognition of longer experience in lieu of graduation or higher educational qualification by statutory rules that in such circumstances further fixing quota or reservation, or classification on the basis of educational qualification for further promotion, would amount to violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, which in fact is not the case in hand.
Herein, concertedly, the eligibility condition for holding the higher post is graduation.
It is the graduation that is provided as eligibility condition for promotion to the higher cadre by the rules.
16.
It is again well established law that the authority competent to lay down qualification of suitability for promotion is competent to change the same, which has been done in the present case, though it has been observed that an acquired right cannot be taken away or impaired.
Again in the precedents cited by learned counsel for the petitioner, the Hon'ble Supreme Court struck down the rules of 1987 which amended the eligibility condition for promotion with retrospective effect as it amounted to annulling or nullifying an already acquired or accrued right for promotion.
It is not so in the case in hand.
The eligibility conditions for promotion even if taken to have been amended in the present case have been amended prospectively i.e. with prospective effect.
17.
It has been observed in JT 1994(5) SC 235 (supra), that the State can prescribe qualification, and a person or a candidate who passed the examination, had only legitimate expectation of his claim to be considered according to the rules in vogue at the time of promotion, particularly when the rules have been brought in operation prospectively.
Thus the law laid down squarely covers the facts and circumstances of the case in hand i.e. promotion to higher post would be governed by the rules of 1997 or rules of 1992 as applicable at the time of promotion.
Prior to them at the most it can be termed as mere chances of promotion, though, as observed in earlier part, even this was not the case.
18.
It is well established that where classification is based on academic qualification which is justified it is for the claimant to justify that there is no reasonable basis to treat them separately.
It is always open to the Government to put employees in the same service in different categories for the purpose of scale of pay according to qualification possessed by them.
When a category can be created for the purpose of grant of pay scale according to the qualification on the pari-materia reasoning, in our considered view it is well within the competence of the State to prescribe eligibility conditions for promotion to a higher post, particularly considering the era of expertise.
Ordinarily the experience cannot be measured in terms of academic qualifications or substitute for higher education.
It is well accepted norm that higher academic qualification has always been put on higher pedestral than lower qualification, though with more experience.
Experience has never been treated as a substituted for academic qualification.
It is the prerogative of the State and the experts to assess whether experience can compensate for the academic qualification.
Herein the Administration by amending rules in 1992 has categorically provided that no person shall be appointed to the post of Executive Engineer whether as direct recruit or promotee who is not a graduate, i.e. academically qualified up to degree.
We find no arbitrariness or violation of any of the rules or principles nor the same has been pointed out.
19.
Plain reading of Conditions of Service Rules 1939 and Recruitment Rules, 1939, provides the feeding to the service on the basis of recommendation of Chief Engineer from any of the grade of the service or by recruitment with special qualification.
Reference may be made to Rule 4 of Recruitment Rules, 1939. similarly a post may be filled in by promotion from members of the service.
They do not provide any mandatory provision for promotion much less any fixed proportion for recruitment to Engineers in the service by promotion.
There is no regulation for promotion from one cadre to another, The statutory rules only enable the State to fill the post by promotion.
There is no mandatory or statutory provision providing for promotion in a particular mode or from the cadre to another.
We may hasten to add that providing the enabling provisions to State to fill the posts by promotion at the most can be termed as providing for chances of promotion.
It cannot be inferred that the petitioner has a right of promotion under either Recruitment Rules, 1939 or Conditions of Service Rules, 1939.
Thus the petitioner neither had any vested right for consideration for promotion nor any right accrued to the petitioner, which has been impaired or taken away by either the Rules, 1979 or Rules, 1992.
20.
Be that as it is, at the most the petitioner could put in that impliedly the rules envisage the recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineer Class II from amongst the members of the service to the maximum extent of 12% of the strength of the Assistant Engineer Class II.
It nowhere envisages by promotion of filling up of the post of Executive Engineer from Class II to Class I Service.
Thus Rules, 1939, do not confer any right for consideration for promotion to Class I Service nor it accrued to the petitioner.
21.
Conditions of Service Rules, 1939 again envisage a promotion to higher pay scale and that too not on the basis of seniority alone.
There can be no gain-saying that Assistant Engineer Class II may be forming a cadre in the service but it cannot be equated with Class I Service which would be an independent cadre.
Cadre and service carry a distinct connotation in the service jurisprudence and one is not synonymous with the other.
After going through the entire scheme of the rules referred to above, we find no rule, nor has been pointed out to the effect that the authorities have to mandatorily fill up the higher posts by promotion.
It was left to the discretion of the authorities to fill up the post in the manner they liked, whether by promotion or by selection.
22.
Similarly, Class II Rules of 1979 provided for conditions of service for Assistant Engineer Class II and that too in the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate.
Method of recruitment or appointment to Class II service has been provided by Rule 8 of 1979 Rules viz. 60% by direct appointment and 40% by promotion from amongst the Line Superintendents.
It nowhere provides that the Assistant Engineers Grade II have any right for consideration for further promotion to Class I Service i.e. of Executive Engineer.
The plain reading of Rules, 1979 leads to an inference that no right for consideration for promotion to Class I either vested or accrued to the petitioner.
23.
As a natural corollary the rules providing the eligibility conditions for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer has not adversely affected the right of the petitioner in any manner.
24.
In view of the observations made above, we are of the considered view that the petitioner has no accrued right which has been taken away by amendment or by framing of Rules, 1992 for appointment of Executive Engineer Class I.
The conditions of eligibility provided by Rules of 1992 in view of the observations made above cannot be termed to be unconstitutional, invalid or perverse in any manner whatsoever.
25.
Learned counsel for the petitioner lastly argued that the rules cannot be amended or changed as it would amount to changing the conditions of service of the petitioner without prior approval of the Central Government in view of Section 106 of the Re-organisation Act, 1956 and Section 82 of Re- organisation Act, 1966.
26.
We find no force in this submission of learned counsel for the petitioner as well for the simple reason that petitioner was promoted to Class II service in 1977 i.e. much after the re-organisation.
Consequently, the petitioner did not have either any vested right or accrued right for consideration for promotion as condition of service before the re-organisation which can be alleged to have been adversely affected.
Be that as it is, in view of the finding arrived at by us that the petitioner did not have any vested right or accrued right for consideration for promotion from the post of Assistant Engineer Class II to Executive Engineer Class I, his grievance that he has been affected by the Rules under challenge has no substance.
27.
Further the law laid down in the judgment in BD Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 546(P&H), wherein while dealing with the Central Government's instructions, it has been held that no prior approval is required, knocks out the contention raised with respect to taking of prior approval for amending the rules.
Thus we find no force in the submission made by learned Counsel for the petitioner that rule 8 suffers from any infirmity as argued by him.
28.
In view of the observations made above, we find no force in the writ petition.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed with costs of Rs. 1000/-.
Petition dismissed.