Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for a declaration that he was entitled to be promoted to the Selection Grade with effect from January 1, 1978 and to the payment of arrears on account of revision of pension etc. with effect from September 26, 1990 along with interest.
The suit was decreed by the learned trial court.
It was held that the plaintiff is entitled to receive the selection grade w.e.f.
1178 as per seniority list dated 15589 and arrears on account of revision of pension w.e.f.
26990 along with 12% interest.
The State of Punjab filed an appeal which has been dismissed.
Hence this second appeal.
2.
The solitary contention raised by the counsel for the appellants is that the learned courts below have only directed that the claim of the plaintiff- respondent be considered for the grant of selection grade.
It was not within the jurisdiction of the courts to direct that he be placed in the selection grade w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
Mr. Sihota, counsel for the appellants submits that the plaintiff-respondent was not given the selection grade as his service record was not upto the mark.
3.
Mr. Hemant Gupta, counsel for the respondent admits that the only direction that could have been given by the court was for the consideration of the plaintiff-respondent's claim and not for the grant of selection grade.
He only prays that the appellants may be permitted to consider his claim and till then, the appeal may be kept pending.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the grievance made by the appellants is well-founded.
The grant of selection grade is not automatic.
No rule or instructions have been pointed out to show that it is granted on the basis of seniority alone.
Even the grievance made by the plaintiff-respondent was that his claim was not considered by the competent authority when selection grade was granted to persons who were junior to him.
In this situation, the only direction that could be given was that the respondent shall consider the claim of the plaintiff-respondent for the grant of selection grade with effect from the date it was given to a person junior to him.
5.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the extent that the plaintiff- respondent shall be entitled to the consideration of his claim for the grant of selection grade w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
In case he is found suitable for the grant of selection grade, he will be entitled to arrears on account of revision of pension as claimed by him with interest as awarded by the courts below.
The judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate Court are modified to that extent.
Appeal partly allowed.