RL Anand, J - Petitioners Nos. 2 to 14 are Inspectors Grade-II in the Audit Wing of the Cooperative Department of the State of Punjab and petitioner No. 1 is the Association of the Inspectors Grade-II.
The case of the petitioners is that in the Cooperative Department in the State of Punjab there are two wings, one is the Audit Wing and the other is the General Wing.
The Audit Wing is under the administrative control of the Chief Auditor Cooperative Societies while the General Line is under the administrative control of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
In both the wings there are Inspectors Grade I as also Inspector Grade-II.
In the cadre of Inspectors Grade-II there was a great stagnation.
Chances of promotion were remote and by the time an Inspectors Grade-II was promoted to the post of Inspector Grade-I he was already drawing an equivalent of higher pay and the benefit was totally illusory.
Further the work of the Inspector Grade-I had greatly increased over the years.
Consequently, there was a move within the Government which has been eagerly pursued by all the Inspectors Grade-II that the cadre of Inspectors Grade-II should be merged with that of Inspectors Grade-I in the Cooperation Department.
Ultimately, by a notification dated 19th July, 1992 (Annexure P1) the State of Punjab decided to merge the cadre of Inspectors Grade-II with Inspectors Grade-I in the Cooperation Department with effect from the date of the issuance of the notification and on the basis of the terms and conditions mentioned in the notification and as per that notification, Inspectors Grade- II were placed junior to the Inspectors Grade-I  2.
The petitioners alleged that the State of Punjab was aware that the Cooperation Department had two wings - one under Registrar and the other under the Chief Auditor.
Therefore, the copies of the notification (Annexure P1) were endorsed to both the supervisory officers.
Unfortunately, the notification was implemented by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Incharge of the General Wing, in the year 1963 but was not implemented in the case of the Inspectors, Cooperative societies working in the Audit Wing.
Earlier the Inspectors Grade-I and Inspectors Grade-II, whether working in the Audit Wing or in the General Line of the Cooperative Department, used to perform identical duties and functions and there was complete parity of pay scales and designation and the recommendations of the Pay Commission have always been common for both these sets of employees, as is clear from the letter dated 30.11.1990 (Annexure P2).
When the petitioners realised that the Department was only going to implement the notification (Annexure P1) in the case of General Line not in the case of Audit Wing, they approached the Chief Auditor, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, and impressed upon him that the State of Punjab had merged all the Inspectors Grade-II with Inspectors Grade-I and there was no justification for the State of Punjab only to implement the notification in piecemeal in the case of Inspectors of General Line and not in the case of Inspectors in the Audit Wing.
Finding justification in the grievance of the petitioners, the Chief Auditor, Cooperative Societies, recommended the case of the petitioners to the State Government.
It was clearly mentioned by the Chief Auditor that almost all the Inspectors Grade-II were already drawing pay in the pay scale of Rs. 1640/-, which was more than the Basic Pay of Inspector Grade-I and, therefore, even if they were upgraded there would be no financial loss to the State of Punjab.
The recommendations of the Chief Auditor is Annexure P3.
It is also stated by the petitioners that earlier the Chief Auditor sent a proposal on 11.8.1992 to the State Government as to why the cadre of Inspectors Grade-II in the Audit Wing should be merged with the Inspectors Grade-I In spite of all this, the State Government has not implemented the notification (Annexure P1) in its letter and spirit.
The petitioners through their Association had been repeatedly meeting the officers of the State, yet no action had been taken to merge the cadre of Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing with the Inspectors Grade-I The action on the part of the respondents in not upgrading and merging the cadre of the Inspectors Grade-II in the Audit Wing is totally against the terms of the notification (Annexure P1) and this action is arbitrary, illegal and cannot be sustained.
It was also pleaded that the Inspectors Grade-II in the Cooperative Department, whether they belonged to the General Line or in the Audit Wing, are governed by the same set of rules.
The pay scale of the two posts is the same as also the designation.
The nature of the duties of the two posts is also the same and the posts are at par with each other.
Consequently, the action of the respondents in upgrading only the posts of Inspectors Grade-II in one wing, i.e., the General Wing, and not upgrading the post in the other wing, i.e., the Audit Wing, is absolutely discriminatory and cannot be sustained.
This action of the Government is in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
With the above allegations, the petitioners have prayed for the issuance of a mandamus directing the respondents to implement the decision taken vide notification (Annexure P1) to merge the Inspectors Grade-II of the Cooperation Department with the Inspectors Grade-I of the Cooperation Department, in the case of the Inspectors working in the Audit Wing of the Cooperation Department.
4.
The State has filed reply and took the preliminary objections that the equation of the posts and pay are matters primarily concerning Government of the State and not the Court; therefore, the writ petition is not maintainable.
The petitioners are Inspectors Audit Grade-II working under the Cooperative Audit Department and they are not Inspectors Grade-II as mentioned in para 1 of the writ petition.
The Cooperative Audit is a separate and independent department working under the control of the Chief Auditor Cooperative Societies, Punjab, as notified by the Government of Punjab vide notification dated 1831970 (Annexure R-1).
Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, is also a separate Head of the Department, who controls the supervisory staff, including Inspectors Grade-I and Inspectors Grade-II.
The Third pay Commission had recommended the pay scale of Inspectors Audit Grade-II as Rs. 1350-2400, which was granted by the Government to this cadre and the qualification was recommended as B.Com.
whereas the qualification of Inspectors Grade-II under the Registrar Cooperative Societies, Punjab, is Graduate.
Vide notification (Annexure P1) the Government decided to merge Inspectors Grade-II of the Cooperative Department with the Inspectors Grade-I and this was applicable to the Inspectors Grade-II working under the control of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
The Government had clarified this position vide letter dated 581992 (Annexure R-2) to the effect that the earlier decision taken vide notification (P1) was limited to the merger of Inspectors Grade-II into that of Inspectors Grade-I in the office of Registrar, Cooperative Societies, and Chief Auditor, Cooperative Societies, had nothing to do in that matter.
Thus from Annexure R2 it is clear that the decision was not applicable in the case of the writ petitioners who belong to the Audit Wing, which is a separate department.
The Government also submitted that the Chief Auditor, Cooperative Societies, has separately requested the Government for the merger of the Inspector Audit Grade-II with the Inspector Audit Grade-I and no decision has been taken so far as all such proposals would be considered by the new Pay Commission.
It is also the stand of the State that the designations of the posts of Inspector Audit and the Sub-Inspector Audit as Inspector Audit Grade I and Inspector Audit Grade-II were changed by the Government by separate notifications dated 25.4.1990, which made it clear that the Cooperative Audit is a separate department and it cannot be considered a wing of the Cooperative Department.
In short, the effort on the part of the Government is to show to this Court that the Audit Wing and the General Wing are two separate Departments and are controlled by two different officers, i.e., Chief Auditor of the Cooperative Societies and the Registrar of Cooperative Societies, respectively.
Also an effort has been made to show that the notification (Annexure P1) was issued for a limited purpose in order to merge the Inspector Grade-II of the General Wing with the Inspector Grade I in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
5.
The parties have also placed on record the documents in support of their case.
6.
I have heard Shri PS Patwalia, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioners, and Shri PS Chhinna, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
7.
Everything would revolve around Annexure P1, i.e., the notification (Annexure P1) dated 9th July, 1992, vide which the Governor of Punjab was pleased to merge the Inspectors Grade-II of the Cooperation Department with Inspectors Grade-I of the Department from the date of publication of this notification in the official gazette.
A perusal of the notification would show that at the time of its issuance no distinction was made by the Government that it wanted only to merge the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing with the Inspectors Grade-I of the Department.
It is a common case of parties that the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing as well as the Audit Wing are the employees of the Cooperation Department of the State of Punjab .
If that was so, it is not open to the State now to say that the notification (Annexure P1) was issued for a limited purpose or that the intention of the Government was only to merge the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing with that of the Inspectors Grade I of the Department.
My reasons are strengthened if I see to the endorsement made under this notification.
The copies of this notification were endorsed both to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh, for information and necessary action and similarly it was sent to the Chief Auditor, Punjab, Chandigarh, for information and necessary action.
This clearly suggests that the Government wanted to upgrade the posts of Inspector Grade II belonging to the General Wing as well as the Audit Wing to the level of Inspector Grade-I and there was no reservation at that time in the mind of the Government that this notification would apply only to the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing.
The learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, has drawn my attention to clause (1) of this notification and submitted that by virtue of this notification, 200 posts of Inspectors Grade- II were abolished from the General Line before their merger and this indicates that the Government only wanted to merge Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing with the Inspectors Grade-I Mr. Chhinna further submitted that had the Government wanted to upgrade the posts of Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing, a note to that effect would have also been made in that regard.
8.
The argument is devoid of any merit because had only 200 posts of Inspectors Grade-II in the General Wing been with the Goverment, it could be inferred by some stretch of imagination that this notification (P1) in only applicable vis-a-vis the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing, but the posts are much more than 200.
If 200 posts of Inspectors Grade-II from the General Wing were sought to be abolished by this notification, it does not affect the operative part of the notification by which it is clear that the Government wanted to merge Inspectors Grade-II of the Cooperative Department with Inspectors Grade-I irrespective of the fact whether those Inspectors Grade-II hail from the General Wing or from the Audit Wing and in this regard the Annexure P2 will be quite helpful because the proposal of the Government was to merge the posts of Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing also.
So long as the Inspectors Grade-II only of General Wing or the Audit Wing are the employees of the Cooperation Department, the operative portion of the notification would apply and the Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing also will be considered for being merged with the Inspectors Grade-I of the Department on such conditions which have been incorporated in the notification itself.
9.
This case has also to be viewed from another angle.
Assuming for the sake of argument that notification (Annexure P1) is applicable to the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing, even then this action on the part of the Government will be considered as discriminatory.
The Inspectors Grade-I of the Audit Wing cannot remain behind and they cannot be viewed with coloured glasses so long as they belong to the same Department.
This court is not convinced with the defence of the State Government that the General Wing and the Audit Wing are two independent departments.
Rather they are different functionaries of the Cooperative Department of the State Government.
10.
Effort was also made by the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General with the help of Annexure R2 in order to convince me that clarification has been given by the Government that notification (Annexure P1) was issued with a limited purpose to merge Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing with the Inspectors Grade-I in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, and the Chief Auditor, Cooperative Societies had nothing to do in the matter.
This order has been issued under the signature of the Superintendent and the point for adjudication would be whether a Superintendent has the power under the rules of business to issue such clarification on behalf of the Government erasing the effect of notification (P1) which was issued on behalf of the Government under the signature of the Secretary, Government of Punjab.
I am of the considered view that such letter under the signature of the Superintendent cannot override the effect of the notification (Annexure P1).
11.
The attempt of the Government to show that the General Wing and the Audit Wing are two independent departments of the State Government is also not correct If given a glance to Annexure R1, which shows that all expenses are debited to the Major Head, i.e., "34 Cooperation and Receipt Head XXVIII Cooperation".
This indicates that the Audit Wing and General Wing are two functionaries of the Cooperative Department but they are not independent departments in so far as projected by the learned counsel for the respondents.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon an authority reported as Haryana State Biologists Association v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 198(P&H)(DB) : 1994(4) Recent Service Judgments 444, and it was submitted that once there was parity in the pay scales of the employees, such parity cannot be disturbed without the authority of law.
The argument is devoid of any merit because the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing and of the Audit Wing were in the same pay scale and by merging the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing with the Inspectors Grade- I, the pay parity of the Inspectors Grade-II of both the wings would be disturbed, which is not warranted.
13.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, has relied upon Union of India of others v. Tej Ram Parashramji Bombhate, 1992(2) SCT 467(SC) : (1991) 3 S.C.C.
11; and State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19, and submitted that in the administrative action of the Government, no Court or Tribunal should compel the Government to change this policy, which involves financial burden on it.
These authorities are not helpful to me.
By notification (Annexure P1) the Government was not equating the posts nor this Court is to determine whether the posts of Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing or of the Audit Wing are equal.
Here the question primarily is whether Annexure P1 was made applicable to the Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing as well as the General Wing.
I have already held above that it applies to both the Wings and ought to have been applied to both of them.
The Audit Wing cannot be discriminated.
14.
Summing up, it is held that notification (Annexure P1) did not make any distinction with regard to Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wing and the Audit Wing and is applicable to both the Wings of the Cooperation Department and the Inspectors Grade-II of the General Wings as well as the Audit Wing would be considered to have been merged with Inspectors Grade- I of the Department on the terms and conditions as laid down in the notification.
Also it in held that is case the Government wants to treat the Inspectors Grade-II of the Audit Wing and General Wing in the matter of merger differently, such action would be considered as discriminatory and violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is also held that Annexure R2 cannot override the effect of Annexure P1.
15.
The net result is that the writ petition is allowed and directions are issued to the respondents to implement the decision taken vide notification (Annexure P1), vide which it was decided to merge the posts of Inspectors Grade-II of the Cooperation Department with the Inspectors Grade- I of the Department, in the case of the Inspectors Audit Grade-II working in the Audit wing of the Cooperation Department of the Punjab Government.
These directions will be carried out by the Government within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
The costs are made easy.