Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These two petitions have been filed by the members of the Ministerial Establishment of the Health Department.
The petitioners have been listed together for hearing in pursuance of the orders of the Motion Bench.
The controversy primarily relates to the determination of inter se seniority.
The facts as alleged in Civil Writ Petition No. 4317 of 1980 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners were appointed as Clerks in the offices of the Civil Surgeons on different dates from March 31, 1965 to October 30, 1969.
While they were working as such, the State Government issued an order on April 28, 1975, regarding the provincialisation of the services of the Zila Parishad staff working in the offices of the Civil Surgeons.
By this order, sanction of the Governor of Punjab was "accorded to the provicialisation of services of Zilla Parishad staff working in the offices of Civil Surgeons, Amritsar, Ferozepur, Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana District..." Certain conditions were laid down.
Resultantly, the services of respondents who were working under various health centres or in the offices of the Civil Surgeons were provincialised.
On April 17, 1979, the Director of Health Services issued the revised provisional seniority list of the staff working in the various subordinate offices.
In this order, it was mentioned that a provisional seniority list has been circulated vide office letter dated August 21, 1978.
The representations which had been received in pursuance of the above circular had been considered.
Certain corrections had been made in the list.
In view of the integration of services of the staff working under the various Zila Parishads, the inter se seniority had been determined "on the basis of the date of joining service ----- in the equivalent ranks which they were holding on 28475 ------."
On this basis, the inter se `seniority of clerks' was determined.
The provisional seniority list was appended to this letter.
The petitioners alleged that they submitted various representations against this list.
Since the respondent did not take any action, they have filed the present petition with the grievance that the provicialisation of the services vide order dated April 28, 1975, was illegal.
They further alleged that the action of the Director, Health Services, in determining the seniority list on the basis of the date of continuous appointment was contrary to the provisions of the Punjab Medical Department Subordinate Posts (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1945.
Under rule 7, it has been provided that "the seniority in a post shall be determined by the date of confirmation in the post."
The petitioners alleged that the criterion adopted by the Director is contrary to the statutory provisions contained in rule 7.
It is further alleged that petitioners 1 and 2 having joined service prior to November 1, 1966, the action of the Director in prescribing a new criterion for determination of seniority was violative of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, inasmuch as the prior approval of the Central Government had not been obtained.
The petitioners consequently pray that the order of provincialisation dated April 28, 1975, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 and the seniority list circulated with the letter dated April 17, 1979 Annexure P-1 with the writ petition be quashed.
3.
The respondents contest the petition.
A short written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 3 to 10.
It has been pleaded by way of a preliminary objection that the order passed by the State Government on April 28, 1975, having been challenged by the petitioners in September, 1980, the relief should be declined on the short ground of delay.
On merits it has been pointed out that petitioners 1 and 2 had been confirmed as clerks with effect from May 23, 1979.
Similarly, respondents 3 to 8 and 10 had been confirmed with effect from promotion arch 2, 1979.
Petitioners 3 and 4 and respondent 9 had not been confirmed.
It has been further pointed out that respondent No. 9 being a member of the Scheduled Castes had been promoted to the next high er post against one of the posts reserved for the members of that class.
In view of the fact that the respondents had been confirmed or promoted earlier to the dates on which petitioners 1 and 2 were confirmed, they have rightly been treated as senior to them.
Still further, it has been pointed out that petitioners 3 and 4 being junior to petitioners 1 and 2, they can have no cause for grievance.
Even the submission that the action is violative of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, has been controverted.
In other respects, the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 has been adopted by these respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it was inter alia pointed out that respondents 3 to 10 had been promoted to the posts of Assistants/Accountants with effect from the different dates on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
It was further pointed out that the inter se seniority had been determined in conformity with the rules.
The association/Union of the Employees had represented against the seniority assigned to the provincialised staff.
However, the action of the Government in granting benefit of the past service has been pointed out that the Punjab Government had ordered vide memo.
dated November 21, 1979, that "the seniority of the Zila Parishad employees should be determined ----- on the basis of the their joining service in that office, as was decided by the Punjab Government memo.
dated 6th/7th September, 1956 -----.
It is further maintained that the Governor of Punjab "has approved the integration of seniority of Zila Parishad staff on provincialisation -----------".
The respondents maintain that the orders for the provincialisation of services and determination of seniority are in conformity with the rules.
Various documents have also been produced along with the written statement.
These are the pleadings.
4.
Mr. Pradip Bhandari, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that the action of the Government in ordering provincialisation of the services of the staff working under the Zila Parishads and their integration with the Health Department by an executive order is illegal and violative of the 1945 Rules.
The criterion adopted by the Director, Health Services, respondent No. 2, for determination of inter se seniority vide order dated April 17, 1979, is contrary to the provisions of rule 7 inasmuch as that the inter se seniority has to be determined on the basis of date of confirmation and not on the basis of the date of continuous appointment.
Lastly, it has been contended that the conditions of service governing petitioners 1 and 2 have been varied by an executive order which is violative of the provisions of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted that the writ petition suffers from the vice of laches and deserves to be dismissed on this short ground alone.
On merits, it has been submitted that the posts of Clerks etc. were actually under the control of officers of the Health Department.
Only the salary was being drawn from the funds of the Zila Parishads.
Since the employees were effectively under the control of the Health Department, their integration with the members of the ministerial establishment by an executive order is legal and valid.
Still further, it has been submitted that the seniority assigned to the petitioners as well as respondents 3 to 10 is in conformity with the provisions of the rules.
Still further, there being no change in the criteria for determination of seniority, the question of seeking approval of the Central Government did not arise.
In any event, even if is assumed that there was some notional change in the conditions of service, in view of the decision of Apex Court in JK Vasavada and others v. Chandrakanta Chiman Lal Bhavsar and another, 1975(2) S.L.R.
522, the approval granted vide lletter dated may 11, 1957, by the Central Government shall be deemed to be an approval under the provisions of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
5.
A perusal of the sequence of events as detailed above clearly shows that the order of provincialisation of the services of staff of the Zila Parishads had been passed on April 28, 1975.
This was a clear signal to all the employees working in the Health Department including the petitioners that the members of the staff of the Zila Parishads would be brought into their cadre.
Still further, it has been stated on behalf of the respondents that in pursuance of this order, the services of 34 employees had been provincialised, out of whom only light are continuing at present.
The remaining employees have either retired or expired.
It is also clear from the record of the case that even before the filing of the writ petition, respondents 3 to 8 and 10 had been confirmed as Clerks.
The petitioners have offered no explanation whatsoever for the delay in approaching this Court.
In this situation, one cannot blame the learned counsel for the respondents for contending vehemently that the petition is highly belated and that in any event a triable issue of limitation arises in this case.
It is the admitted position that the writ petition had been filed almost 5 years after the issue of the order regarding provincialisation.
It is true that the writ petition has remained pending for more than 16 years in this Court.
However, in view of the totality of the circumstances of the case, it does not appear to be reasonable to now question the validity of the very act of provincialisation.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that the petitioners have not suffered any real injustice to warrant any interference.
Respondents 3 to 10 had admittedly joined as Clerks much earlier than the petitioners.
In paragraph 5 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it has been pointed out that the respondents had joined as Clerks on May 15, 1951, January 31, 1957, December 6, 1954, April 14, 1995, May 5, 1960, June 21, 1996, March 30, 1967, and December 30, 1960 respectively.
As against this, a the petitioners had joined as Clerks in the years 1965 and 1969.
Respondent No. 9 who had joined on March 30, 1967, is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
The remaining persons had joined much earlier than all the petitioners.
Still further, it is also not disputed that the respondents have been confirmed with effect from the dates much earlier than those on which petitioners 1 and 2 were confirmed.
Petitioners 3 and 4 being far junior, were not found entitled to be considered for confirmation by the date on which the written statement was filed in this Court.
Since the respondents had served for much longer period and they are confirmed from earlier dates, the action of the respondents in either treating them as senior to the petitioners or promoting them earlier than the petitioners can neither be said arbitrary no unfair.
In this situation, keeping in view the fact that the petition was filed after an avoidable delay of 5 years, it appears to be in the interest of justice not to interfere with the order of privincialisation.
6.
Mr. Bhandari submitted that the order dated April 17, 1979, issued by respondent No. 2 regarding the determination of inter se seniority on the basis of the date of continuous appointment is contrary to the statutory rules.
Per se the argument is attractive.
However, on a closer scrutiny, it turns out to be wholly untenable.
It is the admitted position that on April 17, 1979, neither the petitioners nor any of respondents 3 to 10 had been actually confirmed.
It is true that under rule 7, the inter se seniority has to be determined on the basis of the date of confirmation.
However, even before the employees are actually confirmed their names have to be placed in some order.
If the department makes recruitment to 100 posts, the names of the candidates may be in order of their inter se merit.
However, if there are 100 persons in a cadre from different sources, the inter se seniority will have to be determined by some reasonable method.
Even if a rule provides for determination of seniority on the basis of date of confirmation, the names of the officials will have to be considered for confirmation in some order.
In such a situation, the normal method viz. the determination of inter se seniority on the basis of continuous appointment is absolutely just and fair.
This precisely appears to have been done in the present case.
The petitioners as well as respondents 3 to 10 had not been confirmed as Clerks.
Their inter se seniority was determined on the basis of date of continuous appointment.
Their names have been finally arranged in order of date of confirmation.
This is in conformity with the provisions of rule 7 and accordingly calls for no interference.
Equally there is no merit in the contention that the provisions of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, have been violated.
Seniority is in fact an important condition of service.
However, in the present case, it is the admitted position that the final seniority list is based on the actual date of confirmation.
Since respondents had been confirmed with effect from the dates earlier than those on which petitioners 1 and 2 had been confirmed, they have been declared senior to those who were confirmed after them.
Consequently, there is no infraction of law.
Petitioners 3 and 4 are admittedly junior to petitioner Nos. 1 and 2.
Since it is the admitted position that the seniority shall be finally settled in accordance with the dates of confirmation, the contention that the conditions of service have been changed to the disadvantage of the petitioners is wholly misconceived and cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly rejected.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
C.W.P.
1555 of 1992.
7.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 15515 of 1992, the grievance of the petitioners is two fold.
The petitioners claim that they had been promoted from the posts of Clerks to those of Assistants vide order dated July 14, 1978, "with immediate effect".
As against this, respondents 4 to 9 had joined service in the private medical college viz. Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot.
On July 13, 1978, the Governor of Punjab had issued an ordinance called the Punjab Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot (Acquisition) and Miscellaneous Provisions Ordinance, 1978.
It was published on July 14, 1997.
Ultimately, Punjab Act No. 32 of 1978 viz. the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot (Acquisition) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1997, was promulgated and published in Punjab Government Gazette dated October 12, 1978.
This Act, according to the provisions of section 1(2), was deemed to have come into force on July 14, 1978.
The services of the officers and other employees of the College were taken over by the State Government in accordance with the provisions of section 8.
The petitioners submit that respondents 4 to 9 should be deemed to have been appointed by transfer.
In accordance with the provisions of section 7, when two persons are appointed on the same date, a person appointed by promotion ranks senior to those appointed by direct recruitment or by transfer.
On this basis, it is claimed that respondents 4 to 9 are junior to the petitioners.
8.
The second grievance made by the petitioners is with regard to respondents 10 to 12.
These persons were initially employed in the service of the Zila Parishads.
Vide order dated April 28, 1978, their services had been provincialised.
The petitioners maintain that respondents 10 to 12 were promoted from the posts of Clerks to those of Assistants in June, 1979.
Since the petitioners had been promoted vide order dated July 14, 1978, they would rank senior to respondents 10 to 12.
It may also be mentioned that the petitioners were confirmed as Clerks with effect from November 1, 1966, and August 13, 1975, respectively while respondents 10 to 12 were confirmed as Clerks with effect from April 12, 1979.
Thus, the petitioners claim that they are senior to respondents 4 to 12.
Accordingly, it is claimed that they had a right to be considered for promotion to the next higher post of Superintendent Grade II before any one junior to them including respondents 4 to 12 could be promoted.
However, the claim of the petitioners was totally ignored.
Vide order dated July 20, 1992, a copy of which has been produced on the record as Annexure P-9, the respondent Department promoted various persons junior to the persons including respondents 4 to 12 as Superintendents Grade II.
On these premises, the petitioners pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider their claim for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade II with effect from the date the persons junior to them were promoted.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Two questions that arise for consideraton are -  (1) Are the petitioners senior to respondents 4 to 9 ?
(2) Are the petitioners senior to respondents 10 to 12 ?
9.
Regarding (1)  It is the admitted position that respondents 4 to 9 were working as Assistants in the Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, prior to the issue of the Ordinance on July 13, 1978.
Even on the promulgation of the Act with effect from July 14, 1978, the position remained the same.
Thus, on July 14, 1978, respondents 4 to 9 were already working as Assistants.
As against this, the petitioners were ordered to be promoted as Assistants vide order dated July 14, 1978.
The date on which this order was actually issued is not there on the record.
However, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram admits that petitioner No. 1 had joined as Assistant on October 5, 1978, and that petitioner No. 2 had joined as Assistant On July 17, 1978.
It is, however, submitted that in view of the fact that the competent authority had ordered the promotion of the petitioners "with immediate effect", the promotion shall be deemed to have been made effective on July 14, 1978.
On this basis, it is claimed that the petitioners should be treated as senior to respondents 4 to 9.
It is no doubt true that in view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dr. Amarjit Singh Ahluwalia v. The State of Punjab and others, 1975(1) S.LR.
171, the appointment of the petitioner having been made with immediate effect, it shall be "effective immediately irrespective as to when the person appointed assumes charge of the post".
Even on that basis, there is nothing on record to show that the petitioners would rank senior to those who are already working as Assistants.
It is the admitted position that respondents 4 to 9 have been working as Assistants with effect from the dates much earlier than July 14, 1978.
By the act of legislature they are deemed to be civil servants with effect from the forenoon of July 14, 1978.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, even if they are deemed to have been made Assistants on the same day, it does not appear to be fair to treat them as senior to the persons who have been working in the same rank for much longer period.
In this situation, no ground for interference with the decision of the Department to treat respondents 4 to 9 as senior to the petitioners is made out.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that respondents 4 to 9 can either be treated as the direct recruits or transferees to the Department with effect from July 14, 1978.
As against this, the petitioners were promotees.
In accordance with the provisions of rule 7, when various persons are confirmed on the same date, the promotee ranks senior to the direct recruit and transferee.
It is the admitted position that in the present case neither the petitioners nor respondents 4 to 9 had been confirmed with effect from July 14, 1978.
Consequently, the provisions of rule 7 shall not be attracted.
The only position that existed before the Department was that respondents 4 to 9 had been working as Assistants prior to the College being taken over by the Government.
So far as the petitioners are concerned they had been actually ordered to be promoted on July 14, 1978, and had joined on different dates thereafter.
In this situation, the Department had taken the view that the persons who were working as Assistants prior to July 14, 1978, should be treated as senior to the petitioners, This view was reasonable.
just and fair.
It calls for no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, the claim of the petitioners for seniority over respondents 4 to 9 is rejected.
11.
Regarding (2)  The petitioners also claim to be senior to respondents 10 to 12.
In this behalf, it is relevant to notice that the petitioners were confirmed as Clerks with effect from November 1, 1966, and August 13, 1975.
As against this, respondents 10 to 12 were confirmed as Clerks vide order dated July 13, 1979, with effect from March 2, 1997.
Under the provisions of rule 7, the seniority has to be determined on the basis of the date of confirmation in the rank.
On this basis, the petitioners would rank senior to respondents 10 to 12 in the cadre of Clerks.
Still further, the petitioners were promoted as Assistants on July 14, 1978.
Respondents 10 to 12 were promoted vide order dated June 11, 1979.
The petitioners having been promoted almost 11 months prior to respondents 10 to 12, cannot be treated as junior to them in any manner whatsoever.
Learned counsel for the respondents have not been able to show as to how the petitioners can be treated as junior to the said respondents.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioners are senior to respondents 10 to 12.
12.
Learned counsel for the Department conceded that the claim of the petitioners was not considered when various persons including respondents 10 to 12 were promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade II vide order dated July 20, 1992.
In view of the finding that the petitioners are senior to respondents 10 to 12, they had to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade II before any one junior would have been promoted.
This was admittedly not done.
This was an infringement of their right under Article 16 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, a direction deserves to be issued to the respondents to consider the case of petitioners for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade II with effect from July 20, 1992, when persons junior to them viz. respondents 10 to 12 were promoted.
It is accordingly issued.
It is further directed that the claim of the petitioners shall be considered within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case the petitioners are found suitable for promotion, the consequential relief in the nature of arrear of salary etc. shall be granted.
In view of the above, Civil Writ Petition No. 15515 of 192 is allowed to the extent indicated above.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.