M. Ramakrishna, CJ.
- In this appeal the appellant has called in question the correctness and legality of the order made by the learned Single Judge in SWP No. 1253 of 1988 disposed of on December 24, 1993 by which the learned Single Judge after hearing the learned counsel for the appellant (writ petitioner) on the question of law dismissed the writ petition being without merits.
It is this order which is called in question in the present appeal.
2.
We have heard Shri SS Lehar, learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
A few facts which are necessary for the disposal of this appeal are as follows: The petitioner/appellant was a candidate for selection to the post of Master by the Board of J&K Services Selection constituted by the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
Under the provisions of statute relevant for the purpose, it is seen that the Government of Jammu & Kashmir had entrusted the question of selection of Masters to the Board of Services Selection amongst suitable candidates.
3.
It is stated that respondents 3 to 6 being junior to the appellant have been selected as Masters, but the petitioner/appellant having merit, ability and seniority has been ignored from being promoted to the post of Master by the concerned authority.
Aggrieved by this selection of the Board of Services Selection, the petitioner/appellant had filed SWP No. 1253 of 1988 challenging the correctness and legality of the said selection for the reasons set out in the writ petition.
The learned Single Judge, after considering the grounds taken in the writ petition and hearing the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner, observed that the petitioner had mainly stressed upon the following two star grounds in support of his writ petition:  i) that the petitioner, being senior to respondents 3 to 6 and having better merit and suitability, had preferential right or claim over them for being promoted to the post of Master; and (ii) that the Selection, made purely based upon the interview test by the Services Selection Board without following the method based upon the written-test, was unconstitutional.
Considering the first point, referred to above, the learned Single Judge observed that the petitioner did not possess any superior merit or suitability as against the respondents 3 to 6.
As regards the second point, referred to above, the learned Single Judge observed that the method adopted by the Services Selection Board was based upon the relevant statute and that it was not open to the petitioner to challenge that method as contrary to the Constitution.
Thus, while rejecting both the points, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition on December 24, 1993.
Hence, this appeal.
4.
Shri SS Lehar, learned counsel appearing for the appellant/writ- petitioner, reiterated the grounds (c) to (e) made in the writ petition in the present appeal and submitted that it was not proper on the part of the Services Selection Board to adopt the only method of selection to the post of Master based upon the interview test without holding the written test to assess the merits and de-merits of the candidates.
Similarly, he contended that the writ-petitioner being senior to respondents 3 to 6, the Selection Board ought to have considered his (petitioner's) case according to his seniority while making selection to the post of Master.
5.
We do not see any force in the submission made by Mr. Lehar, learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner/appellant.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court had an occasion to deal with such a question in Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others, reported in AIR 1981 SC 487, wherein their Lordships have held that assessment of marit and suitability for appointment to the post only by way of interview without written test is not arbitrary.
Indeed, this decision of Ajay Hasia came to be reconsidered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Leela Dhar v. State of Rajasthan and others, reported in AIR 1981 SC 1777.
The Supreme Court once again endorsed the ruling made in Ajay Hasia's case and their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed that it is for the Rule making authority to prescribe the method of selection and to see whether such selection is to be based upon the assessment of merit and suitability only by holding an interview test or written test followed by the viva-voce test or both.
6.
In the present case, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the Services Selection Board had committed an error in not following the method prescribed under the statute for the purposes of appointing Masters, but it is not his contention that the law relevant for the purpose of selection to the post of Master found in the statute applicable in the State of J&K, did provide both tests, written examination as well holding of viva-voce test.
On the other hand, his submission is that the selection made by the Services Selection Board, based upon purely assessment of the merits and suitability for appointment of the candidates based upon the interview test or viva-voce test, is incorrect and un-consitutional.
7.
In the light of the rulings of the Supreme Court in the above referred two decisions, it is clear that the statute applicable in the State of J&K at the relevant point of time did provide interview test of Masters based purely upon the viva-voce test and there is not error committed by the Services Selection Board in doing so.
Viewed thus, we do not see any force in this appeal which is hereby dismissed.