Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were working as Junior Engineers in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch).
They pray that the seniority-list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition be quashed and that they be declared as senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 155.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners were appointed as Junior Engineers on purely ad hoc basis during the period from June 21, 1969 to November 23, 1970.
While they were working as such, the Subordinate Services Selection Board invited applications for the post of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers in different branches of the Public Works Department.
The petitioners applied.
they were selected.
Vide letter dated March 17, 1971, the Board recommended the names of the petitioners to the Public Health Branch.
In pursuance to the recommendations of the Board, the Chief Engineer issued letters of appointment to them on April 19, 1971.
The petitioners allege that they were not relieved and ultimately, the Board conveyed its approval to the change of their allocation from the Public Health Branch to the Buildings and Roads Branch.
Letter of appointment was issued to the petitioners on April 22, 1971.
In the meantime, the Board had recommended the names of various persons including respondent Nos. 3 to 155 for appointment as Junior Engineers in the Buildings and Roads Branch vide its letter dated March 23, 1971.
These persons joined their appointments prior to the petitioners.
The petitioners claim that they were "higher in merit list than those recommended for appointment by the Subordinate Services Selection Board afterwards...." As such, "the petitioners were required to be placed above respondent Nos. 3 to 155 in the seniority-list".
They have placed reliance on the instructions issued by the Govt. vide its letter dated March 16, 1962 in which it has been inter alia provided that "in the case of such officials as are recommended to another office for regular absorption, but are allowed to remain in their parent office in the interest of work or on the request of the official concerned, their seniority will be determined with reference to the date of the Board's original recommendations for their regular appointment in other offices".
The petitioners state that they made representation claiming seniority over respondent Nos. 3 to 155.
However, no decision was conveyed.
The Board issued the seniority-list as on January 1, 1988 in July, 1988.
In this list, respondent Nos. 3 to 155 have been shown as senior to the petitioners.
According to the petitioners this list is totally contrary to the instructions issued by the Govt. and as such, deserves to be quashed.
3.
The respondents controvert the claim made by the petitioners.
By way of a preliminary objection, it has been submitted that the petition is belated as it has been filed after lapse of about 22 years.
It has been further submitted that the seniority of persons appointed to the service is determined in accordance with the provisions of the rules called the Punjab PWD (B&R Branch) (Sectional Officers) Engineering Service Class III Rules, 1964.
The method of determining the seniority is laid down in rule 11.
According to this rule, the seniority of the members of the Service appointed after the commencement of these rules shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in the service irrespective of their date of joining.
The respondents have also produced a letter dated December 13, 1972 (Annexure R-3 with the written statement) which is a communication from the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board to the Chief Engineer, PWD (B&R).
In this letter, it has been clearly stated that "the seniority of these candidates should be fixed at the bottom of the list of candidates recommended to your Department vide this office letter of March 1971 in the same order as was made to Irrigation Branch".
The clear stipulation was that the petitioners shall be treated as junior to all those persons whose names had been recommended prior to the approval of the Board to change the allocation.
The respondents have also produced another letter dated January 16, 1976 from the Board to the Chief Engineer (Annexure R-4 with the written statement) in which this position was reiterated.
Still further, vide its letter dated December 1, 1982, the Board had clearly informed the department that it was not possible for it to prepare a joint merit list of the candidates like the petitions who had been initially recommended to the Public Health Branch or various other Branches and those whose names have been forwarded to the Buildings and Roads Branch).
4.
The respondents have also pointed out that certain other persons like the petitioners who had been initially recommended to the Irritation Branch or Public Health Branch but were finally allocated to the Buildings and Roads Branch had approached this Court through CWP No. 4088 of 1983.
They had prayed for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to assign them seniority as per the merit list prepared by the Board.
A Division Bench of this Court had disposed of the writ petition with a direction to the respondents to decide their representation which was pending.
In pursuance to the directions of this Court, the matter was considered by the department.
Vide order dated July 4, 1985, the claim made by those persons was rejected.
It was inter-alia observed that :-  (1) No combined list was prepared by the Subordinate Services Selection Board on the basis of which relative merit of the petitioners vis-a-vis candidates recommended by the Board to the PWD B&R for appointment could be determined.
(2) The Punjab Govt. had notified the Class-III Rules, 1964 after the issue of instructions dated March 16, 1962.
These instructions had not been made a part of the statutory rules.
5.
In view of the above, the representations made by various persons who were in the same position as the present petitioners was rejected.
In the background of this factual position, the respondents maintain that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed with costs.
The petitioners have filed a replication in which they have controverted the averments made in the written statement and reiterated the claim made in this petition.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
Mr. Midha submits that the names of the petitioners having been recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board to the Public Health Branch vide letter dated March 17, 1971, they deserve to be treated as senior to respondents 3 to 155 whose names were recommended by the Board to the Buildings and Roads Branch vide letter dated March 23, 1971.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners have to be treated as senior in view of the instructions dated March 16, 1962.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for respondents 1 and 2 has reiterated the stand as taken in the written statement.
It has been contended that the petition deserves to be dismissed on the short ground of limitation.
Furthermore, it has also been contended that the seniority has been fixed in strict conformity with the rules and calls for no change.
8.
No one has appeared on behalf of respondents 3 to 155.
9.
Since the claim made by the petitioners is based on the letter dated March 16, 1962, the contents thereof may be noticed.
By this letter, the Govt. had conveyed its decision that "the senority of the candidates should be determined with reference to the date of issue of the Board's recommendations."
The obvious intention was that pesons who are higher in order of merit would be recommended first.
Thereafter, the names of others who may be lower in order of merit shall be forwarded.
However, this decision is based on the presumption that there is a common merit-list.
It is only then that the date of recommendation can be relevant and the inter-se seniority may be determined on the basis of the date of recommendation by the Board.
However, in a case where posts borne on different cadres in different services are advertised, the Board may not prepare a common merit- list.
In such a situation, the date of recommendation by the Board shall be of no consequence.
10.
In the present case, there is nothing on record to show that the Board had conducted a common selection for all the posts which are in different services and prepared a common merit-list of all the candidates who had appeared for interview.
Even on the petitioners' own showing, the Board had invited applications for recruitment to the posts of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers in the Irrigation Branch, Public Health Branch and Buildings and Roads Branch.
However, a copy of the advertisement has not been produced.
There is nothing before me on the basis of which it may be reasonably possible to infer that the Board had determined inter-se merit of all the candidates including the petitioners and respondents 3 to 155.
The presumption of the petitioners that they were higher in order of merit as raised in para 8 of the petition is not supported by any evidence on the record.
Consequently, no foundation has been laid for the claim.
The very basis on which they seek the benefit of the instructions of March 16, 1962 is not shown to exist.
11.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the conditions of service governing the petitioners and the private-respondents are laid down in the statutory rules of 1964.
Under these rules, the seniority has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of rule 11.
It is not the petitioners' case that the seniority has not been so determined.
12.
Thirdly, it also deserves mention that in the year 1972, the Board had clearly stated that the seniority of the candidates like the petitioners who had been recommended to the Public Health Branch shall be fixed at the bottom of the list of the persons recommended by the Board viz. respondents 3 to 155 for appointment in the Buildings and Roads Branch.
The petitioners did not challenge this.
Thereafter, this position was reiterated in the year 1976.
Even when a request was made by the Department to the Board to determine the inter-se merit of candidates selected in the year 1971 for the post of Junior Engineers (Civil), it had expressed its inability vide its communication dated December 1, 1982.
A copy of the communication has been placed as Annexure R-5 with the written statement.
Thus, it is evident that no common merit-list had ever been drawn up.
It also deserves notice that when in pursuance to the directions given by this Court, the Engineer-in-Chief considered the representation submitted by certain persons who were working with the petitioners, the claim was rejected vide order dated July 4, 1985.
The reasons given by the Engineer-in-Chief have already been noticed above.
These are the very reasons which have been pleaded by the respondents in this case.
The reasons are good in law and deserve to be accepted.
On a consideration of the matter, it appears that the action of the department in treating respondents 3 to 155 as senior to the petitioners is just and fair.
It calls for no interference.
13.
Even otherwise, the claim made by the petitioners is highly belated.
They had joined service in the year 1971.
The Board had clearly stated that they will be placed at the bottom of the list.
Even if this communication had not been specifically endorsed to the petitioners, there is evidence on the record to indicate that the department had been treating them as junior to the respondents.
A list had been issued as far back as the year 1981.
In CWP No. 4088 of 1983 which had been filed by the persons working with the petitioners, a prayer for quashing this list had been made.
The petitioners did not challenge the list.
Even the impugned list was issued in July, 1988.
The petitioners have not shown that they took any steps to challenge even this list for a period of almost five years when they filed the present writ petition in October 1993.
Even a suit against this list would have been barred by limitation on the day when the present petition was filed.
In such a situation, interference under Article 226 of the Constitution would not at all be possible.
14.
In view of the above, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed both on account of delay as well as on merits.
It is ordered accordingly.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.