NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, seeking direction to the respondents to regularise the service of the petitioner from 2281990, the date of her initial appointment.
The petitioner has also sought the same salary as payable to a Post-Graduate teacher appointed on regular basis.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a part-time Post Graduate Teacher in English on 2281990 up to 31.12.1990 on a consolidated salary equivalent to 75 per cent of the basic pay.
After the tenure of first appointment came to an end, she was again appointed on 211991 upto 3041991.
The services of the petitioner were terminated at the time the school closed for the summer vacation.
The petitioner was again appointed at the time of reopening of the school with effect from 25.6.1991.
All the appointments were made on ad hoc basis.
The petitioner continued to serve as a teacher right from 2281990 onward with notional breaks and summer breaks.
The petitioner claims that she performed duties from time to time under periodical appointments with notional breaks of two or three days every time.
There was a regular post of Post-Graduate Teacher in the Kendriya Vidyalaya, Narayanagarh (New Cantt.
), Amritsar.
3.
Certain posts of Post-Graduate Teachers were advertised in the month of July, 1992.
The petitioner has asserted that she sent her application in response to that advertisement to respondent No. 2 but she was never called for interview though she was eligible for being considered.
The petitioner filed a civil suit as she apprehended that she would be served with an order of termination of her services in the event of selected candidates being available.
That suit was dismissed in December 1993 after respondent No. 3 made a statement that the services of the petitioner will not be terminated except according to law.
Since the petitioner's services were thereafter not regularised and a teacher was instead posted, on transfer from Jammu to Amritsar, in her place, the petitioner sought intervention of this Court through the present petition against the termination of her services.
She has claimed to have put in more than 3 years of service and also fulfils the requisite qualification for the existing post.
Since her services have not been regularised and another teacher, Miss Kusum Lata, who had been selected in the year 1989, has been posted in her place, it is said to be a breach of condition of service.
4.
The respondents have controverted petitioner's assertion that she had a right to continue in service even if she was appointed from time to time on contract and on ad hoc basis till a regular incumbent joined.
It is stated that the services of the petitioner were made terminable as and when a regular incumbent joined after regular selection.
Since the petitioner had only been given ad hoc and part-time appointments for small periods, she had no right to continue in service.
The services of the petitioner were dispensed with on 2811994 on the joining of a regular candidate.
It is also stated by the respondents that eight candidates were called for interview against one vacancy.
The petitioner was not called as her marks in her certificates were lower than those of the other candidates.
Therefore, the petitioner is said to be not entitled to regular appointment.
5.
The terms of appointment of the petitioner can be seen from her appointment order dated 211991.
As per this order of appointment, the petitioner was "appointed purely on ad hoc basis" in the scale of Rs. 1640-2900.
In para 2 of this order, it was specified that the services of the ad hoc appointee/appointment against leave vacancy is terminable without any notice and without any reason being assigned thereto.
Para 5 of this order reads as under :  "The services of Miss Promila Malhotra will be only up to 3041991, but the same can be terminated as and when the regular incumbent joins."
Another appointment letter dated 2461991 can also be examined so as to ascertain the nature of the petitioner's appointment as a Post-Graduate Teacher in English.
As per this appointment also, it appears that the petitioner was appointed "as a part-time Post-Graduate Teacher (English) on a consolidated salary".
Her services were liable to be terminated by the appointing authority without assigning any reason at any time.
The appointment letter dated 1891991 also contains similar terms and conditions as have been seen in the appointment letter dated 211991.
Here also, it was made clear in para 5 of the letter that the services will be only up to 15.3.1992 but the same can be terminated as and when the regular incumbent joins.
6.
The case of the petitioner is that no regular incumbent has been appointed after the posts were advertised subsequent to her appointment.
The transfer and posting of Kumari Kusum Lata are said to be of no effect inasmuch as she had been selected in the year 1989 and had been posted by the respondents in place of the petitioner so as to give an impression as if a regularly-selected candidate was available and thereupon the services of the petitioner could be dispensed with under the terms of her short-time appointment.
It is contended that Kumari Kusum Lata has been posted in the Kendriya Vidyalaya Narayangarh (New Cantt.)
Amritsar, on transfer and she is not a candidate who could be said to have been selected after the posts had been advertised in July, 1992.
It is a case of transfer and not a case of appointment of a candidate after regular selection subsequent to the petitioner's appointment.
7.
The respondents took the following plea in para 9 of their reply :-  "That in reply to para No. 9 of the petition, it is submitted that a list of percentage of the candidates are prepared and thereafter, as per Central Government policy, 8 persons against one vacancy are called for interview because the respondents pay TA to the candidates who are called for interview.
Since the percentage of the petitioner was very low than the other candidates, that is why she was not called for.
It is clear from the Annexure R/9 that the selected candidate has much better qualifications than the petitioner."
It would appear from the above reply that the petitioner was not called for the interview as the percentage of marks obtained by the petitioner in the examinations was lower than that of the other candidates.
However, during the course of hearing, it was made out that the petitioner had been called for interview but she did not appear.
The following observation recorded by the Court on the order-sheet dated 2351996 is relevant :-  "Counsel for the respondents states that after the filing of this writ petition, petitioner was called for interview for the post which she was holding and that she did not appear in the same.
Adjourned to 24.7.1996 with a direction to the respondents to file an affidavit to this effect."
In response to the aforesaid direction, the affidavit of Shri SK Gupta, Principal, Kendriya Vidyalaya Narayangarh, New Cantt., Amritsar, was filed.
Para 2 of the said affidavit reads as under :-  "That the petitioner along with other candidates total in 48 were asked to apply for the post of Teacher and format of the Application Form was duly sent to the petitioner alongwith other candidates on 2031995 through UPC as per the instructions of the Department received by the undersigned but the deponent did not receive application of the petitioner.
The copy of the list of candidates to whom the Application Form was issued through UPC is enclosed herewith."
From the adverments made by the respondents from time to time, it is not at all clear whether the petitioner was given an opportunity to make an application for regular appointment or whether she was not required to appear at all because the percentage of marks secured by her in her examinations was lower than that of the other candidates.
As has been seen, the respondents in para 9 of the reply had categorically asserted that the petitioner was not called for the interview.
Thereafter, it was claimed during the course of hearing that the petitioner was called for the interview but she did not appear.
In the affidavit filed by the Principal of the school, the stand is again a changed one that the petitioner's application was not received though she had been given an opportunity by sending her communication in this regard.
In the light of the shifting stand taken by the respondents, it appears that the petitioner has been denied opportunity at the time of regular appointment.
8.
So far as the replacement of the petitioner by Miss Kusum Lata is concerned, this also gives strength to the petitioner's plea that the respondents are trying to make out a case as if a regularly-appointed candidate is available on a regular selection subsequent to the petitioner's appointment.
The learned counsel for the respondents had attempted to make out a case that, since the petitioner's appointment was made purely on ad hoc basis and was to lapse by efflux of time, she had no right to continue in the post.
Reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Director, Institute of Management Development UP v. Smt. Pushpa Srivastava, 1992(3) SCT 742 (SC) : A.I.R. 1992 Supreme Court 2070.
In the light of that decision, a person appointed on an ad hoc basis or on a contract cannot seek regularization of the services.
As has been seen, in every appointment the petitioner was appointed subject to a condition that her services will be dispensed with as and when a regularly-appointed candidate joins.
Here in the case of the petitioner, the respondents have not revealed whether the selection process is complete and whether regularly-selected candidates were available for appointment.
The appointment of Kumari Kusum Lata on transfer from Jammu to Amritsar appears to be in the nature of colourable device adopted by the respondents so as to make it appear that a regular candidate was available for appointment.
But Kumari Kusum Lata was selected in the year 1989 and this assertion has not been controverted by the respondents by way of rejoinder.
In such a situation, the petitioner has a right to continue in service so long as a regularly-selected candidate is not available.
9.
The petitioner appears to have been not given an opportunity during the course of regular selection and, from the shifting stand taken by the respondents, it appears to be a denial of opportunity to the petitioner.
The respondents are, therefore, required to give fresh opportunity to the petitioner for making application because she appears to be eligible for being considered.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to make an application for the purposes of being considered for regular appointment and also to allow her to continue in the post till a regularly-selected candidate is available for appointment.
No order as to costs.