RL Anand, J - Des Raj Petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a Writ in the nature of mandamus against the Food Corporation of India (hereinafter called 'the Corporation') respondent No. 1, Zonal Manager (North) respondent No. 2, and the Senior Regional Manager respondent No. 3, directing respondent No. 3 to release the promotion of the petitioner from the post of Assistant Grade-II (Depot) to the post of Assistant Grade-I (Depot).
The said promotion already had been given by the Zonal Manager of the Corporation way back on 30121987 as per Annexure P1 but the order has been withheld by respondent No. 3 without any justification.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner was that he joined the Food Corporation of India as Assistant Grade-III (Depot).
Later on he was promoted to the post of Assistant Grade-II (Depot) and is continuing to work on this post with the Corporation.
On 30121987 the petitioner was promoted to the next higher post of Assistant Grade-I (Depot) by the Zonal Manager vide office order No. 167/87 where his name was shown at serial No. 122 bearing Zonal seniority No. 2270 but his promotion has been withheld by the Senior Zonal Manager of the Corporation on the ground that disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against the petitioner and for that reason the promotion order could not be released.
The petitioner made representation to the Senior Regional Manager for the release of his promotion order, which was withheld due to contemplated disciplinary proceedings vide representation dated 1511988 (Annexure P2) and it was brought to the notice of Senior Regional Manager that the petitioner was never served with any charge-sheet and that he was not at fault even in the contemplated disciplinary inquiry due to which his promotion was withheld.
The petitioner alleges that his representation was not taken care of.
Subsequently, he made two more representations dated 11121988 and 30121988 requesting the Senior Regional Manager to release his promotion orders, but there was no response.
The petitioner alleges that later on a charge-sheet dated 1641990 under Regulation 60 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 for minor penalty was served, which is Annexure P5.
The petitioner denied the allegations of the charge- sheet by alleging that it was framed against the facts.
Earlier the petitioner was suspended on the basis of these allegations on 1991987 but it was removed by the Senior Regional Manager vide order dated 19121987.
The petitioner then filed a detailed reply to the charge-sheet (Annexure P5) on 751990 (Annexure P6), but his reply was not considered satisfactory and in an illegal manner the Senior Regional Manager in pursuance of the charge- sheet dated 1641990, without applying his mind, imposed a penalty of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect with effect from 111992 and recovery of proportionate alleged loss of Rs. 661640.
Copy of the order passed by the Senior Regional Manager dated 951991 is Annexure P7.
It is the allegations of the petitioner that under the garb of charge-sheet and the orders (Annexures P6 and P7) his promotion is being withheld illegally, which promotion was due to him on 30121987.
The charge-sheet dated 1641990 has been issued after more than two years from the date when the petitioner was to be promoted and such belated charge-sheet cannot be taken into consideration in view of the case law reported as Union of India v. VK Jankiraman,Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 : AIR 1991 SC 2010.
The petitioner further alleges that he had been making representations to the Department for his promotion due to him with effect from 30121987, but to no avail.
Rather the petitioner was served with another charge-sheet dated 17101992 under the head of 'Minor Penalty' and one more order penal in nature was passed by which three increments without cumulative effect of the petitioner with effect from 111991 were withheld.
The attack has also been made against this order dated 24.4.1993.
The petitioner even filed an appeal before the appellate authority, i.e., the Zonal Manager of the Corporation, but it was declined vide order dated 1151994.
The petitioner, however, filed a review petition against the order of the appellate authority.
Finally it was pleaded by the petitioner that he had been making frantic efforts to get his promotion order released from the Regional Office at Chandigarh, but to no effect and hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents and a joint written statement was filed by the respondents, in which they have denied the allegations of the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner could be considered by the Zonal Promotion Committee subsequent to the imposition of penalty and he was again charge-sheeted on 17101992.
Therefore, as per instructions contained in Annexure R3, if a punishment is inflicted upon an employee, the Departmental Promotion Committee is required to consider such employee for promotion keeping in view the penalty imposed.
The petitioner is still undergoing the penalty of stoppage of three increments with effect from 111994 and, therefore, he could not be promoted on the basis of the order dated 30121987 referred to above.
Also it was submitted that though the petitioner was considered for promotion, but before the promotion order could be released, the petitioner was involved in a vigilance case.
Therefore, he could not be promoted and his case was required to be considered afresh against the next available vacancy.
4.
With the above small pleadings of the parties, we have heard Shri JS Wasu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, and Shri Hemant Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, and with their assistance gone through the record of this case.
The facts in this case are not much in dispute and the pivotal point for determination is whether the respondents were justified in withholding the promotion of the petitioner on the basis of the order (Annexure P1) dated 30121987.
It is the allegation of the petitioner that vide order (Annexure P1) he was promoted.
Vide Annexure P2 he made a representation to the Senior Regional Manager for the release of his promotion order, which was withheld due to the contemplated disciplinary proceedings.
5.
On the contrary, the stand in nut-shell of the respondents is that there was a contemplated inquiry against the petitioner and as per instructions (Annexure R3) the contemplated action could also be taken into consideration while releasing the order.
6.
We are not in agreement with the stand taken by the respondents in view of the settled position of law laid down in various authorities and in this regard we would like to refer to The State Bank of Patiala and others v. OP Latka, 1995(3) SCT 465 (P&H)(DB) : 1995(3) RSJ 148 (DB) - an authority of this Court - in which it was clearly laid down that when disciplinary proceedings had not started against the employee on the dates when the written test and the interview for promotion were carried out and the promotional process was going on, any subsequent charge-sheet does not give any right to the management to put the result regarding the promotion of the employee in the sealed cover.
Admittedly, there was no charge-sheet or any penal action as on 30121987 which is the material date for our determination.
In these circumstances the respondents were not justified in withholding the promotion of the petitioner, when the promotion order was passed vide Annexure P1.
At the most as on 30121987 the Department was contemplating some inquiry.
Such contemplation may or may not become effective.
The matter was again considered in another authority of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as New Bank of India v. NP Sehgal and another, 1991(2) SCT 270(SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 789, their Lordships of the Apex Court were pleased to hold that when the disciplinary proceedings were contemplated or under consideration against an employee, it does not constitute a good ground for not considering the employee concerned for promotion, if he is in the zone of consideration.
The case in hand is on better footing than the one, just relied upon by us.
In the present case, the order of promotion of the petitioner, making him Assistant Grade-I (Depot) was passed.
This order could not be withheld or withdrawn under the garb of a contempted inquiry.
Such like matters again came into consideration of the Apex Court and our attention has been invited to the case reported as The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and another, 1990(2) RSJ 38 and it was the view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that a promotion of an employee could not be withheld merely on the ground of pendency of disciplinary proceedings which had not even reached at the stage of framing of charge after prima facie case is established.
The ratio of this authority is applicable to the facts of the case in hand.
In this context we also rely on Union of India v. KV Jankiraman (supra), wherein it was held that sealed cover proceedings can be resorted to only after issuance of charge- memo/charge-sheet to an employee.
Even the pendency of a preliminary investigation prior to that stage is not sufficient to enable the authorities to adopt this procedure.
Shri Hemant Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, made an attempt, but in vain, by drawing our attention to the instructions (R3).
In our considered view these instructions cannot supersede the laws of the land and any instructions contrary to the established law have to be ignored.
7.
No other point was urged before us.
8.
Resultantly, we have no hesitation in allowing this petition and we issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 3 to release the promotion order of the petitioner, promoting him from the post of Assistant Grade-II (Depot) to the post of Assistant Grade-I (Depot), as earlier ordered by the Corporation.
The respondents shall also bear the costs of the litigation, which are assessed at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.