RC Gandhi, J - By means of this petition, the petitioner is seeking relief of issuance of writ of mandamus, directing the respondents to dispose of the petitioner's appeal filed on 8th September, 1987 with further relief of writ of certiorari quashing impugned order No. 1145 of 1995 dated 3091985 passed by the respondent No. 3.
2.
The petitioner has stated in the petition that he was recruited in Jammu and Kashmir Armed Police in year 1980 and proceeded on five days casual leave with effect from 1141985.
During the period of leave, he fell seriously ill and developed Tuber Arthritis in right hip-joint and was not in a position to move.
The petitioner remained under treatment of Surgeon-Specialist, District, Hospital, Rajouri from 25.4.1985 to 3051995 and was advised complate bed rest by the doctor.
While the petitioner had not recovered, he developed chronic active hepatitis and remained under treatment from 461986 to 481986 and the petitioner was advised complete bed-rest for a period of one year more from 581986.
After having recovered, the petitioner reported back and submitted his joining report on 291987, while he was informed that he has been discharged from service with effect from 17th of April, 1985.
The petitioner after obtaining a copy of the impugned order No. 1145 of 1985 dated 3091985, preferred an appeal before the respondent No. 2, which has not so far been decided.
The petitioner during his ailment, has submitted to the respondent No. 3, applications and a telegram explaining the cause of his absence from duty, which have not been considered by the respondent and the impugned order has been passed in mechanical manner.
The petitioner has further submitted that the observations of the respondent No. 3 that the petitioner is a habitual absentee is not substantiated from any record.
The petitioner has been discharged from service without affording an opportunity of being heard and without holding any enquiry.
The petitioner has been condemned unheard and even a show cause notice has not been served to the petitioner before passing of the order of discharge from service.
3.
The respondents have filed the counter/objections stating therein the petitioner proceeded on four days causal leave with effect from 1141985 and thereafter has not reported back.
The appeal of the petitioner has been disposed of on 25111987 upholding the discharge order.
The petitioner has absented unauthorisedly with effect from 1741985 and the notice dated 2851985 was issued to the petitioner for assuming his duties within seven days, otherwise he will be discharged from service.
The petitioner had not reported back despite notice and was discharged from service by means of impugned order with effect from 1741985 from the date the petitioner absented unauthorisedly.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
So far as the relief sought for disposal of the appeal is concerned, the same stands satisfied as the respondents have disposed of the appeal.
6.
The next contention of the petitioner is that he has been discharged from service without affording an opportunity of being heard.
The petitioner has not even been issued show cause notice for explaining the reasons of his absence.
The order has been passed without holding any enquiry contemplated in terms of Rule 359 of the Police Rules, 1960.
No Government servant can be removed or discharged from service except in the manner provided by law.
The respondents were under legal obligation to afford an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner and after having considered the explanation of the petitioner, resort should have been taken after holding an enquiry.
The order of the respondents on the face of it appears to be arbitrary and not sustainable in law, as the action of the respondents has resulted in depriving the petitioner of his services without adhering and observing the mandate of Rule 359 of the Police Rules and the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner was holding a civil post and termination of service without affording him reasonable opportunity of show cause as to why he be not discharged from service is not justifiable .
An employee is entitled to reasonable opportunity to show cause, which include an opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence, which he can do only when he knows the charge levelled against him.
The learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his contention has cited at the Bar, 1988 KLJ 640 (Kulbir Singh v. State) AIR 1966 SC 1364) (Mafatlal Narandas Barot, Appellant v. JB Rathod, Divisional Controller, State Transport Mehsana and another, Respondents) and AIR 1966 SC 492 (Jai Shankar, Appellant v. State of Rajasthan, Respondent,) in 1988 KLJ 640, the Court was dealing with an identical case of a constable of the respondent Department, whose services were terminated without prior notice and no opportunity was afforded to meet the allegations.
The order of termination was held to be illegal and quashed.
In AIR 1966 SC 1364, the Apex Court has held that while the Government employee is absent without leave, without reasonable cause, termination of service without giving him an opportunity of show cause, contravenes the principles of natural justice.
The Apex Court observed as under :-  "It is true that the respondent may visit the punishment or discharge or removal from service on a person who has absented himself without leave and without reasonable cause, but this cannot entail automatic removal from service without giving such person reasonable opportunity to show cause why he be not removed.
The appellant is entitled to a reasonable opportunity to show cause which includes an opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence which he can do only when he knows what the charges levelled against him are and the allegations on which such charges are based.
In our judgment, the appellant was entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken against him."
In AIR 1966 SC 492, while dealing with the situation where regulations provided an automatic termination of service on over-stay the Apex Court held that still the removal from service without giving opportunity of show cause is illegal.
The Apex Court observed as under :-  "The Regulation involves a punishment for over-staying one's leave and the burden is thrown on the incumbent to secure reinstatement by showing cause.
It is true that the Government may visit the punishment or removal from service on a person who has absented himself by overstaying his leave, but we do not think that Government can order a person to be discharged from service without atleast telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed.
If this is done the incumtant will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed and no question of reinstatement will arise.
It may be convenient to describe him as seeking reinstatement but this is not tantamount to saying that because the person will only be reinstated by an appropriate authority, that the removal is automatic and outside the protection of Article 311.
A removal is removal and if it is punishment for overstaying one's leave an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such an order is proposed, no matter how the Regulation describes it.
To give no opportunity is to go against Article 311 and this is what has happened here."
6.
For the aforesaid reasons and in light of the settled law, the action of the respondents is held as an arbitrary exercise of power.
The petitioner could not have been discharged by the respondents without affording an opportunity of showing cause as to why he be not discharged from service and unless proper enquiry as contemplated under law is conducted.
I hold the impugned order No. 1146 of 1985 dated 3091985 passed by respondent No. 3 as illegal, which is quashed by allowing the writ petition.
Necessary consequences shall follow.
No order as to costs.