TS Doabia, J - This order shall dispose of (i) Writ Petition No. 1101/90 and (ii) W.P. No. 1102/90.
The facts in both the cases are similar.
Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that decision in one petition would be equally applicable for the disposal of other Writ Petition also.
2.
As such, facts have been taken from Writ Petition No. 1101 of 1990.
The petitioner was a member of the Indian Peace Keeping Force at Jaffna in Sri Lanka.
He was deputed to escort Army Stores from a port located in Sri Lanka to a port located in this country.
The name of the port in this country is Avadi - Madras.
The petitioner was apprehended before they could embark in a ship in Sri Lanka.
He was found carrying 400 metre of cloth (In the other case i.e. Miscellaneous Petition No. 1102 of 1990, petitioner was in possession of 216 metre of cloth.)
It was this possession of cloth which led to a Summary Court Martial being held under Section 116 of the Army Act, 1950.
The Army Authorities observed that petitioner was carrying cloth contrary to the instructions given to the units at Sri Lanka.
A charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
This is dated 9.3.1989.
It reads as under :-  CHARGE SHEET  The accused No. 7766247H Hav.
MP TEJBALI SINGH of 8 Inf Bde Pro Secis charged with :-  Army Act Section 42(e) Neglecting to Obey Regimental orders in that he, at KKS during 'OP PAWAN' on 24 Feb 89 at approx 1230 h while proceeding to OP Avadi to deposit loan tents of the unit was caught carrying 400 mtrs cloth contrary 400 mtrs clote contrary to Regimental Order Pt I ser No. 5 dt 16 May 1988  Sd/- x x x Station; C/o 56 APO (TPS Dhanoya) Lt. Col.
Dated : 09 Mar., 1989.
OC, 8, Inf Bde Pro Sec 3.
The petitioner was found guilty.
He was ordered to be dismissed from the service.
However, the Brigade Commander on a review under Section 162 of the Army Act converted the sentence of dismissal into one of discharge.
This order is Annexure-E An appeal was preferred.
This appeal was dismissed.
Copy of this order is Annexure-I  4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that carrying of 400 metre cloth by the petitioner even if taken as correct is not contrary to the Regimental Order.
This Regimental Order was issued on 1651988.
The Regimental Order regarding which some breach is said to have been committed has been placed on record as Annexure-K Para 5 of this Annexure is relevant.
As per of the respondents' stand in this petition, the violation of para 13 of the Annexure-K This para reads as under :-  Para 13 :- "It is not intended to lay any restriction on purchase however the following will be ensured : (a) No offer /JCO/OR is permitted to purchase for more than the pay and allowance paid to him in Sri Lankan currency.
(b) Purchase made will not lead to infringement of customs rules declared when the indl proceeds to India.
A suggested list of items which can be purchased is at Appx.
(c) Under no circumstances will Indian currency be used for any transaction/purchases".
Para 5 of these regulations is also relevant because the charge- sheet has proceeded on the ground that there was violation on para 5 of the order.
This para be also noticed :- "Indian Custom Regulation :- Indian Customs Dept.
have est a check post at Tumbarm and Madras Port.
All India disembarking at these ports or required to declare their items in accordance with baggage rules fwd vide over letter No. 5004/OPP/Al/A3 dt. 29 Jan 1989 (88).
Custom duty is worked out by the customs dept.
which has to be paid on the spot or goods are bonded till customs duty is paid".
5.
The articles qua which a declaration was made by the petitioner is given in Annexure J-1.
The list of articles which can be brought after payment of custom duty may also be noticed :-  DECLARATION CERTIFICATE  1.
I hereby certified that no bonded/duty free goods are free in my posn or embarkation board Mar.
89 for transportation to Madras :-  (a) VCR/VCP -Yes/No (e) Music System - Yes/No  (b) TV Colour -Yes/No (f) Gold/Silver -Yes/No  (c) Cooking Range -Yes/No (g) Air Condner.
-Yes/No  (d) Machine Washing -Yes/No (h) Watch/Camera -Yes/No  2.
Item embarked on board for transportation to Madras have been manifested verified by local authorities and copy handed over to Naval Liaison Officer.
Station : C/O 56 APO Signature : Sd/-  Army No. :7766267H  Dated : Mar.
'89 Rank : Hav (MP)  Name : Tejbali Singh  Unit : 8 Inf Bde Pro  Unit C/o 56 APO  6.
It be seen that petitioner disclosed that he is not in possession of articles referred to in Annexure J-1.
As a matter of fact, it is not the case of Union of India that there was any contravention of Annexure J-1.
All that is now contended is that there was breach of para 13 of the order.
This para stands be reproduced above.
7.
I am of the view that the charge-sheet which was framed against the petitioner was to effect that he was found carrying 400 metre of cloth contrary to the Regimental Order (para No. 5).
A perusal of para 5 of the Regimental Order indicates that the Indian Troops posted in Sri Lanka were to declare items on which custom duty was to be paid.
They were supposed to pay duty at the Indian Port.
The petitioner was at Jaffna in Sri Lanka.
He had not touched any of the Indian Port.
Therefore, the question of paying custom duty did not arise.
Learned counsel appearing for the Union of India submits that the petitioner was not in possession of enough Sri Lankan currency and, therefore, he had violated para 13 of the Regimental Order.
I am of the view that the petitioner was never asked to explain the source of money.
Had this been done he could have explained the circumstances in which he purchased the cloth.
He could have explained that purchase of the cloth was not out of the Indian currency.
The petitioner cannot be punished for something he was not charge-sheeted.
To repeat the charge against the petitioner was that he was caught carrying cloth contrary to the Regimental Order No. 5.
Now this part of the order only requires that custom duty is to be paid and in this case there arose no occasion for paying custom duty as the petitioner never touched an Indian Port.
There was no occasion for not paying the custom duty as the petitioner was detained at Sri Lanka before he could get into a ship bound for Avadi - Madras.
8.
As such the order passed by the respondent-authority discharging the petitioners from the services i.e. Annexure-E and the initial order passed by the Summary Court Martial (Annexure-B) is set aside.
The petitioner would be entitled to reinstatement and all consequential benefits.
9.
There would be no order as to costs.
Security, if paid, be refunded to the petitioner as per rules.