VK Bali, J (Oral) - Smt. Raj Pati, Supervisor, in the office of the Child Development & Project Officer, Uchana, District Jind, it appears, justifiably stakes claim to the next rank i.e. Child Development & Project Officer.
Concededly, she is senior to those who have been promoted on April 24, 1991 on the post under contention.
The controversy, however, veers around the service records of the petitioner.
Obviously, therefore, if the record does not justify her promotion to the next higher rank, respondents i.e. State of Haryana and the Director, Social Welfare Department, Haryana, cannot be faulted for not promoting the petitioner to the post of Child Development & Project Officer (for short CDPO), failing which the petitioner shall deserve the relief asked for by her through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer, to be precise, is to issue a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the adverse remarks contained in Annual Confidential Reports for the years 1986-87 and 1989-90 conveyed to the petitioner vide Annexures P-3 and P-4 as also order dated September 30, 1986 whereby representation of the petitioner against the then Child Development & Project Officer, who was her Reporting Officer, was rejected.
Further, the prayer of the petitioner is to consider and promote her to the post, referred to above.
The reliefs mentioned in detail above are sought to rest on the facts, brief mention whereof becomes necessary.
2.
Petitioner, who possesses educational qualifications of BSc, B.Ed.
and MA in Sociology, was initially appointed as Supervisor in the respondent- department on ad-hoc basis w.e.f.
August 24, 1981.
Her services were, however, regularised w.e.f.
November 1, 1986 under the Government policy, then in existence.
In the seniority list of Supervisors, as it stood on September 1, 1989, her name was at Sr. No. 46.
Extract of the seniority list annexed with the petition as Annexure P-1, reveals that Parveen, Renu Bala, Usha Kiran, Nirmal Grover, Dinesh Yadav and Bir Mati are below the petitioner in seniority, being at Sr Nos. 47 to 52.
The juniors of the petitioner, named above, have been promoted on April 24, 1991 or thereafter.
Grouse of the petitioner is that even though she fulfilled all the qualifications and was senior to Parveen etc., mentioned above, as clearly made out from the seniority list, Annexure P-1, she was ignored.
When she came to know about promotion of her juniors, she filed a representation on April 30, 1991.
She pointed out in her representation that her service record was satisfactory right from 1981 as no adverse remarks were ever conveyed to her.
However, with a view to justify supersession of the petitioner and promotion of her juniors, Deputy Director (Admn.)
in the office of respondent No. 2, conveyed the adverse reports to the petitioner vide letter dated May 7, 1991.
She was informed that her reports for the years 1986-87 and 1989-90 were average and that even her honesty for the year 1986-87 was averge.
The positive case of the petitioner is that these two reports, Annexures P-3 and P-4, were fabricated after her juniors had already been promoted and the same were conveyed to her at a belated stage simply with a view to protect promotion order of her juniors.
She, therefore, represented against the reports, Annexures P-3 and P-4 and claimed promotion on the post of CDPO Her representations succeeded only half-way-through as average remarks regarding her honesty in the report for the year 1986-87 were expunged.
It was further said that since 70% service record of the petitioner was not either good or above, she was not entitled to be promoted.
It is further the case of the petitioner that her confidential report for the year 1986-87 was deliberately spoiled by the then CDPO on account of personal vendetta as she refused to become party to malpractices of the said officer.
Under various social welfare schemes, large scale material, like food items etc., were received by the CDPO and were further distributed amongst Anganwari workers through Supervisors.
The then CDPO asked her to sign the stock register even without verifying as to whether the quantity of the material had actually been received by the concerned Anganwari Workers or not.
She was being asked to sign the stock register even without verifying the quality of the food items.
She, therefore, refused to sign the stock register.
The then CDPO not only made false and frivolous adverse remarks in the confidential report of the petitioner but she also made a reference against the petitioner to respondent No. 2.
By entertaining the said reference, respondent No. 2 vide memo dated June 26, 1986 called for the explanation of the petitioner, who, on receipt of the memo, referred to above, replied in detail on July 22, 1986 pointing out malpractices of the then CDPO She also requested to hold an enquiry in the matter.
On receipt of the reply of the petitioner, respondent No. 2 held an enquiry through Deputy Director (Admn.).
The case of the petitioner is that the aforesaid Inquiry Officer found the petitioner upright in his report dated September 23, 1986.
Consequently, respondent No. 2, vide order dated September 30, 1986, informed the petitioner that she should sign the stock register after verifying the receipts taken from the Anganwari workers and in case she finds any lacuna, she should make a written complaint.
It is further the case of the petitioner that once her representation was accepted and the remarks with regard to her average honesty were expunged, there was absolutely no justification to treat her report for the year 1986-87 as average.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed but in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of the respondents the seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis juniors to her, who have been promoted on April 24, 1991, has not been denied.
The cause of petitioner has, however, been endeavoured to be opposed on the ground that for earning promotion, petitioner ought to have had 70% good reports and inasmuch as her record did not warrant her promotion, juniors to her were rightly considered and promoted to the post under contention.
4.
With a view to resolve the controversy, it shall be better to give in extenso the service records as spelled out from affidavit filed by Mrs. F Mehrotra, IAS, Director, Women & Child Development, Haryana.
The same reads thus:-  "Period Grading Adverse remarks in ACR 8/81 to 3/82 Good - 1982-83 Average - 1983-84 Good - 25.6.1984 to 31.3.1985 V. Good - 1985-86 Average Average 1986-87 Average Behaviour with others not good.
1987-88 Good - 1988-89 Average Quarrelling nature  1989-90 Average Dishonest not punctual.
Work shirker, quarrelling nature etc. 1990-91 Good - 1991-92 Good - 1992-93 V Good - 1993-94 Good -"  Inasmuch as petitioner had averred that her service record, as reproduced above, was not in consonance with the entries made in the ACRs, record was summoned.
While dealing with first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner with regard to distortion of the record, the Court would like to take first the average entry in the confidential record of the petitioner for the year 1982-83.
From the perusal of the original records, the contention of the learned counsel is well made out.
Whereas, with regard to her work and honesty, she has been assessed to be good in the original record, with regard to her capability and intelligence, she has been categorised as satisfactory.
With regard to her disposal of work, she has been categorised as good.
She has also been categorised as good with regard to her honesty.
In the additional affidavit, referred to above, her grading has been mentioned to be average which word is not mentioned in any of the columns of her confidential report for the year 1982-83.
The incorrect showing of categorisation of the petitioner as average in the additional affidavit apart, it is conceded position that this report, if it is to be considered as adverse, was never conveyed to the petitioner, While, thus, assessing the petitioner vis-a-vis her record for the purposes of promotion, uncommunicated report, which has been taken into consideration, for denying the petitioner the desired relief, could not be taken into consideration, That being the position, report of 1982-83 has to be excluded while computing 70% good record of the petitioner on the date when juniors to her were promoted to the post under contention.
5.
Coming now to the categorisation of the petitioner as average and adverse remarks contained in the ACR for the year 1989-90, original record reveals that the petitioner was conveyed these remarks in the ACR and she duly made a representation, The said representation came to be accepted with the following words, when translated into English:-  " I am in agreement with the facts stated by the employee in her representation and I grade the petitioner as good in her confidential report for the year."
This order, however, passed way back in 1991 was recalled by the same officer, communication whereof was given to the petitioner vide letter dated February 1, 1995 ie after filing of the present writ petition.
It may be recalled that while recalling order dated June 16, 1991, no date has been given at all.
From the perusal of the original records and keeping in view the averments made in the writ petition.
as also the fact that no date has been mentioned in the order recalling order dated June 16, 1991, the Court is left with no choice but for to conclude that order dated June 16, 1991 was recalled after filing of this writ petition and it appears that it was done simply with a view to justify supersession of the petitioner and promotion of the persons, who are admittedly junior to her.
That apart in considered view of this Court, order expunging the adverse remarks, could not be recalled after such a lapse and that too without hearing the petitioner in the matter and without even informing her that such an action/order is contemplated.
Once again, this order recalling the order, vide which adverse remarks against the petitioner were expunged on June 16, 1991, cannot be taken into consideration for yet another reason that it contains no reason as to why earlier order was recalled.
Seen, thus, from any angle, the confidential remarks in the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1989-90 as culled out in the additional affidavit, cannot be taken into consideration.
The factual position that then emerges is that the petitioner has six good reports out of eight immediately preceding the promotion of persons junior to her and that, concededly, would make the record of the petitioner good to an extent of more than 70%.
6.
The only ground pressed into service endeavouring to deny the petitioner's due claim having, thus, been knocked down i.e. that 70% of records of the petitioner is not good, the obvious result would be to allow this petition.
In the facts and circumstances of this case the only order that needs to be passed is to issue directions to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of CDPO from a day earlier to her juniors, whose names have been mentioned above, were promoted.
While so considering the case of the petitioner, it goes without saying that the service record of the petitioner, for the years 1982-83 and 1989-90 shall be considered to be good.
This exercise shall be done after hearing the petitioner and the persons who might be affected i.e. the persons who have already been promoted over and above the petitioner and who are junior to her.
Let this exercise be carried out within three months from today.
If, after considering the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post in question department holds in her favour, she shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to record appreciation for Mr. Bhinder for ably assisting the Court on facts and law and being very fair in his stand by producing the entire record before the Court and truly and correctly saying that these two reports, for the reasons, that have been mentioned above, could not be taken into consideration.
In view of the stand taken by the State, I pass no order as to costs.