NK Agrawal, J - The petitioner is working in the office of the District Public Relations Officer, Kapurthala, as an actress on casual appointment.
She was initially appointed as a casual employee on 24121979.
The case of the petitioner is that she had been working as an actress under appointments made from time to time after notional breaks.
Certain posts of actors and actresses were advertised by the Government of Punjab and interview was held for selection in March 1987.
The petitioner claims that she had been selected but somehow her name did not appear in the merit list because the merit list was changed.
She, however, continued to work on casual basis.
The petitioner has, therefore, filed this petition with a prayer that her services should be regularised.
As she was working since 1979 and her services are yet to be regularised after 12 years of service, she has put forward a claim for regularisation in the light of Government instructions dated 751993 (Annexure P-2).
The petitioner has asserted that she fulfils the qualifications and is eligible for regular appointment.
The respondents have put forward the plea that the petitioner has been working on contract basis only and, therefore, she is not entitled for regular appointment unless she is selected by the Selection Committee.
It is stated that the petitioner was considered by the Selection Committee for appointment to the post of Actress on regular basis but she was not found to be suitable.
The list of successful candidates was published on 16.4.1987.
The petitioner was being paid remuneration at the rate of Rs. 100/- per show/programme subject to the maximum remuneration of Rs. 1200/- per month.
Since the petitioner has been working only on contract basis, she is said to have no right whatsoever for being regularised.
It is also pointed out that the petitioner was again called for interview on 12.6.1990 along with some other persons who had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 16698 of 1989 in this Court but the petitioner was again not selected.
One Didar Singh was selected in the category of Scheduled Caste candidates.
Though the petitioner also belonged to such category yet she was found to be not suitable.
2.
The petitioner is said to have been again called for interview on 1711994 after certain posts were advertised by the Government.
She is stated to have been placed now in the waiting list.
3.
Since the petitioner has been working on contract basis and she has been paid remuneration not on the basis of monthly salary but at the rate of Rs. 100/- per performance, therefore, she is not entitled to the benefit of regularisation.
A question, regarding regularisation in a case of appointment made on contract basis, came to be examined by the Supreme Court in Director, Institute of Management Development, UP v. Smt. Pushpa Srivastava, 1992(3) SCT 742(SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 2070.
It has been held in para 20 of the judgment as under :  "To our mind, it is clear that where the appointment is contractual and by efflux of time, the appointment comes to an end, the respondent could have no right to continue in the post.
Once this conclusion is arrived at, what requires to be examined is, in view of the services of the respondents being continued from time to time on "ad hoc" basis for more than a year, whether she is entitled to regularisation ?
The answer should be in the negative.
However, reliance is placed by learned counsel on behalf of the respondent on the case in Jacob v. Kerala Water Authority, 1991(1) SCT 627(SC) : 1990(1) Suppl.
SCR 562 : AIR 1990 S.C. 2228 (supra).." 5.
The respondents have filed details regarding the payments of remuneration to the petitioner in different years.
A perusal of these details contained in Annexure R-1 and R-2 makes it clear that the petitioner had been paid remuneration at fluctuating amounts in different months.
She received payments as a causal artist at Rs. 500/- each for the months of September, October and November, 1982.
A sum of Rs. 200/- only was paid to her for the month of December, 1982.
During the subsequent period also, the petitioner was paid small amounts for each month.
It is thus clear that the petitioner has been working on contract basis and, therefore, she is not entitled to the benefit of regularization of her services in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in Director, Institute of Management Development, UP v. Smt. Pushpa Srivastava, AIR 1992 SC 2070 (supra).
The writ petition is, therefore, rejected.
No costs.