VK Bali, J (Oral) - Joga Singh and eight others, through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents 1 to 3 to regularise their services.
2.
Petitioners herein were appointed through Employment Exchange on the post of either Octroi Moharir or Octroi Peon with Municipal Committee, Assandh.
All of them had actually worked for 7 to 10 years as on the date when the present petition came to be filed way back in the year 1986.
On the strength of years put in by them on their respective posts, as also in view of the Supreme Court judgment in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) SPJ 1 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC), they seek regularisation of their services.
3.
Even though notice of motion was issued on November 26, 1986 and the writ came to be admitted on April 16, 1987, till date no reply has been filed by the respondents.
Even though that is the position available and in normal circumstances the relief asked for deserves to be given to the petitioners on the ground of non-traverse, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that inasmuch as the petitioners by now have put in service of about 20 years or so, in all probability, their services must have been regularised.
If that might have not been done till date, all that he contends is that a direction may be issued to the respondents to consider the case of petitioners for regularisation of their services in view of the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) SPJ 1 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) and various instructions issued on that behalf from time to time.
In view of the position explained above and the statement of learned counsel, a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra), if an order to that effect has not been already passed.
4.
Insofar as other claim in the petition for equal pay for equal work is concerned, Mr. Nehra, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, states that the petitioners deserve the regular pay scale from the date of regularisation of their services and not earlier to that.
In the present petition the only direction that can be issued is that if the petitioners have been regularised, they shall be paid regular pay scale as is being paid to their counterparts in their regular service from that date and if they are to be regularised in pursuance of the directions of this Court, then from the date they are regularised.
Insofar as claim of the petitioners regarding wages for the earlier period is concerned, the learned counsel for the petitioners states that he does not seek that claim in this petition and the petitioners would rather choose to make representation on that behalf.
That being the position, it is ordered that if the petitioners make representation claiming equal pay for equal work for the period earlier to their regularisation, the same shall be considered according to law.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the above terms.