TS Doabia, J - The petitioner's services were terminated in the year 1990.
The present petition has thus been presented after a lapse of five years.
The reason for this delay has been explained.
It is stated that in the case of one Dinesh Kumar some order has been passed by the respondent No. 2.
It be seen that the above Dinesh Kumar challenged his removal by preferring a writ petition No. 617/95.
That petition came to be decided in favour of Dinesh Kumar, and said Dinesh Kumar has been reinstated in pursuance of the order passed by this Court.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek parity with Dinesh Kumar.
The petitioner did not take any step for a period of five years.
As such, he is not entitled to claim any relief.
In this regard reference be made to Shri Ashok alias Somanna Gowda and another v. State of Karnataka, 1992(2) SCT 35 (SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 80.
In para 3, it was said :-  "In view of the fact that appointment under the impugned Rules were made as back as in 1987 and only the present appellants had approached the Tribunal for relief, the case of other candidates cannot be considered as they never approached for redress within reasonable time.
We are thus inclined to grant relief only to the present appellants who were vigilant in making grievance and approaching the Tribunal in time".
See also : VV Joseph and others v. Union of India and others, 1993(2) SCT 235(SC) : AIR 1993, Supreme Court 299, where similar view was expressed in para 5.
It was said :-  "After examining all the circumstances we do not agree with the petitioners that they had not information of the litigation at all.
It appears that they were satisfied by the stand of the Union of India taken in their favour and in pursuing the matter from stage to stage.
The Union of India, therefore, should in the present case, be deemed to have represented the petitioners' interest and the judgment cannot be reconsidered".
Accordingly petition is dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
2.
The respondents' counsel may take notice of the provisions of Section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and if some relief can be granted to the petitioner, then the same be considered.
The respondents would also be at liberty to take notice the plea of limitation, if any, operating against the petitioner.
Disposed of accordingly.