VK Bali, J - The present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed by Haryana Breweries Limited challenging the judgment dated February 13, 1992, rendered by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition 12316 of 1989 that came to be filed by Bhupender Dev Jain-respondent herein challenging termination of his service by invoking bye-law 32 of the Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation Employees Service Bye-Laws (for short 'Service Bye- Laws') by which services of a permanent employee could be terminated by giving three months' notice or in lieu thereof pay of three months.
Learned Single Judge, dealing with the matter, allowed the writ petition but inasmuch as by the time the matter came to be decided, the respondent had superannuated, a direction was issued to the appellant herein that the respondent should be paid full back wages with interest @ 12% per annum from the date the amount fell due to the date when the payment was to be actually made for the period September 14, 1989 to April 30, 1991.
Inasmuch as the appellant had chosen to file the Letters Patent Appeal which was admitted for regular hearing on October 29, 1992, the retiral benefits of the respondent were withheld and it is with a view to secure the said benefits that Civil Writ Petition 1621 of 1993 came to be filed.
Obviously, the fate of C.W.P.
1621 of 1993 hinges upon the decision in L.P.A. and it is for that precise reason that both the matters were ordered to be listed for hearing together.
This order shall, thus, dispose of L.P.A. 972 of 1992 and CWP 1621 of 1993.
2.
The admitted facts constraining the respondent to file Civil Writ Petition 12316 of 1989 reveal that he was appointed as Finance Controller-cum-Chief Accounts Officer with the appellant-Corporation vide orders dated April 24, 1984 which post was redesignated as General Manager (Finance) and that the respondent had since been duly confirmed against the said post.
He resigned from the post in December, 1986 but in March, 1989 he rejoined the same post and the appellant-Corporation treated the period of absence as one of extra-ordinary leave.
However, vide orders dated September 14, 1989 his services were terminated by invoking bye-law 32 of the Service Bye-laws which reads as follows :-  "32 Termination of service :-  The service of an officer or other employee of the Corporation unless otherwise specially agreed to, may be terminated by the appointed authority :-  (i) in the case of permanent officer or other employee, by giving three months' notice on either side or, in lieu thereof, pay of the period the notice falls short of three months".
3.
The learned Single Judge dealing with the matter invalidated the order of termination by following the dictum of the Apex Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, AIR 1986 SC 1571 as also some other judgments of the Supreme Court and Division Bench judgment of this Court in Shiv Kumar Bishnoi v. State of Haryana, 1989(4) SLR 286.
4.
Mr. Surjit Singh Walia, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, in view of authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Central Inland Corporation's case (supra) which is based upon Rule 9(1) of the Disciplinary and Appeal Rules, 1979 which is pari-materia to bye-law 32 of the Service Bye-laws, wherein Rule 9(1) was held to be ultra-vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India to the extent it conferred upon the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation the right to terminate the employment of a permanent employee by giving him three months' notice in writing or by paying him the equivalent of three months' basic pay and dearness allowance in lieu of such notice, could not possibly find any fault with the impugned judgment and was, thus, under the circumstances, constrained only to urge that the service record of the respondent was unsatisfactory and amongst other acts of misconduct he had been guilty of embezzlement and misappropriation as well.
There is, however, nothing on records from where the allegations made against the respondent may be spelled out.
However, even if there were such allegations against the respondent, he could not be shown the exit door without there being an inquiry against him in which he might have been held guilty of the charges levelled against him.
Such a course, concertedly, was not adopted by the appellant-Corporation.
5.
Finding, thus, no merit in this appeal, we dismiss the same, leaving however the parties to bear their own costs.
6.
Concededly, the respondent-petitioner on his superannuation is entitled to retiral benefits like leave encashment, employees provident fund, gratuity and ex-gratia payments which, as referred to above, were withheld by the appellant-Corporation for the sole reason that the Letters Patent Appeal against the judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge dated February 13, 1992 was filed and admitted by the Division Bench of this Court.
On the failure of the appeal aforesaid, the obvious direction that need to be issued in the writ petition (No. 1621 of 1993) is that the Corporation must immediately release to Bhupender Dev Jain his retiral benefits that may be admissible to him under the Service Bye-laws and service conditions of the respondent.
Let this exercise be done and retiral benefits paid to Bhupender Dev Jain within a period of two months from the date of this order.