VK Jhanji, J - This is plaintiff's second appeal.
Plaintiff filed suit to the effect that order dated 12.10.1984 passed by the Director, Sports, Punjab, Chandigarh, rejecting his claim for counting his military service (Naval) from 26101962 to 10.11.1968 i.e. 5 years 2 months and 16 days towards his seniority, increments and fixation of pay in the new scales being illegal and arbitrary.
In the suit, he also made a prayer that the plaintiff is entitled to count his military service rendered by him during emergency as envisaged in rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
Both the Courts below dismissed the suit of the plaintiff relying on the judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1991(4) Labour Industrial Cases 683.
2.
Learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the judgments of the Courts below cannot be sustained in view of Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1995(1) R.S.J 431.
3.
In answer to these submissions, Mr. Bhanot submitted that the petitioner does not fall under the definition of 'Ex-serviceman' as provided under the 1965 Rules as emended on 30.10.1994 His precise submission is that the petitioner has not been released or discharged from the Army but he had left the service of his own.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the matter is squarely covered by decision in Jamiet Singh v. District and Sessions Judge, Amritsar, 1995(1) RSJ 431 : 1995(1) SCT 462(P&H)(DB).
It was never the case of the respondent that the appellant had left service at his own request.
The Courts below have not denied the relief to the appellant on this ground but have dismissed the suit on the basis of judgment in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) RSJ 433 : 1991(1) SCT 137(SC) which case has been noticed by Division Bench judgment of this Court and on notice, this Court held that "in Dhan Singh's case (supra), the contention raised before their Lordships of the Supreme Court was that the amendment created an artificial classification amongst the military personnel which was arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
This contention was negatived and it was held that the young persons who have joined the military services during the national emergency and those who were already in service and due to exigencies of service had been compelled to serve during emergency form two distinct classes.
Thus, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 959 and 1159 of 1989 were dismissed.
However, so far as the present case is concerned, this question does not arise at all.
As already noticed, the State of Punjab has not created a classification as had been done by the State of Haryana.
Consequently, the rationale of the decision in Dhan Singh's case (supra) is not at all attracted to the facts of the present case.
Similarly, even in Ram Niwas's case (supra) the learned Single Judge had rightly followed the decision in Dhan Singh's case and held that the benefit was not admissible to a person who had joined the Army before the proclamation of Emergency.
On this basis, the writ petition of Ram Niwas was allowed and the benefit granted to the respondent was annulled.
Learned counsel for the respondent can, thus, derive no advantage from these decisions.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx" This brings us to the consideration of the decision in Nirmal Singh's case (supra) on which primary reliance has been placed by the learned District Judge.
This was a case of an employee of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
The rules of 1965 as prevalent in the State of Punjab were admittedly applicable.
In spite of this, the learned Single Judge disagreed with the view taken by GR Mahithia, J in Hem Raj Gupta and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1990(6) SLR 592 and following the decision in Dhan Singh's case (supra), held that the 'concessions available under the rules are only for the period of emergency to those who had joined the Indian Army during the period of emergency and served the country during that period.
We are unable to accept the view taken by the learned Judge.
The plain distinction in the language of the rules as applicable in the two States was not brought to the notice of his Lordship.
We overrule the decision in Nirmal Singh's case (supra)'.
5.
The appellant too admittedly rendered services during the proclamation of emergency and after he was relieved from the Army, had joined civil service and is thus entitled to the benefit of military service rendered during emergency as envisaged under rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The judgment and decree of the Courts below are set aside and as a consequence thereof, suit of the plaintiff shall stand decreed and it is held that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefit of military service during operation of proclamation of emergency from 26101962 to 10.1.1968.
No costs.