NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's regular second appeal.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is an employee of the Border Security Force and hence is entitled to join service as well as to pay, powers and privileges of his services and the order of termination alleged to have been passed by the authority is illegal.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff was selected as Head Constable who joined his duties on 3091975.
On 1941982 he proceeded on sanctioned leave for 90 days.
According to the plaintiff, he could not join the Battalion as he had no knowledge of its present location and so had been writing various letters to various authorities in the Border Security Force to know about the exact location of the Battalion so that he could rejoin but he did not receive any reply.
It is on August 20, 1984 that he filed an application seeking permission to rejoin the Border Security Force to which he received reply dated 12111984 that the cannot now be permitted to join services as his services stand terminated.
Hence, the present suit.
3.
The defendants in their written statement stated that the plaintiff proceeded on leave on 1941982 for 90 days only and thereafter abstained and only expressed his desire to join vide his application dated 2081984 i.e. almost after a gap of two years.
Since he did not join, his services were terminated vide order dated 1351983.
In fact, as per letter dated 2871982 he was informed that his leave has expired and so he should resume duty forthwith failing which legal action will be taken.
No reply was received by the defendant and ultimately he was declared deserter and so his name was struck off w.e.f.
1971982.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed:-  1.
Whether the Court has jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPP 2.
Whether a legal and valid notice was served ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is maintainable ?
OPP  4.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed for ?
OPD  5.
Whether the termination is legal and binding ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
The trial Court decided issues Nos. 1, 2 and 3 in favour of the plaintiff and issues No. 4 and 5 against the defendants and so decreed the suit as prayed for.
5.
The matter was again examined by the lower appellate Court which too found no merit in the same and so dismissed the appeal as well.
6.
With a view to seek reversal of the judgment and decree of the Courts below, learned counsel for the appellant has once again urged that the Courts below have, in fact, erred in law in not properly perusing the relevant provisions of the Act and the Rules which unmistakenly prove it a case of desertion by the plaintiff leading to his termination by passing a valid order by the competent authority.
According to the counsel, the proceedings were conducted in terms of Section 62 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (for short 'the Act') and Rule 177 of the Border Security Force Rules (for short 'the Rules') and so the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside.
Elaborating, the counsel made reference to Sections 11, 62 of the Act and Rule 177 of the Rules.
According to the counsel, as per section 11 of the Act, the Director General or the Inspector General can dismiss or remove from service or reduce to a lower grade, rank any person subject to this Act other than an officer.
As per section 62 of the Act, an enquiry can be held into absence without leave i.e. in case a person absents from duty without due authority for a period of 30 days a Court of Enquiry shall be appointed which would examine the matter and in case it comes to the conclusion that the person has remained absent it shall record it so.
Vide Section 62(2) of the Act if such a person is declared to be absent and who does not afterwards surrenders or is not apprehended, he is deemed to be a deserter.
Once a person is declared to be a deserter, he could be dismissed or removed from service in terms of Rule 177 of the Rules and so the termination of the plaintiff cannot be hereby termed to be illegal or otherwise unwarranted.
Accordingly, the judgment and decree of the Courts below deserves to be set aside.
7.
Counsel for the respondent, on the other hand argued that no illegality or irregularity is discernible on perusal of the judgment and decree of the Courts below calling for any interference in the regular second appeal.
Otherwise too, the explanation tendered by the plaintiff for his absence has been accepted by the Courts below whereas the order of termination has been found to be without jurisdiction.
This being so, the appeal is devoid of any substance and dereserves to be dismissed.
8.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the judgments of the Courts below.
The matter in controversy is rather brief.
The plaintiff proceeded on sanctioned leave for 90 days on 1941982 but did not report back till August 20, 1984 when an application was filed by him seeking permission to rejoin the security force.
This prayer was declined by the Director General vide his reply dated 12111984 which has led to the filing of the present suit.
There is no documentary evidence on record in support of the plaintiff's assertion that he could not join the Battalion as the exact location of the Battalion was not known to him.
During a span of about two years, he is stated to have written many letters but did not receive any reply.
It has come on record that the department vide communication dated 2871982 intimated the plaintiff that his leave has expired and so he should resume his duties, else legal action shall be initiated.
No reply was received by the department and so the department after holding enquiry held him to be a deserter and so dismissed his service.
The department informed the plaintiff that his services stand terminated vide letter dated 1351983.
Thus, this came to his knowledge much before his application filed on 2081984 seeking permission to rejoin the Border Security Force.
Border Security Force is a disciplined force and expects from its members to conduct themselves in a disciplinary manner.
In the present case, the plaintiff proceeded on leave for three months on 1941982 and so had to report back on or before 1971982.
From 1971982 to 2081984 the solitary explanation given by the plaintiff is that he was not aware of the exact location of the Battalion.
This assertion of the plaintiff is factually incorrect.
As stated by the defendant, the Unit of the Battalion remained at its old location till June, 1984.
This completely demolishes the explanation given by the plaintiff for his long absence from duty.
9.
Section 11 of the Act deals with dismissal, removal or reduction in rank and entitle the Director General or Inspector General to dismiss or remove or to reduce to a lower grade or rank any person other than the officer.
Admittedly, the plaintiff was Head Constable and so could be removed by the Director General/Inspector General after holding a proper enquiry.
Section 62 of the Act deals with enquiry into absence without leave i.e. when a person is absent from duty without due authority for a period of 30 days, a Court of Enquiry is to be instituted and proceedings conducted in terms of Section 62 of the Act.
Vide Section 62(2) of the Act in case a person is declared to be absent but does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he is deemed to be a deserter.
It is in the light of the statutary provisions that the authority held the plaintiff to be a deserter and so passed an order of termination communicated to him vide letter dated 1351983 i.e. terminating his services from 1971982.
Any irregularity in the conducting of enquiry proceedings does not vitiate its ultimate conclusion that the plaintiff remained absent without leave for almost two years.
Since the explanation for this long absence has been found to be unworthy of any credence, it would be proper to infer that the plaintiff remained absent for this long period without any justification.
So the order passed by the authorities terminating his services is perfectly just and valid.
Accordingly, I accept the appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the Courts below and dismiss the suit of the plaintiff.
No order as to costs.