Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are working as Junior Engineers.
They question the validity of the ranking list prepared by the respondent-Board on February 25, 1993 by which respondents 3 to 6 were placed above them.
The petitioners allege that having joint service prior to the respondents they are seniors to them and that the action of the Board in placing the respondents above them, is illegal and invalid.
2.
The Board as well as the private respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
It is averred that the action is in conformity with the provisions of the Punjab State Electricity Board Services of Engineers (Civil) Recruitment Regulations, 1965 as amended on June 19, 1989.
3.
The short question that arises for consideration is :- Is the ranking list in conformity with the provisions of Regulation 9 as substituted vide Office order, dated June 19, 1989 ?
4.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the Regulation requires that a candidate should be a Graduate in Engineering with five years of experience as a Junior Engineer before he becomes eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
The action of the Board in drawing up the ranking list on the basis of the date of passing the BE or AMIE examination is contrary to the provisions of the Regulation.
5.
On behalf of respondents 3 and 4, Mr. Subhash Ahuja has submitted that prior to June 19, 1989, the Junior Engineers used to be promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer on the basis of their seniority.
By the amendment of the Regulations, 12-1/2 per cent posts were reserved for such Junior Engineers as had qualified the AMIE or BE examination.
The ranking list was prepared in the year 1993.
The inter se positions were fixed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Regulations.
6.
Mr. Kamal Sharma, Additional Advocate General and Mr. KL Arora, who also appeared on behalf of the respondents, submitted that after the year 1984, the occasion for filling up the posts from amongst the Graduate Junior Engineers had arisen only in the year 1993 and that the impugned order was passed in strict conformity with the provisions of Regulations 9.
Is it so ?
7.
Regulation 9 inter alia provides that 65 per cent of the posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) shall be filled up by direct recruitment.
The remaining 35 per cent have to be filled up by promotion.
Out of these, 22-1/2 per cent have to be filled up from amongst the Engineering Subordinates as defined in Regulation 2(g) with five years service as Junior Engineer (Civil).
The remaining 12-1/2 per cent have been allocated to the Engineering Subordinates possessing the qualifications of AMIE/BE with five years service as such.
By way of clarification, it has been provided as under :  "The eligibility for consideration for promotion from AMIE/BE against 12-1/2 % quota shall be determined from the date of qualifying such examination, provided that :-  (i) the ranking list of Engineering subordinates for their promotion as AE after having qualified the AMIE/BE examination and completion of 5 years service in the cadre, may normally be prepared on first day of January of each year and duly notified to all concerned.
(ii) the name(s) of eligible candidate(s) in the Ranking list, will be arranged in order of their date of passing AMIE/BE examination.
The name(s) of the JEs, who qualify the AMIE/BE examination, during the subsequent years, will be added in the Ranking list below the name(s) of the candidates, who have passed the said examination in the earlier years".
8.
The dispute centres around the interpretation of the above provisions.
According to Mr. Patwalia, the petitioners having joined service prior to respondents 3 to 6 had completed five years of service before them.
By the time they completed the requisite period of service, they had also qualified the AMIE examination.
Accordingly, it was submitted that the petitioners should be treated as senior and placed above the respondents who had joined service later than them.
This contention cannot, however, be accepted in view of the above provision.
It categorically postulates that the eligibility has to be determined 'from the date of qualifying such examination'.
Sub-clause (ii) clearly provides that 'the name(s) of eligible candidate(s) in the Ranking list, will be arranged in order of their date of passing AMIE/BE examination'.
It is, thus, clear that it is not the completion of five years of service but the date of passing the examination that determines the inter se position in the ranking list.
Still further, the Regulation provides that persons who qualify the examination in a subsequent year shall be placed below the candidates who have passed the examination in the earlier years.
This is precisely what has been done by the respondents.
A perusal of the ranking list shows that the petitioners had qualified the examination on August 30, 1984 or thereafter.
As against this, respondents 3 to 5 have passed this examination on June 2, 1981, August 30, 1983 and March 3, 1984, respectively.
Respondent No. 6 had passed this examination on September 13, 1985 and he has been placed above only petitioner No. 4 who had passed the said examination on April 4, 1986.
It is, thus, clear that the ranking list has been prepared strictly on the basis of the date of passing AMIE examination.
This clearly conforms to the provisions of the Regulation and, thus, calls for no interference.
9.
The petitioners have not challenged the validity of the Regulation.
However, Mr. Patwalia did make an attempt to submit that persons who had joined the service earlier are being made junior to those who had entered service later on.
The attempt of the counsel was to show that the action is invalid.
10.
It is common knowledge that different criteria has been prescribed under various rules for determination of seniority.
In certain Service Rules, the seniority is determined by the date of continuous appointment while in others, the rules lay down the date of confirmation as the determining factor.
No rule can be perfect.
However, the rule adopted by the Board is primarily based on the candidate's acquiring the essential qualification of a Degree in Engineering.
This provision has a clear rationale.
Posts of Assistant Engineers have been reserved for such Junior Engineers as possess the qualifications of AMIE/BE While those who seek promotion only on completion of five years of service, the Regulation has made a reservation of 22-1/2 per cent posts.
In case of those who possess a higher qualification, reservation of 12-1/2 per cent posts has been made and their inter se positions are assigned on the basis of qualifying the examination.
This is in complete accord with the rule enunciated by a Full Bench of this Court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, 1989(4) S.L.R.
437.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Punchhi (as his Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench was pleased to observe that if the rule of seniority was followed, "it would lead to breeding of manipulations, machinations, calculations and caprice.
Designedly the case of promotion of the first eligible can deliberately be kept delayed with oblique motives so as to let suitable rivals come in and in this manner his acquired eligibility can be frustrated by someone senior acquiring iligibility far far late......, the eligibility criteria is the first dominant factor and thereafter comes the principle of seniority governing the fate when two equal eligibles stake claim to the promotional post.
In that situation, the senior person would get the promotional post on both acquiring eligibility on the same date, even though the promotional post falls vacant later".
While following this decision, a Division Bench of this Court in Prithvi Singh and another v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, 1993(4) SCT 647 (P&H) : 1993 (5) S.L.R.
108 observed that "a person who becomes eligible earlier gets a right to be considered for promotion before a person senior to him who has not acquired the condition of eligibility or has acquired it later than the junior".
This decision of the Division Bench was challenged by the affected persons through Special Leave Petition (C) No. 13782 of 1993.
It was dismissed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on September 10, 1993.
11.
After considering the arguments advanced by the learned counsel and the circumstances in their entirety, it is clear that the criterion adopted by the respondent-Board is in consonance with the rule enunicated by this Court.
It has the imprimatur of their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
12.
In view of the above, I find no ground to interfere.
The Writ Petition is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.