VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing Annexure, P/12 whereby petitioner has been ordered to be reverted to the rank of Constable.
Petitioner is also seeking a writ of mandamus directing respondents to confirm him as Head Constable from the date his juniors were so confirmed.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was selected as constable in District Police, Gurgaon on 31121976.
Later, vide letter dated 19.9.1984, he was selected and promoted as Head Constable.
Vide Office order No. 48856 dated 27111992, a show-casue notice for reversion was given to the petitioner which came to be challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 8920 of 1992.
Division Bench of this Court, on November 6, 1992, on the statement made by counsel for the State, quashed the order of revision against the petitioner leaving it open to the state to pass fresh order after issuing show-cause notice.
Pursuant to the order of this Court, show-cause notice was served on the petitioner who submitted his reply and was also given personal hearing.
The Superintendent of Police, Faridabad, vide order dated 24.12.1992, finding no merit in the reply of the petitioner, ordered his reversion to the rank of Constable with immediate effect.
The order of reversion has been challenged by the petitioner in this petition on the ground that the same is illegal, arbitrary and violative of the rights of the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and against the provisions of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Police Rules).
3.
Respondents, in their written statement, have submitted that the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable purely on ad-hoc and temporary basis which gives no right to the petitioner to seek a declaration that he is to be treated as confirmed Head Constable.
Respondents have averred that such a right can be vested only on those Head Constables who passed Lower School Course.
Respondents have denied that the petitioner was promoted against any vacancy.
Rather, they have submitted that no junior constable has been promoted as Head Constable except those Head Constables who were promoted likewise the petitioners and have obtained stay order from the Court.
They have further averred that the petitioner cannot claim any right to the post of Head Constable.
According to them, reversion has been made to make room for upgraded constables who should have rightly been promoted.
They have denied that any Head Constable junior to the petitioner has been sent to the Intermediate School Course.
It is rather averred that the petitioner was holding the post of Head Constable at the cost of eligible and deserving constables.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner, on account of achievement in sports, was promoted as Head Constable and his case is squarely covered by decision of the Apex Court in JT 1994(2) 157 and CWP No. 11586 of 1993.
5.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the State submitted that the petitioner was promoted only on officiating basis and, therefore, has rightly been reverted for making room for eligible candidates.
6.
In order to appreciate the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary to refer to the relevant rules.
Chapter 13 of the Police Rules deals with the promotions.
According to Rule 131 of Police Rules, promotion from one rank to another and from open grade to the other in the same rank, shall be made by selection tempered by seniority, efficiency and honesty which are the main factors in governing the selection.
Apart from special qualification like training course and practical experience, for the purpose of regulating promotian amongst police officials, sub-rule (3) of rule 131 of Police Rules provides that six lists, A, B, C, D, E and F need be maintained.
For promotion of Constables to the rank of Head Constable, the list to be maintained is list 'C'.
Rule 138 of the Police Rules deals with the promotion of Constable to the rank of Head Constable.
The rule reads as under :-  "138 List C Promotion to Head Constables - (1) In each district a list shall be maintained in card index form [form 138(1) of all] constables who have passed the Lower School Course at Phillaur and are considered eligible for promotion to Head Constable.
A card shall be prepared for each constable admitted to the list and shall cantain his marking under sub-rule 13.5(2) and notes by the Superintendent himself, or furnished by Gazetted Officers under whom the Constable has worked, on his qualifications and character.
The list shall be kept confidentially by the Superintendent and shall be scrutinized and approved by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police at his annual inspection.
(2) Promotions to Head Constables shall be made in accordance with the principle described in sub-rules 131(1) and (2).
The date of admission to List C shall not be material, but the order of merit in which examinations have been passed shall be taken into consideration in comprising qualifications.
In cases where other qualifications are equal, seniority in the police force shall be the deciding factor.
Selection grade constables who have not passed the Lower School Course at the Police Training School but are otherwise considered suitable may, with the approval of the Deputy Inspector- General, be promoted to Head Constable upto a maximum of ten per cent of vacancies."
7.
It is apparent from the reading of the rule that only the names of those constables who have passed Lower School Course and are eligible for promotion to the rank of Head Constable can be brought on promotion List C Persons who have not passed Lower School Course are not to be brought on List C However, under sub-rule (2) of rule 138 of the Police Rules, selection grade constables who have not passed Lower School Course but are otherwise considered suitable, may with the approval of the Deputy Inspector-General be promoted to the rank of Head Constables upto a maximum of 10 per cent vacancies.
8.
In the instant case, admittedly, the petitioner has not passed Lower School Course.
Order of promotion shows that his promotion was purely ad hoc and temporary and he could be reverted at any time without any notice.
It also finds mention in the order that the petitioner will not claim any seniority on the basis of ad-hoc promotion.
The contention that the petitioner was promoted on account of achievement in sports is untenable because his promotion was not against 10 per cent vacancies as provided under sub-rule (2) of rule 138 of the Police Rules.
This position becomes clear from the reading of the written statement where the respondents have averred that the promotion given to the petitioner was not against any vacancy and his reversion his been made for making room for the eligible and upgraded constables who should have been promoted.
Thus, the petitioner cannot make any grievance with regard to his reversion from the post of Head Constable to that of Constable.
His promotion was purely ad-hoc and specifically on the term that he would be reverted to his substantive rank.
The reversion of the petitioner has been made in order to make room for eligible and upgraded constables and therefore, the petitioner has no right to question the order of reversion.
The judgment in Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana and others, JT 1994 (2) SC 157 : 1994(2) SCT 556 (SC) relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner has no application to the facts of the present case as in Rishal Singh's case (supra), the promotion of the petitioner therein was within 10 per cent quota and he was found to be suitable for promotion in accordance with rule 138 (2) of the Police Rules.
However, this is not the position in the case of petitioner in this case.
Similarly Civil Writ Petition No. 11586 of 1993 was decided in terms of the decision of the Supreme Court in Rishal Singh's case (supra) and, therefore, no assistance from it can be derived by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Consequently, this writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.