RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Briefly, the facts of the case are that the petitioner joined the Punjab Police as a Constable on June 20, 1961.
He was promoted as Head Constable w.e.f.
February 1, 1982, and was further.
He was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis on May 9, 1992.
2.
It has further been averred in the petition and not denied by the respondents that the petitioner had crossed his efficiency bar at the relevant time and he had never been communicated any adverse remarks during the period of thirty years of his service.
However, vide order dated October 30, 1992, copy Annexure P-16, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Patiala, prematurely retired the petitioner under Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
The said order reads as under:  "Whereas it is not feasible in public interest to give three months notice in terms of Rule 3(1) of Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, and Sh. Gulab Singh ASI No. 411/PTL shall be paid three months' pay and allowances in advance at the same rate at which he is drawing immediately before 30.10.1992.
Sh. Gulab Singh No. 411/Patiala has completed more than 25 years qualifying service.
And whereas I, Suresh Arora, IPS, Sr. Supdt.
of Police, Patiala of the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire the said Sh. Gulab Sigh ASI No. 411/PTL on 30.10.1992 being some complaints of corruption.
Now, therefore, I Suresh Arora, IPS, Sr. Supdt.
of Police, Patiala, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-Rule (1) of Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Service (Premature Retirement, Rules) 1975 and all other powers enabling me in this behalf, order that the said Sh. Gulab Singh ASI No. 411/Patiala shall be retired on 30.10.1992.
Book the order.
Sd/- Sr Supdt.
of Police, Patiala."
The petitioner filed the present writ petition impugning the aforesaid order.
In paragraph 11 of the written -statement, it has been stated thus on behalf of respondent No. 1:  "In reply to the contents of para No. 11, it is submitted that Sh. Yadwinder Singh s/o Nagina Singh, R/o Village Balwera Tehsil and District Patiala stated in his affidavit that one Teja Singh s/o Amar Singh was serving as a servant with Yadwinder Singh and Teja Singh died in an accident for which compromise was effected between Yadwinder Singh and Sucha Singh s/o Amar Singh.
After the compromise petitioner threatened Yadwinder Singh that he should pay Rs. 10,000/- otherwise he will prepare a case against him.
Out of fear Sh. Yadwinder Singh paid Rs. 10,000/- and petitoner demanded Rs. 10,000/- more from Sh. Yadwinder Singh.
This act of the petitioner amounts to a grave misconduct and keeping in view the miscodunt the petitioner was ordered to be prematurely retired on 30.10.1992, copy of the affidavit is enclosed as Annexure R-2/1 (in Punjabi) and R-2-ii (in English)."
Learned counsel for the petitioner, inter alia, contends that apart from the fact that the impugned order itself recites that the order of premature retirement was being passed on the basis of some complaints of corruption, the averments made in para 11 of the written-statement further go to show that on the basis of some complainant, the respondent came to the conclusion that the petitioner had misconducted himself, which led to the passing of the impugned order.
He further submitted that the reciting of the following words in the impugned order "And whereas I, Suresh Arora, IPS, Sr. Supdt.
of Police, Patiala of the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire the said Sh. Gulab Singh ASI No. 411/PTL on 30.10.1992 being some complaints of corruption" (emphasis supplied) cast a stigma against the petitioner and the order is violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India as it is by way of punishment.
No enquiry into the alleged complaint was conducted by the respondent before coming to the conclusion that the petitioner had misconducted.
In support of his contention he relied on the judgment of this Court in Om Parkash Aggarwal v. State of Haryana and others, 1988(2) All India Services Law Journal 128 and Ram Eqbal Sharma v. State of Bihar and another, AIR 1990 SC 1368 : 1993(3) SCT 621(SC).
3.
On the other hand learned counsel for the respondent argued that since there were complaints against the petitioner of having accepted illegal gratification and on the basis of the affidavit filed by the complainant, the appropriate authority had come to the conclusion that the petitioner had misconducted himself and was to be prematurely retired as it was thought to be in public interest.
He further submitted that if on the basis of the complaint an A.C.R.
could be recorded against the petitioner regarding his integrity and on that basis, he could have been prematurely retired, there is no illegality committed by the respondent in passing the impugned order on the basis of the complaint.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view of that the impugned order is liable to be quashed.
In Om parkash Aggarwal's case (supra), the facts were somewhat similar as in the present case.
In that case, the stand of the State Government has been mentioned in para 4 of the reported judgment, the relevant portion of which reads as under:  "It has further been pleaded that the case of the petitioner was reviewed on the receipt of the complaints and as a result of on the spot inspections it was revealed that there were serious lapses on the part of the petitioner on the basis whereof it was not considered desirable to retain him in service any more in the public interest.
Finally, it has been added that "since the petitioner was simply retired from service in exercise of the absolute right vested in the Government under rule 532-A(C) ibid and in accordance with the settled policy of the State Government after considering the case at the competent level, no violation of Articles 14, 16 and 311 of the Constitution is involved and the action to retire him is not arbitrary."
It was observed by the learned Judge as follows:- "The mere fact that some complaints had been received by the Government against an employee, which were either pending with the Government on the date the decision to retire him was taken on those complaints had since been investigated or inquired into but without associating the concerned employee therewith, would not be a sufficient ground to justify the order of premature retirement in the eye of law.
It was an essential requirement of the principles of natural justice that if any adverse material was to be taken into consideration by the employer to the prejudice of the employee, he must be associated with such consideration.
Otherwise, it would be wholly unsafe for the Government and unfair to the employee to base the decision of premature retirement on the complaints which can be easily managed by his colleages and subordinates likely to be benefited by his premature retirement."
In the authority of the apex Court cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it was observed as under:-  "On a consideration of the above decisions the legal position that now emerges is that even though the order of compulsory retirement is couched in innocuous language without making any imputations against the Government servant who is directed to be compulsorily retired from service, the Court, if challenged, in appropriate cases, can lift the veil to find out whether the order is based on any misconduct of the Government servant concerned or the order has been made bona fide and not with any oblique or extraneous purposes.
Mere form of the order in such cases cannot deter the Court from delving into the basis of the order if the order in question is challenged by the concerned Government servant as has been held by this Court in Anoop Jaiswal's case.
This being the position the respondent-State cannot defend the order of compulsory retirement of the appellant in the instant case on the mere plea that the order has been made in accordnace with the provisions of Rs. 74 (b) (ii) of the Bihar Service Code which prima facie does not make any imputation or does not cast any stigma on the service career of the appellant.
But in view of the clear and specific averments made by the respondent-State that the impugned order has been made to compulsorily retire the appellant from service under the aforesaid Rule as the appellant was found to have committed grave financial irregularities leading to financial loss to the State, the impugned order cannot but be said to have been made by way of punishment.
As such, such an order is in contravention of Art. 311 of the Constitution of India as well as it is arbitrary as it violates principles of natural justice and the same has not been made bona fide."
In the present case, a reading of the impugned order as well as averments made in para No. 11 of the written statement leave no manner of doubt that the whole basis of petitioner's compulsory retirement was the complaint filed by Yadvinder Singh son of Nagina Singh and the conclusion of the appointing authority that because of the complaint, the petitioner had misconducted himself and was not liable to be retained in service as that was not in public interest.
The aforesaid two authorities squarely cover the case in favour of the petitioner.
It was not the annual confidential record of the service of the petitioner that was made the basis of the petitioner's retirement.
The petitioner was not associated with any enquiry that might have been held by the respondent to come to a conclusion that the petitioner had misconducted himself or that there was any truth in the allegations made by Yaadvinder Singh in his complaint.
Apart from the fact I am of the view that the impugned order itself is stigmatic in nature as it mentions that the petitioner was being retired as there were complaints of corruption against him.
This order on the face of it and especially when read with averments made in para No. 11 of the written-statement goes to show that the same was passed by way of punishment.
5.
I find no substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of the complaint, an ACR could have been recorded adverse to the petitioner.
The fact remains that none was recorded and for the last about 30 years, there is nothing adverse to the petitioner on the basis of which an opinion could be formed that the petitioner is to be prematurely retired.
6.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated October 30, 1992.
Resultantly, the petitioner would be deemed to have been in service without any break.
He would be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
7.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of the impugned order certain retiral benefits were released to the petitioner.
Whatever has been released/adjusted in favour of the petitioner will now be adjusted against his arrears of pay in accordance with law and if anything remains payable by the petitioner, that will be adjusted in his future pay.
However, if anything further remains payable by the respondents, that shall be paid within three months from today.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that the respondents would be at liberty to hold a regular enquiry against the petitioner on the basis of the alleged complainant in case it is so decided.