MS Liberhan, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment of Hon'ble Single Judge of this Court dated 31st March, 1994 vide which the writ petition of the petitioner was allowed and the respondents therein were directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer, from the date on which his junior was promoted within three months from the date of receipt of the order.
2.
The factual matrix is not in dispute.
The petitioner joined PWD as draftsman in the year 1963.
He was fully qualified.
The petitioner joined the Punjab Housing Development Board in the year 1978.
No objection with respect to his lacking requisite qualifications was raised for almost fourteen years, rather he was promoted to the higher posts from time to time.
There is no rule providing educational qualification for appointment to the post in the Punjab Housing Development Board (in short 'the Board') which has been pointed out during the course of arguments or referred to in the judgment, though rules known as PWD B&R (Draftsman & Tracer) Service Rules, 1965 were referred to, wherein minimum qualification for appointment of Draftsman has been provided.
The petitioner during his tenure of service in the Housing Board acquired the requisite qualifications envisaged by the 1965 rules referred to above.
Petitioner's appointment or his continuity in service with the Board despite lack of minimum qualification at the time of initial appointment in Board and acquiring the same later during service is not in dispute.
The appellant-Board never challenged the appointment of the petitioner or his continuity in service till date.
3.
Only contention raised by learned counsel for the appellant is that the petitioner did not have experience of ten years from the date of his acquiring minimum requisite qualification for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer in terms of rule 7(2) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, PWD (Building & Roads Branch) Rules, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as 1965 Rules) which runs as under :  "7(2).
In the case of appointment by promotion from sources 2 and 3 under rule 6(1) - a member of the Punjab, PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service of a Draftsman (member of a B&R) Branch Draftsman and Tracers and has put in a service of ten years."
Learned counsel for the appellant further argued that since the appointment of the petitioner is void ab initio on account of his not fulfilling the requisite qualification, consequently he is not entitled to promotion.
He referred to Smt. Ravinder Sharma and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(1) SCT 48(SC) : 1995(1) Recent Service Judgments 195.
Secondly it is contended that the petitioner has not fulfilled the requisite experience of ten years from the date of his acquiring certificate of the Trade Test from the Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, in 1986.
Consequently he did not possess the requisite qualifications for promotion.
He has also referred to N Suresh Nathan v. Union of India, 1992(2) SCT 466 (SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 564.
4.
The Hon'ble Single Judge came to the conclusion that in view of the respondents permitting the petitioner to work for 25 years, the Board is estopped by their act and conduct to decline promotion on the ground that on the date of his recruitment he was not possessing the requisite qualification.
5.
In our considered view, in view of the admitted facts as referred to above, the petitioner was qualified when he was recruited in Punjab in the year 1963.
Again nothing has been pointed out that there is any rule whereby the Board prescribed the minimum requisite qualification for the post, to which the petitioner was initially appointed in the Board in 1978.
Nothing has been pointed out to infer that the Board did not have the power to relax the educational qualification at the initial stage.
In view of the peculiar facts and absence of the rules, it would be reasonable to infer that the Board by their own act and conduct relaxed the educational qualification and accepted the petitioner as duly qualified for the post for these 15 years.
Thus the Board cannot approbate and reprobate in the same breath.
Once the petitioner was accepted to hold the post, the appellant cannot be permitted to challenge the appointment as void ab initio for the purpose of promotion.
6.
The judgment Smt. Ravinder Sharma and another v. State of Punjab and others (supra) is not Para materia with the facts of the present case was much as the appointment in that case was void ab initio as the person appointed did not fulfil the educational qualification on the date of the appointment prescribed by the statutory rules.
Thus the void act could not have been rectified by conduct.
Herein no finding can be returned that the initial appointment was void ab initio or was in violation of the statutory rules/regulations or the regulations of the Board.
Patently, the Board for a period of almost a quarter century accepted the petitioner to be fully qualified and not only permitted him to work but also promoted him to higher posts from time to time.
There is no averment of any fraud played by the petitioner or with regard to his keeping back from the Board his educational qualification or that the Board was misled by the petitioner.
In view of the peculiar facts and circumstances it would be reasonable to hold that the petitioner's appointment in the Board was a valid and legal appointment and the respondent had accepted it as such.
7.
Thus we find no force in the submission of learned counsel for the appellant that the appointment of the petitioner was illegal at inception.
Though there is nothing on record to point out that rule 72 has been made applicable to the Board as such; even rule 72 read with rule 6 as referred to by learned counsel for the petitioner, it emerges that for the purposes of promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer, one is required to have educational qualification prescribed in the rule i.e. for promotion of members of PWD B&R i.e. Sectional Officer/Draftsman and Tracers the person should be possessing the qualifications prescribed in Appendix B which provides (i) a person should be a member of the service of the cadre of draftsman; and (ii) he must have passed diploma in civil engineering he should be holder of a certificate of final trade test from the Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab.
The petitioner is seeking promotion from source III i.e. from draftsman and members of tracers services which does not provide for any educational qualification.
Only requisite requirement for promotion is provided by rule 72 referred to above which provides that a person should be a member of cadre of Draftsman, Tracer services and has put in ten years of service.
Concededly the petitioner had put in ten years service.
Thus the petitioner fulfils the requisite requirement of rule 72.
Even this is made applicable itself in letter and spirit for promotion.
Admittedly juniors to the petitioner were promoted and the petitioner was ignored solely on the ground that the petitioner did not possess ten years' service from the date of acquiring the requisite educational qualification.
8.
So far as the judgment N Suresh v. Union of India, AIR 1992 Supreme Court 564 cited by learned counsel for the appellant is concerned, it is again not Para materia with the circumstances of the case.
Therein, for promotion, requirement was three years service as degree holder which is not so in the case in hand.
It is not required by the rules that a person has to put in service as degree holder or possessing the requisite qualification.
A plain reading of the rule provides that one has to be the member of the service for ten years.
Thus the law laid down by the judgment in N Suresh's case (supra) is not attracted to the facts of the present case.
9.
Lastly, learned counsel for the appellant contends that since a person junior to the petitioner promoted was not arrayed as a party, the writ petition is not maintainable.
Learned counsel for the respondent has refuted the submission and stated that he has not sought any relief against the junior promotee.
However, in order to obviate any adverse effect on the juniors he gives up the claim of seniority against his junior on the promoted post as he has left with only four months service.
The respondent will be entitled to all the consequential reliefs except seniority within a period of one month.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner and pass appropriate orders.
In view of the observations made above, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is hereby dismissed.