HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This appeal has been filed by Haryana Minerals Ltd Narnaul and others (hereinafter called the appellant) against the concurrent finding of the Courts below recorded in favour of the respondent.
2.
The respondent Ram Singh was appointed as Mining Foreman with the Appellant Company on 2261974 vide letter of appointment Ex. P1.
This letter also provided that even after confirmation his services could be terminated with three months notice on either side or pay in lieu thereof.
In the year 1976, the Project of which the respondent was an employee was taken over by the State from the private party but the respondent continued to hold the charge of the said post under the present appellants.
Keeping in view the good work done by the respondent, the General Manager of the Appellant vide his letter dated 1381976 appreciated the work and conduct of the respondent and also placed a commendation letter on his confidential file.
It appears that as the respondent on account of experience and goodwill had got an offer of some good job elsewhere, he tendered his resignation to the appellant but the same was declined on the ground that as his work and integrity during service had been found to be very good, it was found necessary to retain his services.
In the year 1977, the respondent once again tendered his resignation on the ground that he had been offered a better job but then also the same was rejected and the Board of Directors of the Appellant decided to give him an incentive of 5 grade increments.
A letter of commendation was also once again issued.
Once again in the year 1978, in recognition of his good service career, his post was upgraded as Senior Mining Foreman and a higher salary was fixed.
In these circumstances, the respondent has stated that he was somewhat stunned to receive the impugned order dated 30101985, Ex-P3 terminating his services and in lieu of three months' notice offering three months' pay as well.
The respondent feeling aggrieved filed a civil suit challenging the order dated 30101985 on various grounds.
The suit was partly decreed with regard to declaration but dismissed qua grant of injunction.
The appeal filed against the order of the Trial Court was dismissed by the First Appellate Court.
Hence this second appeal.
3.
The Courts below found that services of the respondent could not be terminated by giving three months notice or in lieu thereof pay for that period in view of the law laid down in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1571.
The Courts below also found that the appellant- Corporation was a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and as such the judgment in terms given could be ordered.
4.
Mr. ML Saini, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that in the cited case the challenge had been made to the vires of the rule which was to the effect that service could be terminated on three months notice and as there was no challenge to any rule in the present proceedings that case was distinguishable.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the appeal.
Admittedly, the respondent was, on 30101985, a permanent employee.
The Supreme Court in the cited case clearly held that a clause authorising an employer to terminate the service of a permanent employee without giving any reason and by giving notice was unconstitutional being void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, as being opposed to public policy, and was also ultra virus Article 14 of the Constitution as it was arbitrary and gave unfettered and unbounded power to the employer, and was also in violation of Article 39(a) and 41 of the Constitution.
To my mind, these observations would apply equally to a contract of employment as also to a situation where the vires of a rule have been challenged.
I, therefore, find no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same.