VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 3171991 (Annexure P4) whereby his representation to absorb- adjust him against the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer with effect from the date of his absorption in the respondent-department has been rejected.
He has also prayed that on quashing of order, Annexure Rule 4, he be given all consequential benefits in accordance with policy instructions, Annexure P1.
2.
In brief, the facts are that initially the petitioner was appointed as Head Clerk in the Panchayat Samiti Department on 531966 in the pay scale of Rs. 150-300 and was confirmed as such on 631968.
He worked on the said post upto 851969.
On the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission, the said pay scale was revised to Rs. 225-500 w.e.f.
121969.
In the year 1969, the State of Haryana took a policy decision to abolish the posts of Head Clerks and Steno-typists in the Panchayat Samiti Department and to absorb the incumbents of these posts in other government departments.
In pursuance of the policy decision, vide order dated 251969 the petitioner was adjusted against the post of Sub Inspector in the Food and Supplies Department, Haryana in the pay scale of Rs. 60-120.
Petitioner was not satisfied with this adjustment and on his representation he was absorbed against the post of Inspector, Food and Supplies in the pay scale of Rs. 140-300.
It is the case of the petitioner that his absorption as Inspector Food and Supplies was not in accordance with the policy inasmuch as either the petitioner was entitled to be absorbed against a post having pay scale of Rs. 225-500 or he was entitled to be placed in the said pay scale even while working as Inspector Food and Supplies.
In the department of Food and Supplies, the highest post was that of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer which at the relevant time was carrying the pay scale of Rs. 200-400.
It has further been averred by the petitioner that though he was not absorbed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer despite the fact that he was confirmed Head Clerk in the Panchayat Samiti Department, yet one Kanwar Bhan Rapria who was junior to the petitioner, was absorbed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the respondent-department.
It has further been averred that when the petitioner came to know that his junior has been absorbed against a higher post in preference to his claim, he made representations to the respondents, Several times his case was referred to the Government as well as other authorities, but no action was taken.
Petitioner per force approached this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 6533 or 1991 which was disposed of on 151991 by this Court with a direction to the respondents to decide the pending representations of the petitioner.
Pursuant to the direction of this Court, respondent No. 2 vide his order dated 3171991 rejected the claim of the petitioner for absorption as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
It finds mention in the order that the matter to convert the post of Inspector, Food and Supplies held by the petitioner in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs. 225-500 with its subsequent revision as per instructions has been referred to the Finance Department for sanction.
The grievance of the petitioner is that though the matter was required to be referred to the Finance Department, but till date no such steps have been taken by the respondents.
It has thus been prayed that despite the fact that instruction, P-1 specifically provide that surplus Head Clerks/Steno-typist of Panchayat Samiti Department will be absorbed against the post of equal pay scale or thet will be allowed to carry on the said pay scale on the adjusted post, neither the petitioner was absorbed against the post denying pay scale of Rs. 225-500 nor he was allowed to carry the said pay scale on the adjusted post.
3.
In answer to the claim of the petitioner, the respondents have placed reliance on letter dated 1421969 (Annexure R-1) whereby only a decision was taken to abolish the posts of Head Clerks and Steno-typist working in Block Development Offices and to absorb them in other government departments according to their requirements.
It has been averred that there was no mention of Chief Secretary's letter dated 671968 in letter dated 1421969.
It has also been submitted that as per decision of the Government, petitioner was to be absorbed in other government department and not on a post having pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
They have also denied that there was any decision to absorb the petitioner in the respondent-department on the post of equivalent grade.
In regard to the appointment to the post of Inspector Food and Supplies, the respondents have submitted that petitioner was not possessing the prescribed academic qualification of BA which was necessary for the post of Inspector Food and Supplies but still he was appointed as Inspector Food and Supplies with effect from 951969 by giving relaxation in qualification.
As regards the allegation of the petitioner that one Kanwar Bhan Rapria, a junior to the petitioner, was absorbed as Assistant Food and Supplied Officer in the departments, the respondents have stated that he was appointed on provisional basis but later he was reverted back to his parent department.
4.
The only question to be decided in this petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to be absorbed against the post of equal pay scale or is entitled to carry on the pay scale of Rs. 225-500 which he was drawing while working as Head Clerk on the adjusted post of Inspector Food and Supplies.
5.
Instructions dated 671968, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-1, on the subject of absorption provides as under :-  "(a) Surplus staff is intended as far possible to be absorbed in equivalent grades.
However where the grades are not equivalent, the employees will be permitted to carry their own grades of pay and if it is considered necessary to create a post in that grade by keeping the corresponding post in other grade in abeyance.
For example if an Assistant in the grade of Rs. 150-10-300 in one Department has to be transferred to another Department where there is vacancy of Assistant the grade of Rs. 116-250, he will be allowed his own grade and post be created in his equivalent grade by keeping the one post of Assistant in the grade of Rs. 116-250 in abeyance.
(b) The employees thus transferred will be permitted to carry their own status with them in the new Department.
For example, if an employee is permanent, in his parent Department and has to be transferred where the vacancies are only against temporary posts the employees would remain permanent, though working against the temporary posts.
To enable such employees to get their pensionary benefit etc. Finance Department concurrence may be obtained if necessary.
(c) The transfer would be purely temporary and it is not necessary to fix the seniority of the persons thus transferred in the new Department.
They would retain the seniority in their parent Department to which they would revert as and when vacancies occurred to absorb them irrespective of the fact whether they are permanent or temporary.
2.
These adjustments may please be implemented immediately.
The orders regarding temporary transfers of the employees involved to be issued by the concerned Department as early as possible."
On abolition of the posts, right of the State to absorb or not to absorb any employee cannot be questioned in Court, but once the Government takes a decision to absorb the staff rendered surplus in equivalent grades or permits them to carry their own grades of pay to the adjusted posts, then the Government, on its own sweet will, could not depart from it without rational justification or valid reason.
Any departure made without rational justification would amount to clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
A reading of paragraphs (a) and (b) of the aforesaid instructions makes it abundantly clear that decision of the Government was to absorb the employees in equivalent grades and where it was not possible, the employees were to be allowed to carry their own grades of pay on the adjusted post.
Letter dated 1421969 (Annexure R-1), reliance upon which has been placed by the respondents, has not superseded instructions dated 671968 (Annexure P-1).
Annexure R-1 is only a decision whereby on abolition of posts of Head Clerks/Steno-typists, the Government decided to absorb the incumbents of these posts in other government departments.
For the manner in which they were to be adjusted, a reference will have to be made to Annexure P-1.
It may also be mentioned at this stage that the respondents in their written statement have nowhere stated that instructions dated 671968 (Annexure P-1) have been superseded; rather decision dated 31171991 vide which representation of the petitioner was rejected, states that the matter with regard to protection of pay scales/pay as Head Clerk drawn by the petitioner in his own parent department, i.e. as Inspector in Food and Supplies Department is being referred to the Finance Department for sanction to convert the post of Inspector Food and Supplies held by the petitioner in the pay scale in which he was to be placed as per the instructions.
No explanation worth the name is forthcoming as to why the matter has not been decided by the Finance Department so far.
Letter dates 25/2771991 (Annexure P-5) reveals that though the Director, Food and Supplies, Haryana had asked the District Food and Supplies Controller, Bhiwani, to inform regarding the financial burden upon the Government in giving benefit of difference between the pay scale of Rs. 225-500 which the petitioner was given and of Rs. 140-300 which the Inspector got and also the effect of further revision of pay scales upto date, but it appears that no such details were furnished by the department.
Respondents have also failed to explain as to why sanction from the Finance Department has not been obtained and if sought, why it has been withheld by the Finance Department.
Thus, the action of the State in denying benefit to the petitioner for which he was entitled to under the instructions, P-1, is wholly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
However, there is merit in the contention of counsel for the respondents that the petitioner has been sleeping over the matter since long and it is only in 1991 that he made representation on the basis of instructions dated 671968 and therefore, is not entitled to arrears more than 38 months previous to the date of filing of the petition.
In the wit petition, it has not been disclosed as to when for the first time the representation was made; rather no such representation has been placed on record.
In this view of the matter, I am one with the learned counsel for the State that the petitioner is not entitled to arrears beyond 38 months previous to the date of filing of writ petition.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to accord sanction to convert the post of Inspector, Food and Supplies, held by the petitioner in the pay scale in which he was to be placed as per instructions dated 671968, and the benefit of subsequent revision of pay shall also be given to the petitioner.
Petitioner shall be entitled only to arrears of 38 months previous to the filing of the writ petition.
Since the petitioner has retired, the pension shall be re- fixed on the basis of re-fixation of his pay.
Let the entire exercise be done within six months from the date of communication of this order.