GS Singhvi, J - Although this writ petition has been filed for quashing the decision taken by the Government of Haryana to revise the seniority of the petitioner in the Haryana Veterinary Service Class-II and his threatened reversion from the post of Milk Commissioner, Haryana, to that of Project Director and for grant of salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2150-2500/-, during the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner confined his arguments to the prayer of the petitioner for grant of salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2150-2500/-.
2.
The petitioner served the Indian Army as a Commissioned Officer between 1.7.1954 to 19.12.1969.
He was appointed as Livestock Officer in Haryana Veterinary Class-II (Senior Scale) on 2071972 on the recommendation of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The petitioner was assigned seniority by grant of benefit of the military service rendered by him.
His seniority in the Haryana Veterinary Class-II was fixed w.e.f.
1.2.1967 and in the Haryana Veterinary Class-I w.e.f.
15.1.1974.
After about a decade, he was served with a show cause notice as to why the military service benefit may not be withdrawn.
Against this proposed action, the petitioner instituted C.W.P.
No. 3104 of 1983 which was allowed by a Division Bench on 2551984 and the notice issued to the petitioner as well as the order passed by the Government were quashed.
The Special Leave Petition filed by the State of Haryana against the judgment of the Division Bench was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 2021985.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed as Milk Commissioner, Haryana vide order dated 13111985 (Annexure P4).
However, in the said order it was stated that he would continue to draw salary in his own pay scale.
3.
The petitioner has pleaded that once the Government has appointed him as Milk Commissioner, Haryana and he started discharging the duties of the post of the Milk Commissioner, he has acquired a legal right to be paid salary of the post of Milk Commissioner and denial of salary to him in the grade of Rs. 2150-2500/- is arbitrary and unconstitutional.
The petitioner says that the Government's action of not giving him salary in the pay scale of the Milk Commissioner amounts to violation of fundamental rights of the petitioner enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioner was being assigned seniority in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court whereby an earlier decision of the Apex Court had been reviewed.
The respondents averred that the petitioner was not being reverted from the post of Milk Commissioner and his apprehension is unfounded.
It has also been pleaded by the respondents that the petitioner had accepted his appointment as Milk Commissioner in his own pay scale and, therefore, he cannot claim benefit of salary in the higher pay scale.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana.
6.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner was appointed as Milk Commissioner, Haryana vide order Annexure P4 and with effect from the date of assumption of charge, the petitioner started discharging duties of the post of Milk Commissioner.
This being the factual position, the petitioner had, in my opinion, become entitled to be paid salary in the pay scale of the post of the Milk Commissioner and the Government was not legally justified in denying the salary to the petitioner in the pay scale prescribed for the post of Milk Commissioner.
When the petitioner was actually discharging the duties of the post of Milk Commissioner he has acquired a legal as well as a constitutional right to get salary of the post of Milk Commissioner.
This view of mine finds support from the decision of the Supreme Court in Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana, 1983(2) SLR 734.
Learned Deputy Advocate General tried to distinguish the decision of the Supreme Court by saying that in that case the order of promotion had been on acting basis but no such order had been passed in the instant case.
In my opinion, the distinction sought to be drawn by the learned counsel is imaginary rather than being real.
A look at Annexure 24 shows that the petitioner had been appointed as Milk Commissioner, Haryana independently.
He was not given charge of the post of Milk Commissioner in addition to his post of Project Director.
Thus, it is clear that he was appointed full-fledged Milk Commissioner.
Therefore, there is no legal justification to deny the salary to the petitioner in the pay scale of Rs. 2150-2500/-.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The condition incorporated in the order Annexure P1 that the petitioner would get salary in his own pay scale and will not be entitled to any extra remuneration is quashed and respondent No. 1 is directed to pay to the petitioner salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2150-2500/- with effect from the date of assumption of charge of the post of Milk Commissioner.
Respondent No. 1 is further directed to fix the pay of the petitioner and give him the benefit of arrears within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
Pension and other retiral benefits payable to the petitioner shall also be revised on the basis of fixation of his pay in the scale of Rs. 2150-2500/-.
The arrears of retiral benefits payable to the petitioner as a result of revision shall be paid to him within next four months.