Ashok Bhan and NK Sodhi, JJ.
- Petitioners are working with the respondent- University as Daily Wagers, for the period varying from 6 to 11 years.
Present petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners and to grant them the pay scales and other allowances, which are being given to the regularly appointed employees of equal status, on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
2.
Notice of motion was issued, in response to which written statement has been filed.
3.
The stand taken by the respondent-University in its written statement is that the petitioners were appointed as Daily Wagers on order to meet the requirements and exigency of work as and when required by the University; that the University is in acute financial strain and, therefore, the posts cannot possible be regularised for want of approval by the Finance Committee/Punjab Government.
Regarding equal pay for equal work, the stand taken by the University is that the principle of equal pay for equal work would not apply in the present case as the petitioners were appointed as daily wagers and they are being paid at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner of the area concerned; that equal pay cannot be given to the petitioners until and unless the appointments are made on regular basis by the University.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) RSJ 235, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "So far as the work-charged employees and casual labour are concerned, the effort must be to regularise them as far as possible and as early as possible subject to their fulfilling the qualifications, if any, prescribed for the post and subject also to availability of work.
If a casual labourer is continued for a fairly long spell say two or three years presumption may arise that there is regular need for his services.
In such a situation, it becomes obligatory for the concerned authority to examine the feasibility of his regularisation.
While doing so, the authorities ought to adopt a positive approach coupled with an empathy for the person.
As has been repeatedly stressed by this Court, security of tenure is necessary for an employee to give his best to the job.
In this behalf, we do commend the order of the Government of Haryana (contained in its letter dated 641990 referred to hereinbefore) both in relation to work-charged as well as casual labour."
In the present case, petitioners are working on daily wages with the respondent-University for the last many years varying from 6 to 11 years.
Prima facie, it seems that there is a regular need for their services in the University.
Respondent-University is, therefore, directed to consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana's case (supra), relevant portion of which has been extracted in the preceding paragraph.
5.
So far as equal pay for equal work is concerned, the point in issue is squarely covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP 7784 of 1995 decided on 2381995.
In this writ petition, after exhaustively dealing with the case law on the subject, it was ordered by their Lordships that the nature of duties of the daily wagers being the same as that of the regularly appointed persons of the equal rank, the daily wage workers would also be entitled to the same pay as is being given to the regular employees.
6.
Accordingly, we accept this plea of the petitioners and direct the respondent-University to grant to the petitioners the same pay as is being given to the regular employees of the same rank, from the date of filing of this writ petition.
In this case, we are restricting the relief of regular pay from the date of filing of the writ petition, keeping in view the financial position of the employer-University and the fact that the writ petition was filed at a belated stage.
This writ petition stands allowed in the above terms.
No costs.