GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash the departmental proceedings initiated against the petitioner vide memo Annexure P2.
2.
The petitioner was working as Warder/Constable in the Sub Jail, Kaithal, District Kurukshetra in the year 1983-84.
On the basis of a complaint lodged against the petitioner, a criminal case under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him.
The petitioner was arrested on 1071984 and was released on bail on 1271984.
The petitioner was suspended by the Superintendent headquarters, Jails, Ambala and was transferred to Central Jail, Ambala.
At the same time, an enquiry was initiated against the petitioner under Rules 10 and 11 of the Punjab Jails Department Executive Staff (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1943 which are applicable to the State of Haryana.
The petitioner was charged with the allegation that on the night intervening 8/9.7.1984, the domestic servant of Shri Sewa Ram, Assistant Superintendent, namely, Krishan, was sleeping in the warder line where the petitioner was also sleeping.
Krishan was made to sleep in the warder line because some guests had arrived at the house of Sewa Ram.
Another warder of the jail, Shri Satya Van was also to sleep in the warder line and when he (Satya Van) switched on the lights at about 1130 pm he found Bhim Sain and Krishan lying on one cot and on being asked, Krishan told that warder Bhim Sain had done a wrong act with him.
Thereafter, father of the servant lodged the First Information Report leading to the arrest and suspension of the petitioner.
3.
On receipt of the charge-sheet, the petitioner submitted an application dated 26.10.1984 and prayed that he may be given 15 days time to file reply and to stay the proceedings of the enquiry.
According to the petitioner, the enquiry proceedings could not have continued while criminal case was still pending before a competent Court.
4.
The petitioner's contention is that during the pendency of the criminal case, he could not be subjected to departmental enquiry in respect of the same allegation.
5.
In reply, the respondents have pleaded that after receipt of the charge- sheet the petitioner made a request for extension of time to file reply, which was granted to him.
He again prayed for extension of time.
That too was granted to him.
However, he did not make any request for stay of the departmental proceedings.
The respondents have further averred that the departmental proceedings can be continued simultaneously with the criminal case and there is no legal or constitutional prohibition against holding of the departmental enquiry.
6.
From the undisputed facts which have come on record, it is clearly borne out that the criminal case has been registered against the petitioner for commission of alleged offence under section 377 of the India Penal Code.
As per his own showing, no charge has been framed against the petitioner by the competent Court.
Thereafter, it is impossible for this Court to come to a conclusion that the petitioner is being proceeded departmentally in respect of the same charge which constitute the basis for his prosecution.
A look at the charge-sheet shows that the petitioner has not only been charged with the allegation of having slept with the servant but also with the allegation that he committed a wrong act with this servant.
This being the position, I do not find any reason or justification to hold that the petitioner is being prejudiced due to the simultaneous conduct of the departmental enquiry and the criminal prosecution.
7.
It is well settled that the degree of proof required for conviction in a Court of law is altogether different than the degree of proof required for holding a person guilty in a departmental enquiry.
Therefore, I do not find any merit in the plea of the petitioner that the proceedings of the departmental enquiry should be stayed till the finalisation of the criminal case.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.