RS Mongia, J - The petitioner, Shri Ashok Sharma Nabhewala, who is an Advocate practicing in this Court, filed the present writ petition challenging the appointment of respondent No. 4, Dr. ML Jalota, as Assistant Medical Officer, Homoeopathy, in the Health Department of Union Territory Chandigarh on June 7, 1974, and his promotion as Medical Officer, Homoeopathy on September 12, 1979, and also the action of respondents No. 1 to 3 in giving him the additional charge of the post of Assistant Director, Union Territory Homoeopathy and Indian System of Medicines.
The writ petition has been filed in the form of public interest litigation that respondent No. 4 is the usurper of the public office as he does not have the requisite statutory qualifications and, therefore, a writ in the nature of quo-warranto is sought for against respondent No. 4 directing him to vacate the public office which he is holding.
The statutory qualifications for the post of Assistant Medical Officer, Homoeopathy, are prescribed in the statutory rules known as Chandigarh Civil Medical Service (Homoeopathy) (Class III) Recruitment Rules, 1978;  "Essential : (i) B.M.S.
(Homoeo) or DHM of DHS of DMS (Homoeo) or HMBS or MHMS or equivalent Diploma (4 years course) or GHMS Degree (Agra) or equivalent.
(ii) At least two years experience of Homoeopathic practice preferably in a recognised Hospital or Dispensaries."
The qualifications for being appointed by promotion to the post of Medical Officer are contained in Civil Medical Services (Homoeopathic) Class II Rules, 1980 which are as under :-  "(i) A degree or diploma of not less than 4 years' duration included in the second Schedule to the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 and enrolment on a State Register or the Central Register of Homoeopathy.
Experience : Assistant Medical Officer (Homoeo) with 3 years' regular service in the grade."
The submission by the petitioner who appeared in person, is that respondent No. 4's appointment as Assistant Medical Officer in the year 1974 was against the statutory Rules of Class III inasmuch as the diploma which is possessed by respondent No. 4 in Medicine and Surgery i.e. D.M.S.
(Homoeo) from Bihar State Board of Homoeopathic Medicine was of three years' duration and not of four years' duration which was the requirement of the class III Rules quoted above.
According to the petitioner, the very appointment of respondent No. 4 as Assistant Medical Officer was against the statutory Rules and void ab initio.
His promotion as Medical Officer in the year 1979 was also against class II Rules of 1980 and further the giving of the additional charge of the post of Assistant Director to respondent No. 4 was also wrong and illegal.
2.
Respondent No. 4 in his reply his stated that writ petition at the behest of the petitioner is not maintainable as it cannot be said to be a public interest litigation.
In fact the writ petition has been filed at the instance of some disgruntled doctors.
The other objection raised is that the challenge to the appointment of respondent No. 4 is highly belated inasmuch as he was appointed as Assistant Medical Officer in the year 1974 and promoted to the rank of Medical Officer in the year 1979.
On merits it was submitted that the question of the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Assistant Medical Officer in the year 1974 being against the qualification laid down in the statutory Rules does not arise as the class III Rules are of the year 1978.
Further, the qualifications possessed by respondent No. 4 for appointment as Assistant Medical Officer are duly recognised under the Homoeopathic Central Council Act, 1978.
It has further been submitted that after considering the qualification or experience of respondent No. 4, he was duly promoted to the rank of Medical Officer in the year 1979 and he had also obtained the DHMS from the University of Bihar in the examination held in April, 1981.
3.
For the view we are taking in the matter, it is not necessary to go into the point whether the writ petition at the behest of the petitioner in the form of public interest litigation is maintainable or not.
4.
Assuming for the sake of argument that there is some defect in the appointment of a person, the question that arises is can a writ petition for issuance of the writ in the nature of quo warranto be filed any time after the appointment of a person who is allegedly not qualified ?
In this case respondent No. 4 was appointed as Assistant Medical Officer in the year 1974, whereafter he was promoted to the post of Medical Officer in the year 1979.
Would it be in the public interest or in the interest of justice of entertain a writ petition for quo warranto after 21 years after respondent No. 4 was appointed as an Assistant Medical Officer and 16 years after he was promoted as Medical Officer ?
We are of the view that even for a writ of quo warranto, the Court should be approached within a reasonable time and certainly in the present case, the petitioner has not approached this court within a reasonable time.
In the present case, not only respondent No. 4 got promotion as Medical Officer in the year 1979 after the authorities considered him eligible, he has also put in 16 years of long service in that rank and has been even given the additional charge of the post of Assistant Director.
5.
On the merits of the case, it may be observed that the statutory Rules which lay down the qualifications for the post of Assistant Medical Officer are of the year 1978 and were published in the Chandigarh Administration Gazette dated January 1, 1979.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed as Assistant Medical Officer in the year 1974.
Therefore, the question of seeing the eligibility of respondent No. 4 in the year 1974 for appointment to the post of Assistant Medical Officer under 1978 Rules would not arise.
There has to be violation of statutory Rules in appointment before a writ of quo warranto can be issued.
In this connection the judgment of the apex Court in University of Mysore v. CD Govinda Rao, AIR 1965 SC 491, and judgment of this Court in Man Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab, 1984(1) S.L.R.
790, were cited by learned counsel for respondent No. 4 which do support the abovesaid proposition.
6.
Now coming to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Medical Officer, it may be observed that he was promoted as such in the year 1979 after the official respondents had considered him eligible for appointment to the said post.
The Class II Rules governing the appointment, which were framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India are of the year 1980 and were published in the official gazette dated May 1, 1980.
The Rules are called the Chandigarh Civil Medical Service (Homoeopathic) (Class II) Recruitment Rules 1980.
Rule 4 of the said Rules provides the method of recruitment, age limit, qualification and other matter connected therewith and it states that it will be as specified in columns 5 to 13 of the Schedule appended to the Rules.
The qualifications have already been quoted earlier.
As observed above, the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Medical Officer was made in 1979 and the question of eligibility being seen at that stage as per the 1980 Rules did not arise.
Therefore, the question of any writ of quo warranto that respondent No. 4 did not hold the requisite qualifications as per the 1980 Rules does not arise.
Petitioner seems to have been misled because in the Schedule, which is attached to the Rules in the heading it has been mentioned "Recruitment Rules for the Civil Medical Services (Homoeopathic) Class II, 1978."
Class II Rules of the year 1978 have been brought to our notice, which may have been repealed by 1980 Class II Rules.
It seems that the exercise for laying down the service condition etc. for the Class II posts may have started in 1978.
However, these were not finalised in that year and took the final shape only in the year 1980 when the Rules called Chandigarh Civil Medical Service (Homoeopathic) (Class II) Recruitment Rules, 1980 came into being by publication in the Government Gazette dated May 1, 1980.
In any case, it may be observed that petitioner's appointment as Medical Officer was never challenged within a reasonable time after he was appointed in the year 1979.
Moreover, respondent No. 4 acquired the qualification of DHMS (4 years course) in the year 1981.
It will be too late in the day now to challenge the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Medical Officer which took place way back in the year 1979.
We hold respondent No. 4 to be duly qualified to hold the post of Medical Officer and continuing as such.
There is also no infirmity in just giving him the additional charge of the post of Assistant Director, Union Territory Homoeopathy and Indian System of Medicines.
Consequently we do not find any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.