VK Bali, J (Oral) - By this order I propose to decide a bunch of 25 writ petitions, bearing Nos. 139 to 163 of 1993, as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
2.
The challenge herein is to the award rendered by Shri RM Gupta, Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT, Chandigarh, dated September 8, 1992, vide which orders of termination passed separately against all the workmen were set aside.
The workmen were held entitled to continuity of service and all attendant benefits.
They were, however, held entitled to only 50% back- wages.
This award has been challenged by the Block Development & Panchayat Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh - Petitioner herein.
3.
After reading the impugned award, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that the workmen were not entitled to reinstatement as none of them had put in more than 240 days service immediately preceding the order of termination.
With a view to prop up the contention noted above, learned counsel relies upon the statement of Peru Mal, who was examined as A.W.1 for himself as also on behalf of other workmen.
His statement has been reproduced at page 3 of the writ petition.
I have gone through the statement of the said witness and after going through the same, I am of the considered view that the workmen clearly made out before the Labour Court that they had put in more than 240 days service before their services were retrenched.
It shall be seen from the statement of AW1 Peru Mal that he came to be appointed way back in the year 1981 and his services were terminated on May 1, 1987.
It is, thus, clear from over-all reading of the statement of AW1 that he had worked continuously for a period of about six years ie from June, 1981 to April 30, 1987.
His keeping quiet over the exact period in employment immediately preceding the order of termination is wholly meaningless particularly when there was no cross-examination to pin point as to whether he had worked or not for 240 days immediately preceding the order of termination.
I have also gone through the statement of the sole witness examined on behalf of the Management, i.e. Shri Harcharan Singh, Executive Officer, MW1.
Not a word is stated in his statement as to what was the duration of service period of Peru Mal or any other workman.
It was, thus, not the case of petitioner- management as well that the workmen had not been employed with the Management for 240 days in a calendar year preceding the order of termination.
The contention of learned counsel is, thus, repelled.
4.
It is then argued by Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner that it is proved from the records of the case that all the workmen were daily wagers and were given employment from time to time as and when the work was available.
Reference is again made to the statement of AW1 Peru Mal, who, in cross-examination stated that certain labourers were shunted out when there was no work and were recalled whenever there was work.
It is, thus, proved from the records of the case that all the workmen were daily wagers and they were not employed for a continuous period.
It is, however, different matter that they might have been employed for 240 days in a calendar year preceding the order of termination.
Insofar as AW1 Peru Mal is concerned, he has further admitted in his cross-examination that he had worked after 1987 also as and when he was called for work.
In these circumstances, the Court is of the considered view that payment of 50% back wages was on the higher side.
Mrs. Sabina, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the workmen, under the stress of the argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioner, agrees that it would be just and fair if the back-wages payable to the workmen are reduced to 25 per cent.
This, in view of this Court also, would be just compensation insofar as back-wages are concerned.
5.
For the reasons stated above, all these writ petitions are dismissed with the modification in the award that the workman shall be entitled to backwages to the extent of 25 per cent only.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.