GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issue of a direction to the respondents to release the retirement dues admissible to the petitioner and also for payment of interest.
2.
The petitioner entered the service on 161955 as Insect Collector in the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
He retired with effect from 3181991 while holding the post of Health Inspector-cum-Multipurpose Supervisor (Male).
He has moved this Court due to the fact that the respondents have not paid him pension and his gratuity, GPF and other retiral benefits have been withheld and this has given rise to the present petition.
3.
From the record of the case it transpires that about a year and six months before his retirement the petitioner was transferred from Chahal Kalan Subsidiary Health Centre to Rural Hospital, Rangar Nangal.
He filed Civil Suit No. 84 of 1990 in the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Batala and also prayed for temporary injunction.
His application for injunction was accepted by the trial Court on 2.3.1994 and an order of status quo was passed.
However, after few months the petitioner was not allowed to mark his attendance and was not given duty at Chahal Kalan.
During the pendency of the suit the Civil Court passed an order directing payment of salary to the petitioner for the period between February 1990 to May 1991.
It is given out by the learned counsel for the State that the said suit has since been withdrawn by the petitioner.
While the suit was still pending in the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Batala, the Government initiated an inquiry against the petitioner vide charge-sheet dated 16.2.1990 and pendency of the departmental inquiry has been made their sole touch-stone for withholding the payment of GPF, gratuity, pension etc.
The petitioner says that the withholding of pension, gratuity and amount of provident fund is without the authority of law and the action of the Government amounts to clear violation of the legal as well as constitutional rights of the petitioner.
4.
In the written statement the respondents have pleaded that a sum of Rs. 47,876/- has been paid to the petitioner on account of salary for the period between February 1990 to May 1991 on the furnishing of indemnity bond for Rs. 1,00,000/- and this payment to the petitioner is subject to the result of disciplinary proceedings pending against the petitioner.
The respondents have alleged that the petitioner had wilfully absented from duty and, therefore, he has no right to be paid pension, gratuity etc.  5.
During the pendency of the writ petition the petitioner filed Civil Misc. No. 5430 of 1995 for issue of a direction to the respondents to pay pension and other retiral benefits.
To this Civil Misc. a reply has been filed by Mrs. Charu Tuli wherein it has been stated that the inquiry pending against the petitioner could not be finalised due to the non-cooperative attitude of the petitioner.
It has also been pleaded that till the conclusion of inquiry, no order for payment of pension, gratuity etc. should be issued in favour of the petitioner.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
7.
There is no denying that the petitioner stands retired from the service with effect from 3151991 and also that he has not been paid pension, gratuity, GPF etc. only on account of the pendency of the inquiry proceedings.
There may be some legal justification for withholding of the payment of gratuity during the pendency of the departmental inquiry, but the non-payment of provisional pension during this period cannot in any manner be justified.
Rather Rule 2.2(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II, Part I, envisages payment of provisional pension to the employees who are facing departmental inquiries or judicial proceedings.
As per that rule the employer is entitled to withhold the payment of gratuity during the pendency of a department of gratuity during the pendency of a departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings but the employer is under an obligation to make payment of provisional pension.
Therefore, there is no legal justification for non- payment of provisional pension to the petitioner.
8.
The delay in holiding of the inquiry has been attributed to the petitioner but it has not been shown by the respondent as to what has prevented them from concluding the proceedings of inquiry despite the absence of the petitioner.
If the petitioner abstains from the inquiry proceedings without any reasonable cause, the competent authority is free to proceed against him in accordance with law.
In my opinion, the expeditious decision of the inquiry pending against the petitioner is in the interest of the petitioner as well as the respondents.
Therefore, it is just and proper to direct the respondents to finalise the inquiry proceedings and take appropriate decision in the matter within a period of six months.
9.
Consequently, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The respondents are directed to release provisional pension to the petitioner.
Payment of provisional pension shall be made on or before 15th October, 1995 in so far as the month of September 1995 is concerned.
For all other succeeding months, it shall be made latest by the 7th of the next month.
The inquiry proceedings pending against the petitioner shall be concluded within six months and thereafter the Government should take final decision and pass necessary order for payment of full pension, gratuity, General Provident Fund and other retiral dues admissible to the petitioner.
This would necessarily include petitioner's prayer for computation of pension.
10.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.