VK Jhanji, J - This second appeal is by the defendants against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge whereby the judgment and decree of the trial Court has been set aside and on acceptance of appeal, suit of the plaintiff for declaration to the effect that order dated 821980 passed by the defendants is illegal, malafide and against the principles of natural justice, has been decreed.
2.
In brief, the facts are that plaintiff joined service as Stockman on 5111963 with National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal (in short, NDRI).
On 2171972, he was promoted as T-II Lab.
Technician.
On 1881979, Director NDRI invited applications from the candidates borne on the regular establishment of NDRI and its regional stations at Bangalore, Bombay and Kalyani for the post of T-IV (Field/Farm Tech) STA (Veterinary).
Plaintiff who was qualified applied for the post and passed the written test.
Resultantly, he was selected and given appointment letter dated 621980 in which he was asked to join the new assignment on 811980 in the forenoon.
Plaintiff joined the duties on 821980 (F.N.)
but immediately thereafter, he was served with memo of the same dated i.e. 821980 issued by Administrative Officer (Admn) NDRI, Karnal by which his offer of appointment was withdrawn with retrospective effect.
In the suit, plaintiff has challenged this order being illegal, mala fide and against the principles of natural justice and also on the ground that the impugned order has been passed with mala fide intention by the Director, NDRI, Karnal who wanted to accommodate the relative of OS Tomar, Incharge, Cattle-yard, NDRI, Karnal.
The order is being impugned on the ground that no reason whatsoever was assigned to withdraw order of appointment, besides not affording an opportunity of hearing before the offer of appointment made to the plaintiff was withdrawn.
Defendants in their written statement have admitted that plaintiff had applied for the post of Technician T-4 (Field/Farm Tech) STA (Vety.)
and he appeared before the Selection Committee on 911980, and four candidates were selected in which plaintiff was placed at No. 4, but for denying the claim of the plaintiff, defendants have stated that the appointing Authority had only approved first three names on the panel and the offer of appointment was erroneously issued to the plaintiff which subsequently was withdrawn.
Defendants have also stated that the offer of appointment was an administrative act and could be rectified even after its issuance and when the truth came to knowledge, the offer was withdrawn.
They have further stated that the appointing Authority on the advice of defendant No. 1 offered a post of Technician T-II/3 (Field/Farm Tech.)
to the plaintiff, i.e. in the next lower scale on 12121980 which was accepted and as such he is estopped from challenging the order by which offer of appointment was withdrawn.
The objection that suit is barred by time has also been taken.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 821980 passed by the Administrative Officer, NDRI, Karnal is liable to be set aside for the reasons given in the plaint ?
2.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit by his own act and conduct, as alleged ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
The trial Court dismissed the suit, but on appeal the first appellate Court came to the finding that withdrawing of offer of appointment was not merely an administrative act but was done with an oblique motive and was not a bona fide order.
It was also held that the plaintiff is not estopped from challenging order dated 821980 simply because he had accepted the post of Technician T- II/3 (Field/Farm Tech.).
Suit was also found to be filed within time.
3.
In this second appeal, learned counsel for the defendants has contended that the plaintiff has no indefeasible right to appointment even if the vacancy existed.
According to the counsel, defendants were under no obligation to fill the post simply because panel of selected candidates had been prepared.
He also contended that the plaintiff did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for appointment to the post by direct recruitment.
4.
In answer to those submissions, learned counsel for the plaintiff contended that decision to withdraw order of appointment after the plaintiff had joined, was for oblique motive.
He, thus, contended that the order under appeal is not to be interfered with.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that the appeal is devoid of any merit.
The contention of counsel for the defendants that the plaintiff did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for the post is factually incorrect.
The essential qualifications fixed for the post of Technician-IV (Field/Farm Tech.)
are :  (i) Three years' diploma/Bachelor's degree in relevant field, (OR) National Trade Certificate of IT National Apprenticeship Certificate or equivalent qualifications with seven years' experience in the relevant field (OR) Matriculate with ten years' experience in the relevant field (OR) one year's training course in Forestry with ten years' experience in the relevant field (OR) Intermediate in Science/Intermediate in Agriculture.
(ii) 3 years' experience in the relevant field for diploma- holders."
Admittedly, when selected and appointed, the plaintiff was matriculate with more than 10 years' experience in the relevant field.
Rather on the relevant date he had more than 17 years' experience.
As regards the contention that decision to withdraw the post was taken bona fide and was for valid reasons, suffice it to say, one N.S.
Sirohi a relative of OS Tomar, Incharge Cattle Yard Division, who on re-advertisement has been appointed on the post against which plaintiff was selected, had also applied along with the plaintiff but had remained unsuccessful.
Ordinarily, if the vacancy is notified for appointment and the candidate is found fit, successful candidate does not acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed and the employer is under no legal obligation to fill up the vacancy, but action of the employer has to be bona fide.
In this case, decision to withdraw appointment has not been found to be bona fide or for valid reasons.
The finding on issue No. 1, thus, calls for no interference.
6.
It was next contended by counsel for the defendants that the suit filed by the plaintiff was time-barred as the same was not filed within one year.
Reference was made to Article 100 of the Limitation Act which provides that limitation to set aside any act or order of the officer of the Government in an official capacity is one year from the date of such act or order, as the case may be.
This Article does not apply where the suit is to set aside the order passed without jurisdiction or which is ultra vires.
The present suit is for declaration that order dated 821980 passed against the plaintiff is illegal, mala fide and against the principle of natural justice and therefore, is ultra vires.
Accordingly, the contention that the is suit barred by time is without any merit.
Consequently, the appeal shall stand dismissed.
No costs.