GS Singhvi, J - The only point which derserves to be adjudicated in this case is - whether the respondents have withheld the death-cum-retirement grauity payable to the petitioner under the authority of law or their action is contrary to the provisions contained in the rules which regulate the payment of post-retirement dues to an employee.
2.
On ataining the age of superannuation, the petitioner retired w.e.f.
30.6.1988 as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
After his retirement, the petitioner made representations to the various departmental authorities for release of his gratuity.
Accountant General, Punjab, issued letter No.
Pen.
(K) II/N-5/80-90/66-61 dated 1051989 authorising the respondent No. 2 to realese a sum of Rs. 3510705 towards death-cum-retirement gratuity payable to the petitioner.
However, the departmental authorities did not realese gratuity in favour of the petitioner on the pretext that 'No Demand Certificate' has not been received.
Letter dated 29.8.1990 (Annexure P-1) shows that no demand reports had been received from all the Heads of Branches at the Headquarter, but still the gratuity was not released to the petitioner.
After retirement of the petitioner, the Director, Food and Supplies passed order dated 44191 and granted the benefit of proficiency step up to the petitioner on completion of eight years.
3.
Petitioner says that withholding of death-cum-retirement gratuity which was payable to him on the date of his retirement amounts to depriving the petitioner of his property and as the action of the respondent is not sanctioned by law, the petitioner is entitled to the amount of gratuity and interest due to unlawful deprivation of the property.
The respondents have justified the withholding of the gratuity on the ground that the departmental proceedings had been initiated against the petitioner vide Memo Nos. JA-16- 85/5292-95 dated 1921986, JA-16-85/24001-02 dated 1291986 and No.JA-16-QC-80-81-TTN-87/25277-85 dated 30101987 (Annexures R-1 to R-3).
Respondents have pleaded that in terms of Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, Part II, the employer was justified in withholding the grauity because the person who is facing departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings is not entitled to grauity till the culmination of such proceedings.
4.
During the course of arguments, Mrs. Tuli sumitted that show-cause notices issued to the petitioner (Annexures R-1 to R-3) should be treated as charge-sheets and in any case they should be treated as act of the Government initiating inquiry against the petitioner and, therefore, the Government was entitled to invoke Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
5.
In order to appreciate the contention of Mrs. Tuli, it would be appropriate to refer to Rule 22(b) and (c) which reads under :-  "22(b) : The Government further reserve to themselves the right of whithholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if, in a departmental or judicial proceeding, the pensioner is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his service, including service rendered upon re-employment after retirement : Provided that -  (i) Such departmental proceedings, if instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall after the final retirement of the officer, be deemed to be a proceeding under this article and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer had continued in service; (2) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service whether before his retirement or during his re- employment :-  (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government; (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution; and (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the officer during his service.
(iv) No such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re- employment shall be instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or an event which took place more than four years before such institution; and The Public Service Commission should be consulted before final orders are passed  Explanation : For the purpose of this rule - (a) a departmental proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which the statement of charges is issued to the officer or pensioner, or if the officer has been placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such date; and  (b) a judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be instituted :-  (i) in the case of a criminal proceeding, on the date on which the complaint or report of the police officer on which the Magistrate take cognizance, is made; and (ii) in the case of a civil proceeding, on the date of presentation of the plaint in the Court.
22(c) : (1) where any departmental or judicial proceeding is instituted under clause (b) of rule 22 or where a departmental proceeding is continued under clause (i) of the proviso thereto against an officer who was retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement or otherwise, he shall be paid during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which, upon conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed, a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of his qualifying service upto the date of retirement or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement upto date immediately preceding to the date on which he was placed under suspension; but no gratuity or death-cum-retirement gratuity shall be paid to him until the conclusion of such proceedings and of final orders thereon.
The gratuity, if allowed to be drawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of the proceedings will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of final orders by the competent authority.
Provided that where Departmental proceedings have been instituted under rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 for imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of rule 5 of the said rules, the payment of gratuity or death-cum- retirement gratuity, as the case may be, shall not be withheld.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-clause (1) shall be adjusted against the final retirement benefits sanctioned to such officer upon conclusion of the aforesaid proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period.
Note : The grant of pension under this rule shall not prejudice the operation of rule 64 ibid when final pension is sanctioned upon conclusion of the proceedings."
A look at the above-quoted Rule shows that the Government is empowered to withhold pension or a part thereof and recover from the pension payable to an employee the pecuniary loss which may have been suffered by the Government due to grave misconduct or negligence committed by the Government servant during the course of employment.
Such an action can be taken on the basis of a departmental inquiry which may have been initiated against the concerned employee before his retirement and which may be pending at the time of his retirement.
The departmental inquiry initiated against an employee does not come to an end on his retirement but by operation of the statute it is deemed to be continuing even after his retirement.
At the same time, the competent authority is empowered to initiated disciplinary inquiry against the employee after retirement provided that such inquiry pertains to an incident of four years prior to the date of initiation of the inquiry and the sanction is given by the competent authority for such initiation.
Similar action is to be taken where judicial proceedings are pending against the Government employee or is pending withinthe purview of proviso to Rule 22(b).
As per Rule 22(c), the Government servant is not entitled to payment of full pension during the pendency of inquiry or judicial proceedings.
The amount of gratuity is also not payable to an employee who is facing departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings.
6.
The phrase 'initiation of departmental inquiry' has not been defined in Rule 22 but it has been judicially interpreted.
A departmental inquiry cannot be treated to have been intiated till the competent authority frames a charge-sheet and issues the same to the concerned employee.
A contemplated inquiry whatever be the stage of contemplation cannot be equated with an inquiry intiated by the issue of charge-sheet.
While interpreting the provisions of All India Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969, their Lordships of the Supreme Court in PR Narayanan v. Union of India, 1972 SLR 219, held that an inquiry cannot be said to have been initiated against a member of All India Service till the charge- sheet/statement of allegation has been issued to him.
That was a case in which suspension of the pettioner was called in question on the ground that the Government had exercised the power of suspension before the initiation of inquiry.
While upholding the contention of the petitioner that suspension could not have been ordered without the initiation of inquiry, the apex Court held that mere contemplated inquiry cannot furnish basis for taking action for suspension of the employee.
7.
In view of the above, it must be held that the notices (Annexures R-1 to R-3) which were issued to the petitioner by the District Food and Supplies Controller cannot be treated as initiation of an inquiry against the petitioner.
It is also important to notice that notices were issued to the petitioner by the District Food and Supplies Controller, Amritsar, i.e. an officer immediately superior to the petitioner.
That officer could not exercise power of the disciplinary authority qua the petitioner who was holding the post of Assistant Food and Supply Officer.
Thus, by no stretch of imagination, notices Annexures R-1 to R-3 can be treated as action taken by the competent authority to initiate inquiry against the petitioner.
In view of the above conclusion, it must be held that the respondents have unlawfully withheld the gratuity payable to the petitioner at the time of his retirement.
This being the position, it must also be held that the action taken by the respondents which is not supported by authority of law is contrary to Article 300-A of the Constitution of India and for such deprivation of the property, the petitioner is entitled to payment of interest as held by the Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release death-cum-retirement gratuity payable to the petitioner.
Before releasing the gratuity to the petitioner, the respondents should revise the amount of gratuity keeping in view the fact that after retirement, the petitioner was given benefit of proficiency step up.
The petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum w.e.f.
171988.
The amount of gratuity and interest shall be paid to the petitioner within three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
In the event of failure to comply with this direction, it would become necessary for the Government to recover the amount of interest from the pay of the officer who may be responsible for the delay in the compliance of the order of the Court.
Appeal allowed.