AP Chowdhri and HS Brar, JJ.
- The petitioner was appointed Accoutants Clerk at Halwasiya Bal Mandir, an educational institution, on Septemebr 9, 1982.
In May, 1992 he was transferred to Halwasiya Vidya Vihar Senior Secondary School respondent No. 2.
On July 7, 1992, the petitioner was served with a charge sheet.
He submitted his reply.
After an enquiry he was dismissed by order dated May 6, 1993.
He served a notice of demand dated May 19, 1993, seeking reference of the industrial dispute to the Labour Court.
By order Annexure P-3 the appropriate Government while declining to make the reference stated that it had been found that the petitioner had been transferred by the Management and he failed to take charge at the new place of posting, which was followed by an order of termination which was in accordance with law.
The petitioner has assailed the order declining reference in this writ petition.
2.
The contention of Mr. Mani Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the function of the appropriate Government under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is an administrative one and neither judicial nor quasi-judicial.
All that the appropriate government is required to see is that an industrial dispute either exists or is apprehended.It has further been contended that it is not open to the appropriate Government to devolve into merits of the case and once it is of the opinion that there does exist an industrial dispute and the claim put forward is not a frivolous one, the matter has to be referred to the Labour Court.
He has relied on the following authorities in support of his above contentions :-  (1)Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1985 SC 915; (2)Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar , AIR 1989 SC 1565; (3)Udaivir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1994(1) SCT 166(P&H) : 1994(1) RSJ 211; and (4) Ram Diya v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) RSJ 278 (D.B.)
3.
The contention of Ms. Vanita Sapra, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 on the other hand, is that all claims for reference have not to be technically forwarded by the appropriate Government and it is open to the approbate Government to see whether a prima facie case has been made out.
Reliance has been placed on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Mehar Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(2) LLJ 250.
She has also relied on the basic authority of the Supreme Court in Bombay Union of Journalists v. State of Bombay, AIR 1964 SC 1617, as well as Prem Kakar v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1976 SC 1474.
4.
We have gone thought the case law cited at the Bar.
The settled law is that the function of the appropriate Government under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is an administrative one and as laid down in the provision itself, it is open to the appropriate Government to satisfy itself whether an industrial dispute exists or is apprehend.
It is equally settled that while the appropriate Government can see whether prima facie case is made out, it cannot go into the merits of the dispute nor, therefore, adjudicate the same.
In Mehar Singh's case relied on by Ms. Sapra learned counsel for respondent No. 2, it was held that the termination of service in question in that case was not even prima facie shown to have been made in violation of any provision of the Act.
In the facts of the present case, on the other hand,the petitioner assailed the enquiry held against him on various grounds.
There is no dispute with the broad principle laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Bombay Union of Journalist (supra), which has been noticed in necessary detail in Mehar Singh's case referred to above.
What has happened in the present case is that the appropriate Government has adjudicated the disputed.
It is not a case where the petitioner had failed to make out even a prima facie case.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow the writ petition, set aside the impugned order declining the reference and directed the appropate Government to reconsider the mater and pass appropate fresh orders according to law within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition is disposed of in these terms.
Petition allowed.