Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled as a Sepoy on August 8, 1940.
He retired from service on July 21, 1955.
He claims that two months' annual leave was due to him at the time of his retirement.
As a result, he should be deemed to have retired on September 20, 1955.
On this basis, the petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the pension with all arrears.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on the ground that he had served only for a period of 14 years and 348 days.
Since he had not completed 15 years of service, he is not eligible for the grant of pensionary benefits.
It has also been pointed out that the watch and ward personnel are not eligible "for regular terms of engagement....".
Consequently, they are not entitled to the benefits admissible to the regular members of the Indian Armed Forces.
It has also been stated that the petition is highly belated as it has been filed after a lapse of over 38 years from the date of discharge from service.
3.
Admittedly, the petitioner had served for 14 years and 348 days.
His averment that he was entitled to the grant of two months' annual leave at the time of his retirement having not been denied, it can be presumed that he had actually served till September 1955.
In this situation, he will be deemed to have completed 15 years of service.
Even otherwise, under the provisions of Regulation 125 of the Pension Regulations and the circular letter dated October 5, 1989, a copy of which is at Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, there is a provision for condonation of deficiency in service upto six months.
The petitioner's claim in accordance with the provisions of the regulation and the circular letter has not been considered.
Consequently, the plea that the petitioner is not eligible for the grant of pension, merely because there was deficiency of 17 days in completing the prescribed period of 15 years cannot be sustained.
In fact, a Division Bench of this Court in Banta Singh v. Union of India and others, 1994(4) SCT 12 (P&H) : 1994(4) RSJ 175 has already negatived a similar objection.
4.
Equally, lacking in merit is the second objection.
The 'Watch and Ward' staff are subject to the Army discipline.
They are paid salary in the same manner as the personnel serving in the infantry and other divisions of the Army.
That being so, there is no basis for treating the 'Watch and Ward' personnel differently from the other members of the Regular Army.
5.
As for the objection of delay, it is undoubtedly correct that the petitioner had not approached this Court soon after the discharge from the Army.
In fact, for more than three decades, the petitioner had done little to claim the relief of pension.
The mere issuance of a legal notice after more than 30 years cannot mean that the petitioner was pursuing his case vigilantly.
However, in spite of this, I am of the view that the petitioner cannot be denied the relief on account of delay.
The petitioner has continuously suffered the lose on account of non-payment of pension.
The Government has retained the money that should have been disbursed to him.
If the Government has not released the pension to the petitioner, it cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong and deny the relief even now to the petitioner.
The petitioner shall, however, not be entitled to any interest on the amount of arrears of pension on account of the delay in approaching this Court.
6.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for grant of pension in the light of the above observations.
Whatever amount is found due, shall be paid to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.