NK Sodhi, J - Civil Writ Petitions 15479 and 16048 of 1994 can be conveniently disposed of by one order as the challenge in these petitions is to the denial of admission to the petitioners to the Diploma Course in Pharmacy for the Session 1994-95 on the ground that they were ineligible.
Common question of law and facts arise in these petition but the facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition 16048 of 1994.
2.
By an advertisement issued in The Daily Tribune dated August 1, 1994, the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh (for short the Board) invited applications from eligible candidates for admission to the two years' Diploma Course in Pharmacy (hereinafter called the course) run by the institutions affiliated to the Board for the session 1994- 95.
The minimum qualifications prescribed for admission as mentioned in the advertisement were as under :  "Minimum qualification for admission to Diploma in Pharmacy Part-I course - A pass in any of the following examinations with Physics, Chemistry and Biology or Mathematics.
(1) Intermediate examination in Science; (2) The first year of the three year degree course in Science; (3) 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science; (4) Pre-degree examination; (5) Another qualification approved by the Pharmacy Council of India as equivalent to any of the above examination.
Provided that there shall be reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes candidates in accordance with the instructions issued by the Central Govt/State Govts/Union Territory Administrations as the case may be from time to time."
3.
It may be mentioned that the aforesaid qualifications for the course in question have been laid down by the Pharmacy Council of India (hereinafter called the Council) in its Education Regulations, 1991.
Admissions to the course were to be made on the basis of relative merit of the candidates of their aggregate marks obtained in Physics, Chemistry, Biology or Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, as the case may be in any of the qualifying examinations.
4.
Petitioners herein who have passed the vocational course certificate from the Central Board of Secondary Education after studying in Government Model Senior Secondary School, Sector 10, Chandigarh applied for admission to the course.
While passing the vocational course, the petitioners studied the following subjects :-  (1) English (2) Hindi (3) Pathology Laboratory Technology (4) Clinical Bio-Chemistry (5) Micro Biology (6) Physics & Health Education, and (7) General Foundation Course.
5.
According to the petitioners the vocational course done by them is equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science which is one of the qualifying examinations prescribed by the respondents as a minimum qualification for admission to the course and, therefore, they were eligible for admission thereto.
Their grievance is that the respondents have not considered their applications for admission erroneously treating them as ineligible.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it is stated that the application forms received in response to the advertisement were scrutinized and the candidates who were found eligible were given admission on the basis of the marks secured by them in the qualifying examination.
It is pleaded that the vocational course that has been done by the petitioners is not equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science.
According to the respondents the petitioners were ineligible for the course.
It is further stated that before scrutinizing the applications for admission respondents 1 and 2 constituted a committee to examine as to whether the students who had passed the vocational course were eligible or not.
The committee which consisted of four different Heads of Department of different institutes examined the matter in its entirety and came to the conclusion that the vocational course was not equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science or to any other examination approved by the Council.
7.
The Council in its separate written statement has pleaded that the petitioners were not eligible for the course as the vocational course done by them has not been recognised as equivalent to any of the qualifying examinations prescribed for the course.
8.
In order to show that the vocational course as done by the petitioners is equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science, they have relied on a copy of the letter dated August 23, 1994 addressed by the Central Board of Secondary Education (an autonomous organisation under the Union Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India, New Delhi) to the Board (Annexure P-4 with he petition).
In this letter the Central Board has informed the Board that all the courses either academic or vocational at 10+2 stage lead to Senior School Certificate Examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education which is a feeder qualification for entry to the under-graduate courses.
It is stated therein that there is no inter-se equivalence of the course i.e. academic to vocational or vise-versa.
The Central Board has further mentioned that the concerned Board/Agency may treat the vocational courses as the feeder course to their courses of Diploma or degree.
The Board was advised to recognise the vocational course at 10+2 stage for entry to its Diploma and degree courses.
It is not clear from this letter whether the vocational course has been treated as equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science but even if it is so it is recognised only by the Central Board of Secondary Education and not by the Board or by the Council.
This letter is, therefore, of no help to the petitioners.
Our attention was drawn to another letter dated October 26, 1994 addressed by the Board to the Council.
This letter was written to the Council to consider grant of recognition to the vocational course for admission to the Diploma course in Pharmacy.
There is nothing on the record to show that such recognition or equivalence was ever granted by the Council.
As a mater of fact, the Council in its written statement has denied having granted any such equivalence.
The question of equivalence between the vocational course and the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science had to be decided by the Council or by the Board but they in their wisdom have not equated the two for the purpose of admission to the course.
It is well settled that it is for each University or institution to decide the question of recognition or equivalence of an examination/course held by any other Board or university with the qualifying examination which constitutes the basis of eligibility.
The Court cannot sit in judgment over the decision of those Bodies in such matters as the Court does not possess any expertise.
Those Bodies or institutions are the best to decide such questions having regard to the courses, the syllabus, the quality of teaching or instruction and the standard of examination.
These are academic questions and the Courts have no role to play therein.
Moreover, in the present case, the Board had constituted a committee of the experts to examine the question whether the vocational course was equivalent to the 10+2 examination (academic stream) in Science.
This committee found that it was not so and, therefore, the petitioners were held to be ineligible for the course.
When the Council and the Board do not recognise the vocational course as done by the petitioners equivalent to any of the prescribed qualifying examinations, it has to be held that they are ineligible for the course.
9.
Mr. Vinod Sharma counsel for the petitioners then contended that the vocational course is a pre-degree examination and, therefore, the petitioners were eligible in terms of the minimum qualification prescribed for admission to the course.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate appearing for the Board no doubt conceded that the vocational course was a pre-degree examination but he stated that the petitioners were nevertheless ineligible because they had not passed the said examination/course with Physics, Chemistry and Biology or Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics as the subjects.
Here again the petitioners submit that the subjects that they have studied while passing the vocational course and referred to in the earlier part of the order are more specialised than the subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology in general terms and, therefore, they are better qualified for admission to the course.
This contention too cannot be accepted.
Whether the subject of Clinical Bio-Chemistry which was a part of the vocational course of the petitioners is a more specialised subject of Chemistry as understood generally and whether Micro Biology is the same subject as Biology are matters really for the experts to determine and the Court cannot comment thereon.
In any case the petitioners have not studied the subject of physics which is a necessary pre re-quisite for admission to the course.
We have, thus, no option but to hold that the petitioners are ineligible.
10.
In the result, we find no merit in the writ petitions and the same stand dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.