RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The respondent-Bank was earlier represented by Mr. JS Shahpuri, Advocate.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the said Advocate unfortunately expired and consequently vide order dated May 26, 1994, notice of this writ petition was ordered to be issued to the respondent-Bank.
Respondent-Bank stands served.
2.
A Civil Misc.
Application No. 4971 of 1995 was moved by the petitioners for placing certain documents on record, which was allowed on May 5, 1995 and the learned counsel for the petitioners was directed to send the copy of the Misc. application along with the documents to the respondent-Bank, which, according to the learned counsel, were duly sent on May 6, 1995 by registered post.
Nobody has chosen to put in appearance on behalf of the respondent- Bank.
Consequently, I have heard learned counsel for the petitioners.
3.
Brief facts leading to the filing of the present writ petition may be noticed.
The petitioners were appointed as Class IV employees by Lakshmi Commercial Bank Ltd Petitoner No. 1 was appointed on February 16, 1979 whereas Petitioner No. 3 was appointed on April 12, 1979.
Though the date of appointment of Petitioner No. 2 in Class IV has not been mentioned in the writ petition, yet it is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioners that he was promoted to Class III on September 14, 1987.
In accordance with the recruitment policy issued by the Lakshmi Commercial Bank on April 1, 1980, copy at Annexure P-2 the vacancies inthe posts of Cashier/Godown Keeper/Cashier-cum-Godown Keeper were to be filled in by promotion from the subordinate staff cadre to the extent of 25% of the Clerical recruitment.
Such promotions were to be effected from those employees who had at least passed Matriculation examination from any written test .
On October 20, 1982, the Lakshmi Commercial Bank issued a list of eligible members of subordinate cadre in the States of Punjab, Haryana, J&K, HP Area Office Chandigarh etc., who were to be promoted as Cashiers, Godown Keepers.
There names were arranged in order of seniority (copy Annexure P-3).
Petitioner No. 1 is at Sr. No. 13 whereas petitoner No. 3 is at Sr. No. 14.
The name of petitioner No. 2 is not in the said seniority list.
It may be observed here that under the Banking Nationalisation Act, 1971, the Lakshmi Commercial Bank was merged with the Canara Bank on August 23, 1985.
3.
Name of one Shri Ashok Kumar, who was appointed as Class IV employee on July 16, 1979, appears at Sr. No. 15 in the list of eligible members dated October 20, 1982.
In continuation of this list, another list was issed on December 20, 1982 in in which the names of the petitioners or that of Ashok Kumar were not mentioned.
It may be observed here that according to the merger policy, the conditions of service of the employees merged with the Canara Bank were to remain unchanged.
Shri Ashok Kumar, who was appointed as Class IV employee on July 16, 1979 filed a civil Suit claiming promotin to the post of Cashier/Godown Keeper on the basis of his seniority in accordance with the seniority list issued on October 20, 1982.
The prayer made in the Civil Suit was that the latter list issued on December 20, 1982 should not be taken into consideration for promoting him and he be promoted in accordance with the seniority list issued vide order dated October 20, 1982.
The civil Suit was, however, dismissed by the Trial Court.
On appeal having been filed by Shri Ashok Kumar the suit was decreed and he was ordered to be promoted on the basis of seniority list dated October 20, 1982.
The Canara Bank filed Regular Second Appeal No. 2742 of 1987 in this Court, which was disposed of on September 22, 1987 with the modification that instead of directing the Bank to promote the plaintiff (Ashok Kumar) in accordance with the Seniority list dated October 20, 1982, the Bank shall consider the case of promotion of the Plaintiff in accordance with the seniority list dated October 20, 1982.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the petitioners, who are admittedly senior to Ashok Kumar in the Seniority List, Annexure P-3, dated October 20, 1982, are entitled to the same relief as was granted to Shri Ashok Kumar.
As observed above, Shri Ashok Kumar had filed a civil suit and ultimately his suit was decreed by the District Judge and this Court in Regular Second Appeal referred to above, upheld the decree with a slight modification that instead of ordering the promotion of Shri Ashok Kumar, it was directed that he be considered for promotion in accordance with seniority list dated October 20, 1982.
5.
Admittedly, Petitoner Nos. 1 and 3 are senior to Shri Ashok Kumar being at Sr. Nos. 13 and 14 whereas Shri Ashok Kumar is at Sr. No. 15.
The petitioners being senior cannot be denied the consideration for promotion from the date when any of their junior was promoted.
Admittedly, as observed above, Shri Ashok Kumar is junior to them.
6.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and direct the respondent-Bank to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion from the dates any of their junior has been promoted to the higher post.
It may be observed that the petitioners have appended some orders of promotion of some persons which according to them, were junior in Class IV.
It would be open to the petitioners to inform the Bank the dates when their alleged juniors were so promoted.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of 3 months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order either from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioners.
Needless to mention that the petitioners, if found suitable for promotion from a particular date prior to the dates they have already been promoted, they shall be granted all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Petitioner allowed.