Sat Pal, J - Vide this judgment, we propose to dispose of four writ petitions, bearing GWPs.
337 of 1994, 2251 of 1994, 14702 of 1992 and 16236 of 1992, as the points of law raised in all these writ petitions are identical.
2.
C.W.P.
No. 337 of 1994 has been filed by Shri Inderjeet Khurana, who is working as a Ziledar and in this writ petition, he has challenged the selection of Sarvshri Ashok Kumar Gaur, Sant Lal Pachar, Bhagwan Dass, Brij Bhushan, JK Ahuja and Mam Chand, who are respondent Nos. 2 to 7, as 'B' Class Tahsildars, whose selection has also been challenged by Lachhman Dass, Ziledar.
In C.W.P.
No. 14702 of 1994, Shri Ram Chander Malik, who is also working as a Ziledar, has challenged the selection of Sarvshri Ashok Kumar Gaur, Sant Lal Pachar, Bhagwan Dass.
In C.W.P.
No. 16236 of 1992, Jai Narain, Petitioner has challenged the selection of Sarvshri Ashok Kumar Gaur, Sant Lal Pachar and Bhagwan Dass.
3.
The selection for the post of Tehsildars is governed by the Haryana Revenue Group 'B' Service Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred as the Rules).
The relevant Rule 9 and the relevant extract of Appendix 'B' are reproduced herein below :  "9.
(1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made - (a) in the case of District Revenue Officer by promotion from amongst Tehsildars; (b) in the case of Tehsildars :-  (i) 40% by direct recruitment of persons recommended by the Commission for appointment to the post of the Tehsildar on the basis of HCS (Executive Branch) and Allied Service Examination; (ii) 40% by promotion from amongst Naib Tehsildars; and  (iii) 20% by transfer from amongst :-  (i) Superintendent of the Office of the Deputy Commissioners; (ii) Assistant Superintendent of Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners Office; (iii) District Kanungos; (iv) Zonal Ziledars of PWD (Irrigation Branch), or (v) Head Assistant of Director Land Records Office.
(2) Appointment by promotion, shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis and seniority alone shall not give any right to such promotions."
APPENDIX 'B' (See rule 7) Sr. No.
Designation of posts Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1 2 3 4, xx x x,  2.
Tehsildar Degree or its equivalent of a recognised university and should have passed matriculation or its equivalent examination with Hindi.
i) by promotion; five years as Naib Tehsildar and who has qualified departmental examination of Tehsildar.
2) By transfer; One year experience as Superintendent in the Deputy Commissioner's Office; or five years' experience as Assistant Suptd.
in Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's Offices; or Five years experience as Canal Ziledars of PWD (Irrigation Branch); or Five years' experience as Head Assistant in Director Land Record's Office 4.
From Rule 9, it will be seen that 40% of the posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment, 40% by promotion from amongst Naib Tehsildars and 20% by transfer from amongst various categories mentioned in sub-clause (iii) of Rule 9(1).
All the writ petitioners and the affected respondents belong to 20% quota by transfer.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 9 further shows that appointment by promotion is to be made on seniority-cum-merit basis, but this criteria of seniority-cum-merit basis has not been shown as applicable to the 20% quota by transfer.
5.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 337 of 1994, submitted that after coming into force of the rules, in the year 1991, the appointments by way of transfer (20% quota) were made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no marks for viva voce were fixed in that year but in the present case, the criteria had been totally changed and appointments had been made on the basis of the selection, which was contrary to the rules.
He further submitted that even assuming the criteria of selection was valid, the selection of private respondents was illegal as the petitioner was not given any marks for the year 1989-90 and 1991-92 as the ACRs for the said two years had been shown misplaced/not received, by the Selection Committee.
The learned counsel further submitted that the petitioner was shown as BA but the qualification of the petitioner was MA and the benefit of higher qualification was not given to the petitioner.
He also submitted that respondent Ashok Kumar Gaur, Bhagwan Dass Bishnoi and Sant Lal Pachar had been shown favour as they were close to the Chief Minister, Haryana.
He further submitted that there was no justification to grant relaxation in favour of the respondent JK Ahuja and Mam Chand, when eligible candidates in all respects were available.
6.
Mr. Balhara, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 14702 of 1992, reiterated submissions, made by Shri Malik.
He further submitted that the criteria for selection should have been made after the candidates had been screened by the Screening Committee as in 1991 only senior persons were considered and selected but in the present case, the criterion was fixed prior to the names were called for from the Financial Commissioner and as such, the procedure followed in the present case was contrary to law.
In support of his contention, he placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in Kamal Kumar Gupta v. State of Haryana, 1991(1) SCT 57 (P&H)(FB) : 1991(1) R.S.J.
487.
7.
Mr. RK Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 16236 of 1992 also reiterated the submissions made by Mr. Malik.
He further submitted that in para 5 of the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Haryana, it has been admitted that Sarvshri Dharam Pal Pannu and Raj Mal, Ziledars were selected as Tehsildars on seniority-cum-merit.
He submitted that according to the criteria of seniority-cum-merit, the senior persons ought to have been selected if they were not found unfit for promotion.
In support of his contention, he placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. NM Thomas, AIR 1976 SC 490.
8.
Mr. Gopi Chand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 2251 of 1994 also reiterated the submissions made by Shri Malik and emphatically stated that the criterion of the selection in the present case was seniority-cum-merit in terms of Standing Order No. 12 which was applicable to the selection which means that all senior candidates, who were not found unfit had to be selected.
He further submitted that since this criterion had not been followed in the present case, the selection of the private respondents was illegal and contrary to the rules.
In support of his contention, he placed reliance on a judgment of Supreme Court in Govt. of India v. CA Balakrishnan, 1974 SLWR 791, and a judgment of this Court in BK Sareen, Sanitary Inspector v. Cantonment Board, Jullundur Cantt, 1988(6) Serv LR 112.
He also submitted that the rules in the present case had been violated as the candidates more than three times of the vacancies had been considered.
In support of this contention, he placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, 1985(4) SCC 417.
9.
Mr. Kamal Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Haryana, submitted that under the rules, criterion for selection of 20% quota of Tehsildars by transfers was not seniority-cum-merit but was based on merit of the candidates.
He further submitted that after the rules of 1988 came into force the selection was based on the merit in 1990-91.
He also submitted that the criterion was just and fair.
He further submitted that the allegations of bias had not been made against any member of the Selection Committee which comprised of three senior IAS officers.
He further submitted that all the writ petitioners and the private respondents were duly considered by the Selection Committee and since total marks awarded by the Selection Committee to the private respondents were more than each one of the writ petitioners, the said respondents were selected by the Selection Committee.
Lastly, he submitted that the relaxation in favour of respondent Nos. 6 and 7 was granted under Rule 18 of the rules.
10.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, Ashok Kumar Gaur, Sant Lal Pachar and Bhagwan Dass, reiterated the submissions made by the learned Additional Advocate General.
He further submitted that in the case of these respondents, no relaxation was granted by the State Government.
11.
Mr. Sanjay Majithia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of JK Ahuja respondent No. 6, reiterated the submissions made by learned Addl.
Advocate General.
He further submitted that the said respondent was promoted as Assistant Superintendent on 26th August, 1986 and though he was promoted as Personal Assistant to Commissioner dated 3rd November, 1989, but in terms of letter of promotion, dated 29th January, 1989, he was allowed to hold his lien on the post of Assistant Superintendent.
He, therefore, contended that in fact, the said respondents had completed 5 years of service as Assistant Superintendent at the relevant time, and relaxation granted in his favour was not relevant.
12.
Shri PC Chaudhary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Mam Chand, respondent reiterated submissions made by the learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana.
He further submitted that the selection of the said respondent was made against the post reserved for the scheduled caste, for which he was the only candidate.
He also submitted that the State Government, under Rule l8 of the Rules, had the power to relax any of the provisions of the rules, and in this case, the Government relaxed the experience of the said respondent of about 10 months.
13.
We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
14.
From Rule 9 of the rules, it is clear that the criterion of seniority-cum-merit is applicable only to the appointments of Tehsildars by promotion, from amongst Naib Tehsildars.
Since there is no mention of seniority-cum-merit basis with regard to the selection of Tehsildars by transfer from amongst the various categories mentioned in sub-clause (iii) of Rule 9(1)(b), selection of the candidates for this quota has to be on merit, as in the case of direct recruits.
From the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Haryana, we find that the criterion adopted by the Government for selection is equitable, fair and just and is not arbitrary in any manner.
The Selection Committee comprised of three senior IAS officers and out of 100 marks, 75% marks were fixed for 5 latest annual confidential reports as per following details :  1) Outstanding 15 marks 2) Very good 12-1/2 marks 3) Good 10 marks 15.
The remaining 25% marks were set apart for over-all suitability.
Out of these 25 marks, 10 marks are for qualifications and 15 marks for interview, 10 marks for qualification were bifurcated as follows :  a) Graduate Ist Class 3 marks Graduate IInd Class 2 marks Graduate IIIrd Class Nil marks (being basic qualification) b) Post-graduate/LL.B.
2 marks c) 5 marks were assigned for outstanding achievements in sports and other extra-curricular activities, break-up of which has also been given in the written statement; 5 marks in total were kept for service experience, beyond 5 years of service which were the minimum experience.
16.
In view of the facts mentioned herein above, we do not find any merit in the contentions urged on behalf of the writ petitioners that the criterion for appointment by way of transfer (20% quota) was seniority-cum-merit.
17.
We have also perused the original record produced by the official respondents and find that total marks obtained by each one of the private respondents are more than the total marks obtained by the writ petitioners.
In this connection, the total marks awarded by the Selection Committee to the petitioners vis-a-vis private respondents, who were selected as Tehsildars as mentioned in the written statement and original record are reproduced herein below :  Sr. No. Name Marks awarded for confidential reports Marks awarded for overall suitability Total marks awarded., 1.
Sh. Brij Bhushan, Superintendent, Respondent No. 5 67-1/2 21 88-1/2 2.
Sh. Ashok Kumar Gaur, Ziledar, Respondent No. 2 67-1/2 8 70-1/2 3.
Sh. Bhagwan Dass, Ziledar, Respondent No. 4 57-1/2 9 66-1/2 4.
Sh. Sant Lal Pachar Ziledar, respondent No. 3 55 14 69 5.
Sh. Jatinder Kumar, Asstt.
Suptd., respondent No. 6 75 10 85 6.
Sh. Mam Chand, Asstt.
Supdt., respondent No. 7 55 17 72 7.
Sh. Inderjit Khurana, petitioner 43-1/2 8 51-1/2 8.
Sh. Lachhman Dass, petitioner 55 9 51-1/2 9.
Ram Chander Malik, petitioner  52-1/2 7 59-1/2 10.
Sh. Jai Narain, petitioner 40 11 51 18.
The contention of the writ petitioners that the private respondents, Ashok Kumar Gaur, Brij Bhushan, Bhagwan Dass and Sant Lal Pachar had been shown favour at the instance of the OSD to the Chief Minister, Haryana as well as the Chief Minister himself, is without any substance as neither the OSD to the Chief Minister nor the Chief Minister has been impleaded as respondent nor any allegation of bias has been made against the members of the Selection Committee.
Further the contention of Mr. Malik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of writ petitioner.
Inderjit Khurana, that the said petitioner was not given the benefit of MA qualification is devoid of any merit as from the record it is clear that he has been awarded marks of his said qualification.
19.
As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the relaxation granted in favour of respondents JK Ahuja and Mam Chand was contrary to the rules, it will be relevant to refer to Rule 18 of the Rules :  "18.
Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so, it may by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
20.
Admittedly the said two respondents had not completed 5 years' serv0ice at the relevant date, i.e. 1st August, 1991.
In case of respondent, JK Ahuja it has been alleged that he was short of two months' service and in case of Mam Chand, he was short of 10 months of service.
From the records, we find that all the writ petitioners and the private respondents had completed 5 years of service on 24.8.1992, the date on which they were interviewed by the Selection Committee.
In the original records, reasons given for relaxing experience, qualifications are that the said respondents had since completed the requisite experience when their case for appointment was being considered and such persons constituted a particular category.
From the records, we also find that on 17th July, 1992, a decision was taken by the State Government that the age limit from 50 to 45 years should not be reduced and the vacancies between the two categories namely, (1) Superintendents, Assistant Superintendents etc., and (2) Ziledars be shared in the ratio 50 : 50.
In the note in respect of this decision, it was also stated that the names from the Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners may not be called afresh to avoid delay in the selection process.
Since on the date of this decision, the said respondents had already completed the requisite experience, the reasons given by the State Government for relaxation for the category to which they belonged, appear to be valid.
21.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in these writ petitions and all the writ petitions are dismissed accordingly.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.