GS Singhvi, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the adverse remarks made in his Annual Confidential Report and for issue of a direction to the respondents to promote him as Assistant Sub- Inspector of Police with effect from the date his juniors have been promoted.
2.
Facts of the case are that the petitioner joined the service of the Government of Haryana on 2221971 as a Constable.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 14111981.
He was further promoted as Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police on ad hoc basis vide letter dated 2721991.
With effect from 171991, the petitioner was deputed to the Intermediate School Course.
After successful completion of the said Course, the petitioner was posted in the Police Lines, Rohtak.
3.
Claim of the petitioner is that he had earned good entries in his Annual Confidential Reports except for the period between 20.11.1991 to 3131992.
According to him, for this short period adverse remarks have been made in his Annual Confidential Report by the concerned authority for reasons which are wholly extraneous.
He was conveyed the adverse remarks vide letter dated 1691992, Annexure P-1.
Against these remarks, petitioner submitted representation Annexure P-5.
The same has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General, Rohtak Range, as would appear from Annexure P-6, dated 2871993.
In the meantime, persons who had passed the Intermediate School Course along with the petitioner, were brought on List 'D' and a number of such persons were promoted as Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police vide order Annexure P-9 dated 381992.
Petitioner represented against the supersession but his representation has been turned down by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, vide Annexure P-10 dated 22101992.
4.
Petitioner has challenged the adverse remarks on the ground that the same have been made arbitrarily and that there has been a wholesale breach of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana for recording of the remarks in the confidential reports.
Petitioner's plea is that due to the adverse remarks his name has not been included in List 'D' and that has led to denial of promotion to him.
5.
Respondents have contested the writ petition on the ground that the adverse remarks have been made in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner by the officers who had the opportunity to assess the work and the performance of the petitioner.
According to the respondents, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Rohtak, was the In-charge of Police Lines and he had the occasion to observe the working of the petitioner.
He made adverse remarks regarding general reputation of the petitioner and the Superintendent of Police as well as the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak, agreed that the petitioner is an official having bad reputation.
Further case of the respondents is that the petitioner has been denied promotion because of adverse record and that he has no right to be promoted on the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
6.
Shri IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the adverse remarks have been made in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner due to personal prejudices and, therefore, the said remarks are liable to be set aside.
Another contention of Shri Balhara is that the adverse remarks have been made by the concerned authority without any basis because during the relevant period, the petitioner had remained posted in the Police Lines and was not assigned any duty concerning traffic etc. Shri Balhara pointed out that Shri Sudhir Chowdhary has not even signed the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner and so far as other two officers are concerned, they had no occasion to watch the working of the petitioner.
Learned counsel further argued that the petitioner possesses a very good service record and but for the adverse remarks conveyed to him vide Annexure P-1, the petitioner would have been promoted as Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police on regular basis.
7.
Ms. Ritu Bahri, Learned Assistant Advocate General, argued that the adverse remarks have been made by the concerned officers on the basis of their personal observations and even if, there may not be any documentary evidence to substantiate the adverse remarks regarding integrity, the concurrent remarks made by the three officers should not be disbelieved.
Ms. Bahri argued that the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak, is emphatic in observing that the petitioner had extorted money from the general public and such remarks should not be overlooked by the Court.
8.
Record containing the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner and the file in which the representation of the petitioner has been dealt with and decided has been placed before the Court.
Perusal of the file containing the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner from the year 1987-88 which has been placed before the Court shows that for the year 1987-88, the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Bahadurgarh, rated the petitioner as a good officer.
In the column relating to general remarks, the reporting officer made the following entry :-  "Hard worker, tries to learn departmental working, loyal, disciplined and punctual."
9.
For the period between 141988 to 2281988, the petitioner has been rated as a good officer and in the column of general remarks, the concerned officer has written 'generally good'.
The Superintendent of Police had agreed with these remarks.
For the period between 2381988 to 20111988, when the petitioner remained posted as Incharge, Traffic Staff, the reporting officer had described him as a good Head Constable and the Superintendent of Police had agreed with it.
For the period between 1.12.1988 to 6.1.1989 and 7.1.1989 to 31.3.1989, no remarks have been given because the period of working of the petitioner under the concerned officer was less than three months.
For the period between 1.4.1989 to 15.1.1990, the petitioner has been given 'very good' and 'good' remarks.
This period includes the period of his posting as Incharge, Traffic, Police Station City, Rohtak.
For the period between 1161989 to 1961989, 21.6.1989 to 26.6.1989, 17.1.1990 to 31.3.1990, 1.4.1990 to 841990, 9.4.1990 to 22.6.1990, 6.7.1990 to 21.8.1990, 22.8.1990 to 29.8.1990 and 10.9.1990 to 14.10.1990, no remarks have been given because the petitioner had not worked for a period of minimum three months under the reporting officers.
For the period between 16101990 to 2621991, his work has been described as satisfactory.
For the period between 2721991 to 3131991, no remarks have been given because the petitioner had worked for less than three months under the concerned officer.
Between 141991 to 3061991, he has been described as a good and hard working officer.
Between 171991 to 19.11.1991, the petitioner was undergoing the Course.
Between 20.11.1991 to 3131992, adverse remarks contained in Annexure P-1 were made in the confidential report of the petitioner.
For the period between 1.6.1992 to 3131993, the Superintendent of Police has described him to be a good officer.
10.
From the above narration of the remarks made in the confidential reports of the petitioner, it is clear that except for the period between 20.11.1991 to 3131992, the petitioner's performance has been rated as satisfactory/good.
In none of these reports, except for the disputed period, integrity of the petitioner has been doubted by any of his senior officers.
The most interesting part of the remarks made in the confidential reports of the petitioner is that during his posting as Incharge, Traffic, the reporting as well as the reviewing officers have not doubted his integrity but when the petitioner had remained posted in Police Lines, adverse remarks regarding his integrity had been made.
A close look at the adverse report shows that the remarks in part-B are shown to have been made by Shri Sudhir Chowdhary, IPS, but the report does not bear his signatures.
The Superintendent of Police, Rohtak and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak, have made adverse remarks but there are no dates under their signatures.
11.
The file in which the representation made by the petitioner has been dealt with shows that the representation of the petitioner together with the documents enclosed by the petitioner were sent to Dr. BK Sinha, Superintendent of Police, Security, CID, Chandigarh.
Dr. Sinha gave his comments vide letter dated 1731993.
The comments offered by Dr. Sinha are worth quoting because they would show whether there was any basis for the adverse remarks made against the petitioner.
Dr. Sinha wrote :-  "There was general complaint about the behaviour of HC Kartar Singh No. 50/RTK but it is correct that on two occasions he had shown good work when he was deployed for law and order duties.
Regarding the details of his duties it is not possible to give any opinion without consulting local records.
The remarks regarding withholding of promotion does not apply to me because it is sorted out at the D.I.G.
's level.
Representation and the copy of the Annual Confidential Report are returned herewith."
12.
This file further shows that except Dr. BK Sinha, no other officer i.e. Shri Sudhir Chowdhary (reporting officer) and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak, were called upon to give their comments on the representation of the petitioner.
It is also revealed from this file that after receipt of the comments from Dr. BK Sinha, the record was placed before the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
On the first page of this file, there is a note dated 2241993, that in compliance with officer TPM dated 2141993, the representationist is present to appear before your goodself (D.I.G.).
Thereafter, there appears a note of the Deputy Inspector General of Police dated 2871993.
This note reads :  "There is no merit in the representation of HC Kartar Singh No. 50/RTK.
Hence, representation has been considered and rejected.
Issue orders accordingly.
Sd/- Deputy Inspector General, Rohtak."
13.
In the background of the entries made in the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner for various years, it is evident that except for the disputed period none of the reporting, reviewing or controlling officers of the petitioner doubted his integrity at any point of time.
Even in respect of the period for which adverse remarks have been conveyed to the petitioner, the then Superintendent of Police has not reiterated/supported the adverse entry regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
Comments of Dr. BK Sinha that there was a general complaint about the behaviour of the petitioner, cannot by any stretch of imagination be equated with an adverse remark doubting his reputation.
So far as other two officers are concerned they had not offered any comments on the representation made by the petitioner.
Above all, no explanation has been furnished by the respondents as to how adverse remarks could be made against the petitioner as Traffic Head Constable when he was not even posted as Traffic Head Constable during the relevant period.
In his representation as well as the writ petition, the petitioner had unequivocally stated that he was posted in the Police Lines and was not assigned the duties of checking the traffic.
It is, thus, evident that neither the reporting nor the reviewing/controlling officers had any justification to make adverse remarks regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
The record which has been produced before the Court by the learned Assistant Advocate General does not support these adverse remarks.
Rather the comments made by Dr. BK Sinha on the representation submitted by the petitioner against Annexure P-1 clearly show that the said officer did not make any attempt to support the adverse remarks regarding the general reputation of the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, it has to be held that the adverse remarks regarding the integrity of the petitioner had been made without any basis.
14.
The matter deserves to be examined from another angle.
Subject relating to remarks in the confidential reports has been covered by the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India However, the Government of Haryana has adopted the instructions issued by the State of Punjab prior to its bifurcation.
Government of Haryana has also issued its own administrative instructions.
With regard to integrity, one of the earlier set of instructions is to be found in Punjab Government's letter dated 4101956.
Those very instructions have been reiterated in the Haryana Government circular letter dated 12121985.
These instructions clearly contemplate great care on the part of the reporting officers before they make adverse remarks regarding integrity.
No doubt, the instructions issued by the Government do not have the force of law but after having issued them, the Government do not have the force of law but after having issued them, the Government and its functionaries cannot altogether ignore the same.
15.
In C.W.P.
16084 of 1993 (Amrik Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, decided on 2481994, this court had dealt with the nature of the instructions issued by the Government and their binding character and has observed :-  "It is true that these instructions do not have the force of law but the Government or its functionaries cannot altogether ignore them.
The administrative authorities, who are enjoined with the task of recording entries in the confidential reports, are bound to comply with these instructions.
A slight deviation of the procedural aspect of the confidential reports may not have the consequence of invalidating the adverse remarks but a wholesale breach of substantive part of these instructions may give rise to an inference of non-application of mind in the recording of remarks in the annual confidential reports.
It may also be indicative of arbitrariness and casual approach adopted by a reporting/controlling/reviewing officer.
Column regarding integrity is most vital for the Government servants as well as the public service.
There can be no denying that apart from the requirement of efficiency in the performance of duties by a public servant his integrity is of utmost importance.
A dishonest public servant or one whose integrity is doubtful may cause greater injury to public interest than an inefficient public servant.
Adverse remarks regarding integrity of a public servant ordinarily result in supersession at the time of promotion and denial of various service benefits.
Both from the point of the view of the Government and the public servant column regarding integrity has to be filled with greatest care and caution.
While it is imperative that the dishonest public servant must not be spared by the superior officer, the competent authority must take all precautions before discharge of his duty as per the instructions before making adverse remarks regarding integrity.
In this background, it is necessary to observe that if adverse remarks regarding integrity are found to be casual, perfunctory or cryptic or where it is found that the entries have been made for extraneous consideration or the material available on record is sufficiently indicative of the non-application of the mind, the Courts will scrutinise the challenge with greater anxiety.
Perusal of the extracts of the instructions, quoted above, also highlights the importance of entry pertaining to the integrity of the public servant.
In the letter dated 4101956, it has been enjoined on the competent authority to indicate reasons in support of his opinion that the officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt.
In the letter dated 12121985, the Government once again emphasised the need for greater care in recording of entry in the column of integrity.
The Government made it clear that ill-considered remarks based on inadequate observation cause lot of damage to the official concerned and, therefore, there must exist material to substantiate the adverse opinion regarding integrity.
Letter of the Government regarding communication of adverse remarks also requires that the reporting officer should specifically point out whether the defects have already been brought to the notice of the officer concerned.
It, is, therefore, clear that an onerous obligation is placed on the reporting officer or other authority, who makes adverse remarks regarding integrity of an officer, to be extra cautious and careful while making adverse entry pertaining to integrity."
16.
In view of the above quoted proposition of law, it must be held that the adverse remarks made regarding the integrity of the petitioner are wholly baseless, and are unjustified.
17.
Remarks regarding the moral character, reliability, professional knowledge, discipline, punctuality and communal impartiality have also not been supported either in reply to the writ petition or from the record produced by the respondents.
In his representation, the petitioner gave details of his working during the period under report and submitted that he had been given two commendation certificates with cash rewards for good work and that there was nothing which could cause reflection on his moral character, reliability, etc.
He specifically pleaded that there was no basis for alleging communal partiality against him.
In his comments Dr. BK Sinha has not indicated as to on what basis he recorded his agreement with the remarks made by the reporting officer.
That apart, so far as the reporting officer is concerned, no comments were called from him in response to the representation of the petitioner.
This may be due to the fact that the remarks have not even been signed by the reporting officer.
Therefore, it must be held that the adverse remarks made in columns 1 to 7 are also baseless apart from being arbitrary.
18.
The aforesaid conclusion of mine is buttressed by the fact that while deciding the representation submitted by the petitioner, the Deputy Inspector General of Police has not even recorded that the representation made by the petitioner does not contain any plea which deserves acceptance or that all the contentions raised by the petitioner were unfounded.
In fact, the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police discloses a casual and perfunctory approach by the concerned officer while dealing with the representation of the petitioner.
19.
In view of the above, the adverse remarks made in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period between 20.11.1991 to 3131992 (as contained in Annexure P-1) are liable to be quashed.
20.
Petitioner's claim for promotion will have to be reconsidered by the respondents in view of the fact that the adverse remarks made against him have been found to be arbitrary and unjustified.
Admittedly, the respondents have denied the promotion to the petitioner only on account of adverse remarks in his Annual Confidential Report and once these remarks disappear from the record of the petitioner, the concerned authorities will have to reconsider his case for being brought on List 'D' and for promotion to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
21.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Adverse remarks contained in Annexure P-1 are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for inclusion of the name of the petitioner in List 'D' and also for his promotion to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
If the petitioner is found suitable, his name shall be brought on List 'D' and he shall be given promotion with effect from the date his juniors were promoted.
In that event, the petitioner shall be given all consequential benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.