GS Singhvi, J - The order dated 15.7.1993 passed by respondent No. 1 reverting the petitioner from the post of Assistant Controller (Finance and Accounts) to the post of Section Officer is under challenge in this petition, in which the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the order Annexure P-7 and for grant of other appropriate relief.
The petitioner, who joined service as a Sub Divisional Clerk, came to be promoted as Section Officer after he passed the State Accounts Service Examination in the year 1973.
While holding the post of Section Officer, the petitioner was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar with effect from 151984 in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400.
He was also promoted as Accounts Officer by an order dated 1261986 issued by the Governor of Punjab.
This promotion was for a period of six months in the first instance and was also subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short, `the Commission').
The term of temporary promotion of the petitioner as Accounts Officer was extended from time to time.
At the same time, the Government referred his case to the respondent-Commission for approval of his case.
After about six years of his promotion as Accounts Officer on temporary basis, the respondent-Commission conveyed to the Government vide letter dated 27.8.1992 that the petitioner has not been found fit for promotion on the basis of his overall record and this letter of the Commission has been made foundation of the impugned order Annexure P-7.
2.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the order of reversion on the ground that the Government and the Commission have acted arbitrarily inasmuch as they have taken into consideration many irrelevant factors while judging his suitability and that his case has not been considered for ad hoc and regular promotion when other persons much junior to him in the cadre of section officers were promoted in the years 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1990.
3.
Respondents have defended the impugned order by filing separate replies.
In its reply, respondent No. 1 has pleaded that the promotion of the petitioner on the post of Accounts Officer was purely on ad hoc basis and was subject to the approval of the Commission and in view of the letter written by the Commission on 27.8.1992 holding that the petitioner was not fit for promotion, the Government had to issue the order of his reversion.
It has been stated by the respondent No. 1 that the petitioner's turn for promotion came in the year 1984 and he was superseded on account of adverse Annual Confidential Reports of the years 1973-74, 1978-79 and 1979-80.
It has also been stated by the respondent No. 1 that a penalty of stoppage of one grade increment with cumulative effect was imposed on the petitioner vide order dated 751986 and on the basis of this record, the respondent-Commission was fully justified in not approving the petitioner's promotion to the post of Accounts Officer.
In its reply, the respondent-Commission has supported the stand taken by the Government.
4.
In response to a replication filed by the petitioner, in which he has stated that the penalty imposed upon him was not of stoppage of one grade increment with cumulative effect, but was without cumulative effect and that the said order of punishment has been quashed by the learned Sub Judge, Ferozepur who decreed Civil Suit No. 56 of 1988 filed by the petitioner respondent No. 1 has once again reiterated that the petitioner did have the adverse record on the basis of which the Commission could declare him unfit for promotion.
Regarding the judgment and decree passed by the learned Sub Judge, Ferozepur, respondent No. 1 has stated that an appeal has been filed before the District Judge, Ferozepur and the same is pending.'
5.
First contention of Mr. Mahajan is that after his promotion vide order dated 1261986, the petitioner did not earn any adversity in his record and therefore, no material was available with the respondent-Commission to declare him unfit for promotion.
Another fact of this contention of Mr. Mahajan is that adverse material available in the record of the petitioner prior to 1261986 shall be deemed to have been washed off with his ad hoc promotion vide annexure P-1 and the same was not available to the respondents for adjudging the suitability of the petitioner.
Second contention of Mr. Mahajan is that even if the petitioner could be treated as unfit for promotion in the year 1986, he had a right of independent consideration of his case in the years 1987, 1988, 1989-90 and onwards when a large number of other persons junior to him were promoted as Accounts Officers.
6.
Mrs. Tuli argued that the petitioner's promotion vide annexure P-1 was specifically subject to the approval of the Commission and when the Commission has taken the view that the petitioner is not fit to be promoted, reversion of the petitioner had to be ordered by the Government.
She argued that only on the basis of his ad hoc promotion, the petitioner cannot claim that his record was clean so as to entitle him to regular promotion to the post of Accounts Officer.
Mrs. Tuli made an oral statement that 10 years' past record of an employee is ordinarily considered for adjudging his suitability/fitness and as the petitioner has earned two adverse annual confidential reports and one punishment, the decision taken by the Commission treating the petitioner to be unfit for promotion cannot be characterised as arbitrary.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions and in my opinion, the petitione must succeed.
A look at the impugned order shows that after almost six years of his ad hoc promotion as Accounts Officer, the respondent-Commission considered the case of the petitioner and recorded a conclusion that the petitioner was not fit for promotion on the basis of his overall record.
The phrase ``overall record'' used in Annexure P-7 has not been defined in the rules and has not been explained in the replies filed by the respondents.
If the suggestion of the respondent No. 2 was that entire service record of the petitioner had been looked into for the purpose of adjudging his suitability for promotion to the post of Accounts Officer, the consideration made by the Commission will have to be characterised as wholly arbitrary and capricious.
For promotion to the post of Accounts Officer, the next lower post is that of the Section Officer but consideration of his record as clerk and of other posts cannot but be termed as consideration made on the basis of irrelevant factors.
If at all, the oral statement made by the learned AAG namely, that the Commission has adopted the practice of considering the post 10 years record is to be relied upon as in the year 1992, the Commission could legitimately consider the record of the petitioner upto the year 1982 and it has not been shown to the Court that between 1982 to 1992, the petitioner's record had such adverse factors which could constitute a valid foundation for forming an opinion that he was unsuitable for promotion as Accounts Officer.
The only adverse factor during this period was a punishment of stoppage of one grade increment without cumulative effect.
That punishment stood quashed by the learned Sub Judge, Faridkot and a mere pendency of appeal filed in the Court of District Judge could hardly afford a ground to the Commission to rely upon the punishment which was nullified by the judgment of competent Court.
8.
Even if for a moment, it is assumed that record of the petitioner could be considered 10 years anterior to 1986, in my opinion, consideration of the adverse remarks made in the annual confidential reports for the years 1978-79 and 1979-80 was impermissible because after the year 1980, the petitioner was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar in the pay-scale of Rs. 800-1400 and he was given ad hoc promotion by none else than the Governor of the State and he was allowed proficiency step-up with effect from 1.5.1986.
It has neither been pleaded nor it could be accepted that the Governor of Punjab had ordered promotion of the petitioner to the post of Accounts Officer without application of mind or without consideration of the service record of the petitioner.
If the petitioner was found fit for promotion, though on ad hoc basis after consideration of his record, which included adverse remarks in the two annual confidential reports as well as the order of punishment at a later point of time the Commission could not rely on that adverse material for holding the petitioner to be unfit for promotion.
Even efficiency bar is allowed to be crossed only when the record of an employee is satisfactory.
The fact that the petitioner was allowed to cross efficiency bar with effect from 151984 is indicative of the fact that the competent authority did not consider the adverse remarks made in the confidential reports of the petitioner for the years 1978-79 and 1979-80 as serious enough to withhold the efficiency bar of the petitioner.
9.
In Regional Manager v. Pawan Kumar Dubey, AIR 1976 SC 1766, the Supreme Court has applied the theory of wash off.
It has been held by the Apex Court that once an employee is promoted on the next higher post, though on ad hoc basis, his adverse record will be deemed to have been washed off.
Applying this principle to the case of the petitioner, it can reasonably be said that after the petitioner had been allowed to cross efficiency bar in the year 1984 and had been promoted on ad hoc basis in the year 1986, adverse remarks and the order of punishment were no more available to be taken into consideration by the respondent-Commission for adjudging the suitability of the petitioner.
It must, therefore, be held that the decision of the Commission to declare the petitioner to be unfit for promotion as Accounts Officer is arbitrary and unjust.
10.
Second contention of Mr. Mahajan also merits acceptance.
He is right in contending that even if the petitioner could be adjudged unfit for promotion in the year 1986, the respondent No. 1 could not have ordered his reversion without considering his case for promotion with effect from the date his juniors were considered for such promotion in the years 1978, 1979 and onwards.
Right of consideration of an employee for promotion is inherent in the concept of equality, which forms part of provisions of Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
An employee may not be suitable for promotion in a particular year or at a particular point of time but unfitness for promotion in a particular year cannot operate as a bar to his consideration for promotion during the subsequent years or at a subsequent point of time.
The employer is under a constitutional obligation to consider the case of an employee for promotion keeping in view his seniority and eligibility.
Indeed it is not in dispute that when promotions were made on the post of Accounts Officer in the years 1987 and onwards, candidature of the petitioner was not considered.
May be, that this was done on account of the fact that the Government had already referred the case of the petitioner for approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
However, that factor ought to have been taken into consideration while bringing about the reversion of the petitioner.
The petitionr could not have been placed in a worse position than he would have been without promotion in the year 1986.
Had he not been promoted in the year 1987, respondents would have definitely considered his case for promotion in the year 1986 and onwards.
Adverse reports for the years 1978, 1979 and 1980 could not have been taken into consideration by the Government time and again for superseding the petitioner and in any case, in the years 1990 and 1991 and onwards, these adverse reports were out of zone of 10 years, which according to the learned AAG, was the period for which the record of all eligible persons could be considered by the Commission for adjudging the suitability.
11.
In view of above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P-7 is declared illegal and is hereby quashed.
The petitioner stands retired from service and there was an interim order in his favour.
Therefore, no further direction is necessary to be given.
However, he shall be entitled to all consequential benefits as a result of quashing of the order Annexure P-7.