Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of an appropriate direction to the respondents to declare the result of the MD Ophthalmology Examination taken by her in December, 1994.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed the MBBS Examination in December, 1988.
She completed one year's internship in December, 1988 and the house job in December, 1990.
In September, 1991, the petitioner was admitted to the three years' Post Graduate Course leading to the degree of MD Psychiatry.
While she was undergoing training, the petitioner was shifted "from MD Psychiatry to MD Ophthalmology at Medical College, Patiala, Session 1991".
A copy of the order dated June, 10, 1992 passed by the Principal, Government Medical College, Amritsar is at Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted her thesis in September, 1993.
It was approved by the University.
She was informed about it vide letter dated May 19, 1994.
The examination for the Post Graduate students was to be held in December, 1994.
The final examination was scheduled to commence on December 15, 1994.
The University issued examination forms to various candidates.
None was issued to the petitioner on the ground that she had not completed the training for a period of three years.
Consequently, she approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer that she may be permitted to take the examination and the respondents be directed to declare her result.
3.
The Motion Bench directed the issue of notice to the respondents.
A reply dated December 12, 1994 was filed by the Principal, Medical College, Patiala.
It was pointed out that the petitioner was not eligible to appear in the examination as she had not completed the training for a period of three years.
Reference was made to the recommendation made by the Medical Council of India vide letter dated December 28, 1989.
According to the respondents, the petitioner having joined the course on June 11, 1992, was not eligible to take the examination which was to start on December 15, 1994.
4.
The Motion Bench vide its order dated December 14, 1994 admitted the petition and directed the respondents to permit the petitioner to take the examination at her own risk and responsibility and subject to the decision of the writ petition.
The petitioner appeared in the examination.
The result of the examination was declared on March 16, 1994.
The respondent-University has, however, withheld the petitioner's result, as the matter was subjudice.
5.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner having joined the Post Graduate Course in September, 1991, she completed the requisite period of training of three years in September, 1994 and was, thus, eligible to appear in the examination which was scheduled to commence on December 15, 1994.
Learned counsel further submits that the petitioner was shifted from the MD Psychiatry course to MD Ophthalmology by the respondents on their own.
She had joined the course in Ophthalmology in pursuance to the letter issued by the Principal of the College.
She cannot be made to suffer on account of the fact that the admission to MD Ophthalmology was delayed by the respondents in spite of the fact that the seats were available.
In any event, learned counsel points out that even in accordance with the recommendations of the Medical Council of India, a candidate was required to complete 80% of the training programme so as to be eligible to appear in the examination.
Even if the petitioner is assumed to have joined the course in June, 1992, she had attended 80% of the training programme by December 15, 1994 when she had actually completed two years, six months and four days.
This was more than 80% of the total period of three years.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have submitted that the period of training from September, 1991 to June 10, 1992 has to be excluded from consideration.
Since the petitioner had joined the training in MD Ophthalmology on June 11, 1992, she would have completed the requisite period of three years in June, 1995.
As such, she was not eligible to appear in the examination held in December, 1994.
The claim as made on behalf of the Principal of the Medical College, Patiala, has been reiterated by Mr. DPS Kahlon, learned counsel for the respondent-University.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Was the petitioner eligible to appear in the MD Ophthalmology examination which commenced on December 15, 1994 ?
8.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined the Post Graduate Training in September, 1991.
In June, 1992, she was shifted by the respondents to the Ophthalmology Department.
By December, 1994, she had completed Post Graduate Training for a total period of three years and three months.
So far as the speciality of Ophthalmology is concerned, the petitioner had admittedly undergone training for a period of more than two years and six months.
According to the Regulations framed by the Punjabi University, the examination for the degree of Doctor of Medicine is "open to any person" who "has obtained at least 3 years previously the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery from this University or from the Panjab University at Lahore before 1948 or from any other University".
It is further provided that in the case of clinical subjects, the candidate should have completed a house job in a recognised hospital for at least one year out of which six months should be in the subject selected for the MD Examination.
According to the regulation, the candidate is required to complete "training for a period of two years in the case of clinical subject and for a period of three years in the case of a basic subject, in a college/institute recognised by the University for the Doctor of Medicine Course".
Ophthalmology is admittedly a clinical subject.
Still further, according to the recommendations of Post-Graduate Medical' Education as adopted by the Medical Council of India in January, 1992, the minimum period of training for the award of a Post-Graduate Degree is three calendar years.
However, it has been further provided that the candidate should "attend a minimum of 80% of the training period".
In other words, a candidate should attend training for a period of 248 years.
The petitioner has admittedly completed training for a period of 250 years.
Consequently, the petitioner fulfils the prescribed norm and was eligible to appear in the examination.
The plea taken on behalf of the respondents that she had not completed the course in conformity with the recommendations of the Medical Council of India, cannot, thus be sustained.
9.
Mr. Sidhu, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that in a similar situation, this Court had declined relief to the petitioners in CWP No. 5097 of 1994.
On a perusal of the order, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure R-II with the written statement, it appears that the question as to whether or not the candidates had completed 80% of training was not considered by the Bench hearing Anil Kumar's case.
Still further, the petitioners in that case had given an undertaking.
That was one of the factors which had weighed with the Bench while deciding the case.
In the present case, it has not been shown or even alleged that the petitioner had given any undertaking.
The case is clearly distinguishable on facts.
Therefore, the respondents can derive no advantage from the decision.
10.
It is true that the writ court does not normally enter academic thickets.
Whenever an academic Institution takes a decision, the court is reluctant to interfere.
In a case where a candidate is not eligible for appearing in an examination, the court does not normally intervene.
However, in the present case, it appears that the petitioner was eligible as she had completed the requisite period of training.
Secondly, it has been pointed out by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has already got married and gone to Canada.
In such a situation, if the petitioner is forced to come back and appear in the examination, she would be put to a totally avoidable inconvenience and expense.
It would be appropriate and in the interest of justice to direct the respondents to declare her result.
In case, she passes the examination, it would be an end of the matter.
Otherwise, law will have its course.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
It is declared that the petitioner was eligible to appear in the final examination leading to the degree of MD Ophthalmology.
Respondent No. 1 has to declare her result.
It shall do so within one week from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, she is declared to have passed the examination, the respondent would award the degree.
Otherwise, the petitioner shall be entitled to appear in any other examination that may be held hereafter.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.