SP Kurdukar and Swatantar Kumar, JJ.
- Admit.
Pleadings of the parties are complete.
By consent, writ petition placed on board and called out for hearing.
2.
The dispute in this writ petition relates to declaration of result of Diploma in Education.
It is common premise that the petitioners appeared in the second year examination of the Diploma in Education, held in July, 1994.
The result of the said examination was declared on September 30, 1994.
However, it appears some irregularities were committed by some of the institutions and consequently, the results of those institutions were withheld.
Petitioners' institution is one of them.
On November 21, 1994, show cause notices were issued to the petitioners pointing out certain irregularities in their admission in Diploma in Education for first year course.
The petitioners submitted the replies to the show cause notices.
Since nothing was done till mid-January 1995, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No793 of 1995, in this Court seeking a direction to respondents Nos1 and 2 to finalise the enquiry and to dispose of the show cause notices expeditiously.
This Court on January 17, 1995, directed respondents Nos1 and 2 to dispose of the show cause notices within three weeks.
The State of Haryana, later on moved an application in this Court seeking extension of time up to April 24, 1995.
The result of the petitioners was declared on March 15, 1995 and the certificates were issued to the petitioners as on March 15, 1995.
In the meantime, on December 22, 1994, the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana, the third respondent, advertised 5160 posts of JBT teachers and the last date of submission of application forms was January 6, 1995.
It is the contention of the petitioners that the candidates who appeared along with them for the second year examination in Diploma in Education, in July, 1994, have been interviewed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, because their certificates bore the date of issue prior to January 6, 1995.
The petitioners were denied this opportunity on the ground that their certificates of Diploma in Education (second year examination) are bearing the date of issue as March 15, 1995.
This date being subsequent to the last date of the receipt of the applications for the posts of JBT teachers.
i.e., January 6, 1995.
Since the petitioners were denied the opportunity of being interviewed, they have moved this Court for direction to respondents Nos1 and 2 to correct the date of March 15, 1995, to September 30, 1994, or to direct respondent No3, to interview the petitioners on the basis of the certificates although issued after January 6, 1995.
4.
Respondents No1 and 2 filed written statement and relied upon the enquiry proceedings commenced against the institution where the petitioners were doing Diploma in Education.
It was then stated that since the irregularities in admission to the first year Diploma in Education Course were noticed, the show cause notices were issued.
It was stated in the written statement, -  ``........and ``the competent officer, i.e. Distt.
Education Officer, Kaithal, found that the charges levelled against the petitioners were not maintainable.
On his recommendation the result was declared on 1531995."
The stand taken on behalf of respondents Nos1 and 2 is that because of the pendency of the enquiry in respect of the irregularities, the matter could not be finalised and no fault whatsoever could be found with respondent Nos1 and 2.
The contention raised on behalf of respondents No1 and 2 may be true, but at the same time, the candidates like the petitioners who were keen to get some jobs after fulfilling the eligibility clause, cannot be denied the opportunity which is available to them.
In such enquiry proceedings, it is always desirable that the enquiry officer must conclude the enquiry expeditiously so that interest of the candidates like the petitioners does not suffer.
5.
Mr. Surya Kant, the learned counsel appearing for the third respondent, urged that the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, accepted the eligibility of the candidates who had received the certificates before the cut off date, i.e., January 6, 1995, and it was not possible to extend the date.
Counsel further urged that there could be many other candidates who might have been issued such certificates after January 6, 1995, and they have not come to the Court.
He further urged that if the petitioners are given any benefit, the same may be extended to other candidates also who have been issued the Diploma in Education certificates after January 6, 1995.
6.
After hearing the counsel for the parties and bearing in mind the interest of the petitioners and the similarly situated candidates whose certificates bear the date of issuance after January 6, 1995, we direct the respondents to interview such candidates subject to other eligibility criteria.
The third respondent would accordingly take necessary steps in this behalf so that the eligible candidates are not deprived of the benefit of the advertisement on December 22, 1994.
Writ petition to stand disposed of in the above terms.
Parties to bear their own costs.