G S Singhvi, J - Orders annexures P-1 and P-2 issued by the Commissioner and Secretary, Department of Sports, Government of Haryana, and the principal-cum-Director, Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai (Sonepat) (for short, the school) respectively have been challenged by the petitioner.
He has prayed for quashing of these orders and for his reposting in the school.
2.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of these orders on multifold grounds.
His first plea is that having been appointed in the service of the respondent-school as Clerk with effect from 31.5.1975, he has become a member of the service of the school and, therefore, he cannot be transferred outside the service of the school.
Second ground of challenge is that while holding the post of Storekeeper, he cannot be transferred as Assistant because cadre of Storekeeper is different then that of the Assistant.
Petitioner's third ground of challenge is that the impugned order of transfer is neither in public interest nor in the interest of service.
Last ground of challenge is that the impugned transfer has been effected due to mala fides of respondents No. 2, namely, the Principal-cum-Director of Motilal Nehru School of Sports, Rai.
3.
Shri J C Verma, Senior Advocate, argued that the respondent-school is an autonomous body functioning of which is controlled by the Board of Governors and it is not a part of the Government's department.
According to the learned counsel, being a member of the service of the school, the petitioner cannot be transferred outside that service without his consent.
Second argument of Shri Verma is that even if the respondent-school is treated as a part and parcel of the Department of Sports, transfer of petitioner outside the cadre of Storekeeper is impermissible.
His argument is that transfer of the petitioner from the cadre of Storekeeper (sic) to the cadre of Assistant amounts to termination of his lien in the cadre of Storekeeper and such an action can be brought about only after a regular enquiry or with the consent of the petitioner which he never gave.
Third contention of Shri Verma is that the impugned transfer has been brought about on account of mala fide intention of respondent No. 2 who was annoyed with the petitioner because the petitioner had challenged appointment made by respondent No. 2 on the post of quartermaster.
Shri Verma also argued that though the transfer is an incident of service, the Government cannot exercise its administrative power of transfer except for good reasons having nexus with the public interest or interest of service.
Learned Assistant Advocate General drew my attention to various documents filed with the reply to show that respondent-school is not a separate juristic person but is apart and parcel of the Department of Sports, Government of Haryana.
Ms. Bahri argued that sanction of various posts in the respondent-school by the Government unmistakably establishes that it is a part of Department of Sports and Youth Welfare and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to claim that the impugned order of transfer is outside the service of the school.
She further pointed out that the petitioner's lien has been maintained on the post of Storekeeper in the service of the school and, therefore, the petitioner cannot claim that his right in the service of school has been adversely affected.
In regard to change of cadre, learned Assistant Advocate General argued that posts of Storekeeper and Assistant form part of the ministerial service and both the posts carry identical pay scale and, therefore, the impugned order of transfer cannot be termed as an order effecting change in the cadre.
She countered the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner regarding mala fides by contending that the petitioner has not impleaded that person as a party to the writ petition against whom allegations of mala fides have been levelled and, therefore, the court cannot record a finding on the allegation of mala fide.
Ms. Bahri further argued that impugned order of transfer has been passed in the interest of service and in the interest of administration and that it is not necessary for the respondent-school to disclose reasons for effecting transfer of the employees.
4.
After having given my serious consideration to the rival contentions.
I am of the view that the impugned orders cannot be nullified on the ground of mala fides.
Though the petitioner has chosen to level allegations of mala fides against the Principal and Director of respondent-school, he has not chosen to implead that officer as a party to the petition against whom he has pleaded mala fides.
Any finding of mala fides can be recorded by the Court only after giving a reasonable opportunity of hearing to that person against whom allegations of mala fides are levelled.
Unless such person gets an opportunity of hearing, the court cannot record a finding adverse to such person.
This principle of law is implicit in the concept of natural justice and has been amply recognised by the Supreme Court in Ashok Yadav v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 454.
5.
Rejection of the claim of the petitioner that the impugned order should be quashed on the ground of mala fides, however, does not automatically lead to the rejection of his other contention that the impugned order should be quashed on the ground that the petitioner has been transferred outside his cadre without his consent.
Though Ms. Bahri is right in pointing out that post of Storekeeper as well as post of Assistant form part of ministerial service, there can be no manner of doubt that these two posts belong to separate cadres.
It is not the case of the respondents that recruitment to the posts of Storekeeper and Assistant is made from same source or that there is common seniority of two cadres.
It is also not their case that common avenue of promotion is available to the Storekeeper and the Assistant.
Admittedly, the petitioner was promoted as a Storekeeper and thereafter he was confirmed on that post with effect from 811987.
With his confirmation on the post of Storekeeper the petitioner became a member of service in the cadre of Storekeeper.
He acquired a lien in that cadre and also acquired a right to hold post of Storekeeper.
By the impugned order (Annexure P-1) the petitioner has been transferred against the post of Assistant.
He has been replaced by Shri Ashok Kumar, who is holding the post of Assistant.
Thus, in effect and in substance, the petitioner's cadre has been changed by the impugned order.
That could not have been done by the respondent except with the consent of the petitioner and it is not the case of respondents that the petitioner has consented to his transfer from the cadre of Storekeeper to that of the Assistant.
Consequently, the impugned orders (Annexures P-1 and P-2) are liable to be quashed on the ground of change of cadre of the petitioner without his consent.
6.
Law on the subject, namely, that change of cadre of an employee cannot be effected except with his consent was laid down by the Supreme Court in Jawaharlal Nehru University v. Dr. K S Jawalkar, 1989(3) SLR 730.
7.
In view of the above conclusion it is not necessary for me to decide as to whether the respondent-school is a separate entity or forms part of the Department of Sports and Youth Welfare, Government of Haryana.
Similarly, it is not necessary to make adjudication on the legality or otherwise of the impugned order of transfer on the ground that it has not been passed in public interest or for administrative reasons.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders annexures P-1 and P-2 are quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.