GS Singhvi, J (Oral).
- In this writ petition, challenge has been made to the notification Annexure P.3 and order Annexure P13.
It has been prayed by the petitioners that these annexures by quashed and it be declared that the condition of 12 years' service as a pre-requisite for the grant of annual increments to the promoted Draftsmen is contrary to the rules and is arbitrary and unconstitutional.
2.
In brief the case set up by the petitioners is that they joined service of the Punjab Works Department (Irrigation Branch) on appointment as Tracers.
They passed the examinations prescribed by the Chief Engineer for the purpose of promotion to the posts of Draftsmen.
After having cleared the examinations, the petitioners became eligible for being considered for promotion as Draftsmen and by various orders issued in the years 1980 to 1985 the petitioners were promoted as Draftsmen.
Some of these orders have been placed on record as Annexures P2/A to P.2/D.
At the relevant time the petitioners were given pay in the pay-scale of Rs. 570-1080 which was prescribed for the post of Draftsmen.
3.
Third Pay Commission appointed by the Government of Punjab recommended revised pay-scale of Rs. 1,500-2,640 for the posts of Draftsmen.
This pay scale become effective with effect from 111986 under the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988.
Members belonging to the cadre of Draftsmen submitted representations before the Anomalies Committee and pleaded that their pay-scale should have been higher.
The Anomalies Committee accepted the representations of the Draftsmen and proposed the revised pay- scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 for Draftsmen.
The Government of Punjab gave effect to the recommendations of the Anomalies Committee vide notification dated 1921990.
The revised scale of pay has also been made effective from 111986 but at the same time the following note came to be inserted against Sr. No12 relating to the posts of Draftsmen :-  ``A Junior Draftsman shall be eligible for promotion as Draftsman in the scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 after a minimum period of twelve years of service as such.
Junior Draftsmen/Tracers already promoted as Draftsmen before putting in twelve years' service in the lower scale will start in the scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 at the minimum of Rs. 1,800 and shall be entitled to get increments in that scale only after they have completed the aforementioned minimum eligibility period of twelve years of service."
Petitioners have pleaded that by prescribing the requirement of 12 years service as a condition precedent for entitling a Draftsman to earn increments in the pay-scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 a hostile discrimination has been introduced amongst the members of the cadre of Draftsmen.
Those who have been appointed by direct recruitment have been given the benefit of pay-scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 and such persons are entitled to earn increments in terms of the provisions contained in the aforesaid Rules of 1988, but those who have been promoted as Draftsmen will not earn annual increments unless such promotion was accorded after the incumbent has rendered 12 years of service on the next lower post, i.e. the post of Junior Draftsman/Tracer.
It has also been pleaded by the petitioners that a serious anomaly would come into existence by the operation of the condition incorporated in the notification dated 1921990 inasmuch as a junior person might have been promoted in preference to his seniors on the basis of merit but he shall not earn annual increments till the completion of 12 years' service, whereas his senior who was at one time superseded, immediately on his promotion, in case his senior has already served for 12 years on the next lower post, would earn increments.
4.
The petitioners raised their grievance on the anvil of discrimination and violation of their constitutional right in C.W.P.
No.14380 of 1990.
That writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on 9.11.1990 with a direction that the representations made by the petitioners should be decided within a period of three months.
The representations of the petitioners have been rejected by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power, vide order dated 1941991 (Annexure P13).
Rejection of their representation compelled the petitioners to file CO P No467 of 1991 which was decided by this Court on 1181991.
Having felt convinced that they will not get redressal of their grievance from the administrative authorities, the petitioners have once again sought intervention of the Court through this petition.
5.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who have pleaded that after a thread-bare consideration of their contentions the competent authority has rejected their representations.
According to the respondents, the condition of 12 years' service has been prescribed keeping in view the requirement of experience on the lower post, which is necessary for promotion to the post of Draftsman.
Respondents have justified their action by pleading that under rule 10(1)(c) of the Punjab Irrigation Branch Draftsmen and Tracers State Service Class III Rules, 1960 a Tracer becomes entitled to be promoted as Draftsman without any requirement of experience and this would lead to a situation where a junior person will get promotion qua a senior, a situation which was required to be avoided.
In order to bring an end to the anomalous situation which would crop up on account of promotion of a junior person, the competent authority has prescribed 12 years' experience on the post of Tracer for grant of annual increments.
6.
Though Shri Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioners, advanced many fold contentions in support of the writ petition, I do not consider it necessary to deal with all of them because in my opinion the petition deserves to be allowed on the short ground that the notification issued on 1921990 (Annexure P.3) cannot be applied to the persons who have already been promoted as Draftsmen before the coming into force of the revised pay-scales.
The respondents have not disputed that recruitment to the posts of Draftsmen is regulated by the provisions contained in the Rules of 1960.
They have also not disputed the fact that under rule 10(1)(c) a person is eligible to be promoted as Draftsman on his having qualified the examination prescribed by the Chief Engineer for the purpose.
There is also no controversy on the point that the petitioners have in fact been promoted as Draftsmen between the years 1980 to 1985 on their having passed the requisite examination prescribed by the Chief Engineer, Irrigation.
Thus, all the petitioners were holding the posts of Draftsmen on the date of commencement of the revised pay-scale Rules.
These petitioners and those who had been recruited as Draftsmen by direct recruitment constituted one class on the date of commencement of the revised pay-scale Rules.
The promotion of the petitioners did not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Neither it has been pleaded nor has the learned Assistant Advocate-General argued that any of the petitioners lacked the minimum qualifications prescribed under the recruitment rules for the purpose of promotion to the post of Draftsman.
Once the petitioners are treated as existing Draftsmen duly promoted in accordance with the recruitment rules, it is not open to the respondents to impose any additional qualification in order to prevent them from earning their regular increments.
Right to earn increments with the completion of each year of service accrues to the petitioners in terms of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
In terms of rule 47 an increment is earned by a public servant as a matter of course.
Rule 47 uses the word ``ordinarily" and expression unless it is withheld.
A combined reading of the word `ordinarily' and the expression `unless it is withheld' shows that unless there is a specific order passed by a competent authority for withholding an increment payable to an employee, such an employee earns increment as a matter of right and as a matter of course.
Note below rule 47 further clarifies that increment can be denied to an officer/official who does not fulfil the basic conditions as prescribed in the respective service rules regarding the minimum number of years in the lower rank who is promoted to the higher rank by invoking an alternative provision.
The note in my opinion clinches the issue in so far as this case is concerned.
It could have been legitimately argued by the respondents that the petitioners should not be given the benefit of annual increments in the revised pay scale because at the time of promotion they did not fulfil the requirement of the minimum number of years of service.
However, as has already been mentioned above, it is not the case of the respondents that any of the petitioners lacked the minimum number of years of service prescribed under the rules under which they were promoted as Draftsmen.
Therefore, the petitioners could not have been denied increments to which they became entitled in the cadre of Draftsmen.
If at all the respondents could legitimately incorporate a condition requiring 12 years service for the purpose of promotion to the post of Draftsmen, such condition was required to be incorporated in rule 10(1)(c) of the 1960 Rules.
If that had been done, such a condition would have operated prospectively and could not have affected the rights of the persons who have already been promoted as Draftsmen.
The principle of law that the rights acquired in respect of promotion and even in respect of consideration for promotion at a particular point of time it cannot be taken away by amendment made in the statutory rules does not require a detailed discussion.
If that be the position, in the event of an amendment in the rules of 1960, there is every justification in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the respondents have arbitrarily incorporated the condition of 12 years of service in Annexure P.3 and have unjustly denied the benefit of annual increments due to the petitioners in the revised pay-scale with effect from the date of completion of each year's service.
In fact, operation of the amendment made vide notification dated 1921990 would result in depriving the petitioners of the annual increments which they have already earned.
In my considered view the amendment brought about by notification dated 1921990 could at the best operate prospectively and it was not open to the respondents to have invoked the note given in the said notification against the posts of Draftsmen held by the petitioners.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
It is declared that the note incorporated in the notification dated 1921990 cannot be applied qua the petitioners who have already been promoted as Draftsmen prior to 111986.
The decision taken by respondent No2 vide Annexure P13 is hereby declared illegal and is hereby quashed.
Respondents are directed to take action to grant annual grade increments to the petitioners in accordance with this order within a period of three months.
The monetary benefit by way of granting annual grade increments shall be paid to them within the next two months.
It is hoped that the respondents will apply the directions given by this Court in this case to the cases of all similarly situated persons so that they are not compelled to file separate petitions in this Court.