G.S.Singhvi, J - Though this petition has been filed by three petitioners, namely Yudhister Kumar Gupta, Dr. Jagmohan Bindlish and Miss Anil Kumari, name of petitioner No.2 was deleted on 17-09-1987 and at the commencement of the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioners made a statement that he is not pursuing the petition on behalf of petitioner No3 due to lack of appropriate instructions .
Consequently decision of this writ petition is confined to the claim of petitioner - Yudhister Kumar Gupta.
2.
In brief, facts of the case are that petitioner Yudhister Kumar Gupta was appointed as a Lecturer in Rural Industrialisation in RKSD College, Kaithal, with effect from 26-8-1983.
His appointment was approved by the University of Kurukshetra as would appear from letter Annexure A/3, which respondent is No. 3 and 4 have placed on the record of the Court alongwith their reply to CM No. 7734/1993.
Initially appointment of the petitioner was on probation of one year.
The Governing Body of the College considered the question of confirmation of various teachers.
Some of the lecturers were cleared for confirmation.
In cases of some others, including the petitioner Yudhister Kumar Gupta, it was resolved by the Governing Body to extend the period of probation by one year.
This was done on the ground that the Principal required more time to judge the capability of those teachers to control the classes.
After about one year the the President of the Governing Body conveyed to the Principal of the College and the petitioner vide his letter dated 21-8-1985 the decision of the Governing Body to terminate the petitioner service.
Similar decisions were conveyed to the other Lecturers.
The petitioner challenged the action of the Governing Body in terminating his service by filing appeal before the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
After hearing the petitioner and the representatives of the Management, the Director expressed the view that the reports of the Principal regarding the work of the petitioner were far from being credible.The Director also opined that the performance of the Lecturers cannot be termed as low.
Notwithstanding these conclusions, the Director dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellants had failed to make out a case of mala fide intention on the part of the Management.
Dissatisfied with the order of the Director, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Commissioner-cum-Secretaty to the Government of Haryana.
This revision petition came to be dismissed vide order dated 8-9-1986.
The Commissioner agreed with the Director, Higher Education that the reports written by the Principal about the work and conduct of the appellant were not credible.
He, however, rejected the plea of the petitioner about malafides of the Management.
He relied on the Management's version regarding reduction of the work load and held that no interference with the decision of the Management was called for.
He, therefore, dismissed the revision petition, subject to a direction that petitioner and Jagmohan Bindlish would have a first claim to be appointed as lecturers in the respective subjects in the College, if any, vacancy in that particular subject arises.
3.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the action taken by the Management on the ground that it was in violation of Rule 20 of Chapter II of the Kurukshetra University Calendar Volume I Plea of the petitioner is that in the event of reduction in the work load, the Management of the College was required to intimate the University the factum of reduction in work load and its intention to retrench the services of the teachers.
Another plea raised by the petitioner is that in terms of Rule 20(v) of the Kurukshetra University Calendar, he ought to have been retained as a part-time lecturer because the number of periods taken by him even on the basis of the reduced work load was more than eight.
Another plea raised by the petitioner is that respondent No4 has manipulated termination of his service because of personal ill-will.
The petitioner was supposed to be a person, supported by the rival faction in the Governing Body and as a close relative of the friend of the petitioner had supported the rival candidate at the time of election to the Governing Body of the College, respondent No4 had made him victim of his person vengance.
4.
Respondents No3 and 4 have opposed the writ petition on the ground that the appointment of the petitioner was on probation and it could be terminated by the Management without any reason.
These respondents have pleaded that the very extension of the period of probation is indicative of the fact that the performance of the petitioner was not satisfactory during the initial period of probation.
It has been alleged that the work and performance of the petitioner was of a low-level and the result of the candidates whom the petitioner had taught, was poor.
Another plea raised by the respondents is that the work load in the subject of Rural Industrialisation had considerably reduced from 1981-82 to 1985-86.
Detailed statement of number of students admitted to B.A.Classes of first-year second-year and third-year have been given out in para 9 of the reply of substantiate the assertion of the respondents that the number of students was not enough for retaining service of the petitioner.
5.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner filed an application for issue of a direction to the respondents to appoint him against the available vacant post of Lecturer of Economics in view of the direction given by the Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Government, Haryana.
This application was opposed by respondents No3 and 4, who pleaded that the petitioner had been appointed as a lecturer in Rural Industrialization, against a post which was sanctioned by the University Grants Commission.
The entire expenditure of that post was borne by the University Grants Commission in the first five years.
At the end of five years term, it was found that only six students were left in the subject and, therefore in view of astonishing low number of the students, the Management decided to discontinue service of the petitioner.
It was also stated that the petitioner had never been appointed against the post of Lecturer in Economics.
He had, therefore, no right to be given preference as Lecturer in Economics.
6.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for respondents No. 3 & 4 made a statement that as on date, no teaching work is left for a lecturer in the subject of Rural Industrialization.
7.
First contention of Shri Rajesh Gumber is that while terminating service of the petitioner, respondent No3 had not followed the statutory provisions contained in Rule 20 of Kurukshetra University Calendar Vol.I.
He submitted that the respondent-College is affiliated with Kurukshetra University and, therefore, it is bound to comply with the rules framed by the said University.
Second contention of Shri Gumber is that the impugned action of the Management is arbitrary and irrational because the work and performance of the petitioner was more than satisfactory during the period of probation and the Principal of the College had concocted reports of poor performance of the petitioner.
By placing reliance upon the observation made by the Director, Higher Education and Commissioner-cum-Secretary to the Government in Education Department, Shri Gumber argued that both these authorities have concurrently held that the reports dated 20-8-1985 written by the Principal about the work and conduct of the petitioner did not inspire confidence.
This, according to Mr. Gumber, is sufficient to vitiate the action taken by the employer.
The third contention advanced by Shri Gumber is that the employer's action of bringing an end to the service of the petitioner is actuated by malice and personal ill-will of respondent No4.
8.
Shri Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for respondents No3 & 4 argued that the reports submitted by the Principal regarding performance of the petitioner cannot be termed as mala fide or arbitrary because the Principal had made assessment of the work of the petitioner.
Mr. Patwalia argued that the extension of probation period of the petitioner is by itself sufficient to establish that the work of the petitioner was not satisfactory.
Shri Patwalia then argued that real cause for termination of service of the petitioner was non-availability of sufficient number of students in the subject of Rural Industrialization and reduction in the work load for the post of the Lecturer in Rural Industrilization.
He further argued that the allegations of mala fides levelled by the petitioner are vague, apart from being incorrect.
Learned Counsel pointed out that the allegations of mala fide have been rejected by the appellate as well as by the revisional authorities and, therefore, their findings should not be disturbed by this Court.
Lastly, he argued that even if there was any legal infirmity in the action of the employer in the context of allegations of violation of Rule 20, no mandamus be issued for reinstatement of the petitioner because as on date, no teaching work is left in the subject of Rural Industrilization.
9.
Rule 20, on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner, reads as under :-  " 20 Retrenchment Rules No retrenchment of a teacher, in any subject, shall be made, due to fall in the work-load without the prior permission of the University and without the prior permission of the University and without following the procedure as laid down below :-  (i) After the expiry of the last date for the admissions with late fee etc.
If it is noticed by a College that there is fall in the work-load, complete information about number of students admitted, in the subject concerned in each class, the work-load calculated strictly according to the provisions under Appendix VIII of this Ordinance, the number of periods alloted to each teacher in the subject concerned and the number of teachers proposed to be retrenched and their names shall be intimated to the University.
The University may, if it thinks fit, have an inquiry made into the matter.
(ii) For calculation of the work-load for the purpose of proposed retrenchment or making a teacher a part timer, the maximum strength of each section shall be taken as 60 students for Undergraduate Classed and 40 students for Postgraduate classes.
(iii) The details of the work-load shall also be supplied by the College, to the teacher(s) concerned, who will be at liberty to question the workload and may take representation to the college/University in this behalf.
(iv) If the University approves the proposed action to be taken by the College, the notice as provided under Clause No.18(a) given above for retrenchment, shall be given by the College to the teacher(s) concerned.
(v) The retrenchment of a teacher shall be made only if the number of periods shall below the level of 8.
If the number of periods remains in between 3 to 7 the teacher concerned shall be retained on part time basis.
vi) For the purpose of retrenchment, the junior most teacher in the subject shall be affected.
(vii) If the workload increases due to the increase in the number of students or some vacancy is caused due to any other reason, during the next three Sessions, the retrenched teacher shall be adjusted."
Persual of the above quoted provisions shows that in the event of fall in the work-load, the College is required to send an intimation to the university regarding the number of periods allotted to each teacher and the number of teachers proposed to be retrenched, alongwith their names.
The University can get an enquiry made into the matter.
The manner in which the work-load is to be calculated has been indicated in clause(ii) of Rule 20.
Sub-rule (iv) contemplates retrenchment of the teachers after the University approves the proposed action of the College.
Clause(V) of Rule 20 indicates that if number of periods remains in between 3 to 7, the teacher concerned shall be retained on part-time basis and at the time of retrenchment, the rule of `Last come first go' should be followed.
The petitioner has specifically pleaded and there is no denial by the respondents that the number of periods taken by him in the year 1985 was much more than 8.
It is thus evident that the work-load in the subject of Rural Industrialization was not reduced to an extent which could entitle the respondent-College to terminate service of the petitioner.
In fact the respondent-College did not bother to comply with the mandate of Rule 20 in as much as did not send the detailed information to the University as required under Rule 20(i) and it did not take action in accordance with clause (v) of Rule 20.
Neither the Director, Higher Education, nor the Commissioner-cum-Secretary has examined this aspect of the case.
Before this Court also no explanation has been offered by the respondents No3 &4 for non-compliance of Rule 20.
Their half-hearted plea to the effect that Rule 20 is not applicable is negatived from the very fact that the respondents have not denied affiliation of the College with the Kurukshetra University and the fact that the College had itself sought approval from that University in regard to appointment of the petitioner as would appear from Annexure A/3.
10.
Argument of Shri Patwalia that termination of the petitioner's service was due to poor performance and the findings recorded by the appellate as well as the revisional authorities are erroneous is, in my opinion, without any substance.
Except the report of the Principal dated 20-8-1985, the date on which the Governing Body had met to consider the cases of the petitioner and others, no other material was placed on the record to show that prior to that date any assessment was made by the Principal or by any other competent authority regarding performance of the petitioner and the same was found to be unsatisfactory.
The co-incidence between the date of report of the Principal and the date of meeting of the Governing Body coupled with the fact that there is no other material to substantiate the claim of the respondents about the bad performance of the petitioner could legitimately be taken into consideration by the appellate as well as revisional authorities for taking the view that the reports of the Principal were not worth acceptance.
I find no error in the concurrent findings recorded by the Director, Higher Education, and the Commissioner-cum-Secretary.
11.
The plea raised on behalf of the respondents that extension of the initial period of probation of the petitioner is by itself indicative of this unsatisfactory performance, is also without any substance.
A look at Annexure P/2 shows that initial period of probation of the petitioner and eight other Lecturers was extended not due to the their unsatisfactory performance, but on account of the fact that the Principal was not in a position to make an assessment of the capability of the teachers to control the classes.
It is clear from Annexure P-2 that the Principal wanted more time to make assessment of the working of nine Lecturers.
That cannot, in any manner, lead to an inference that the performance of nine Lecturers was unsatisfactory.
12.
Argument of learned counsel for the petitioner that the action of the employer in terminating the service of the petitioner is vitiated by mala fides need not detain me for long.
That plea has been considered by the appellate as well as revisional authorities and both of them have found the allegation of mala fide to be without any substance.
In this writ petition also vague and bald allegations have been levelled by the petitioner.
He has not shown as to how respondent No4 was personally prejudiced with him.
A remote connection between the petitioner and his friend's relative, who had allegedly supported the rival faction at the time of election to the Governing Body cannot furnish at the time of election to the Governing Body cannot furnish a sound basis for recording a finding that the action of respondent No3 is actuated by personal ill-will or bias of respondent No4.
In my opinion, the petitioner has failed to discharge the burden which lay upon him to produce direct or strong circumstantial evidence to substantiate the allegations of malafides.
13.
Ordinarily this Court may have given relief of reinstatement in service to the petitioner but in the view of the fact that no teaching work is left in the subject of Rural Industrialization and no post of Lecturer is now available in that subject, the issue of a direction for reinstatement of the petitioner would be wholly futile.
Since the teaching work is no more left, the petitioner cannot be forced upon the College.
The Court cannot direct creation of a post for the purpose of re-employment of the petitioner.
Post of Lecturer of Economics also cannot be given to the petitioner as he had not been appointed as a Lecturer in Economics in the year 1983.
The mere fact that the petitioner had at one or other point of time taught the subject of Economics, will not entitle him to claim appointment on the post of lecturer in that subject.
Therefore notwithstanding the finding that the termination of the pertitioner's service was contrary to Rule 20 of the Rules, a mandamus cannot be issued in favour of the petitioner for his reinstatement.
Instead it will be appropriate to award compensation to the petitioner for wrongful termination of service.
14.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed to a limited extent, namely that the action of the respondent No3 in terminating service of the petitioner is declared to be contrary to the Rule 20 of Chapter II of Kurukshetra University Calendar Volume I However, in view of the fact that no teaching work is left in the subject of Rural Industrilization, relief of reinstatement is denied to him.
Instead it is ordered that respondent No3 shall pay a sum of Rs.5000/- to the petitioner for wrongful termination of his service.