VK Bali, J (Oral) - Dev Raj Salwan through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 1 to finalise the tentative seniority list of Head Draftsmen issued on March 31, 1978 after disposing of the objections filed by him.
He further prays that he be declared senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5 and respondent No. 1 be restrained from reverting him on the basis of erroneous seniority list.
2.
The facts on which the relief aforesaid stems, reveal that petitioner, who is matriculate with diploma in Draftsman Civil from Industrial Training Institute, Amritsar which he obtained in the year 1962-63 applied for the post of Draftsman in the year 1964 to the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter to be referred to as the Board) and was so selected.
The Secretary of the Board sent the names of selected candidates to the Department vide letter dated June 6101964.
It is the case of petitioner that apart from some other candidates, respondents 3 to 5 were also selected for the aforesaid post alongwith him and his name was kept higher in merit than said respondent by the Board.
Vide letter dated June 12, 1964, the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, addressed a letter to the Superintending Engineer, Amritsar Drainage Circle, Amritsar, and the names of five selected Draftsmen including that of petitioner for issuing them appointment letters vide letter dated June 23, 1964, the Superintending Engineer, Amritsar wrote back to the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, that though vide letter dated December 7, 1963 it was mentioned that five vacancies of Draftsmen were expected to occur during the year 1964-65 and a demand was placed for that purpose but due to heavy reduction in the drawing staff in other circles and clossing down of anti-waterlogging Division, the surplus Draftsmen were absorbed and, therefore, there was no vacancy to appoint the persons whose names were sent vide letter, Annexure P-1 Copy of letter dated June 23, 1964, has been placed on records as Annexure P-2.
The name of petitioner, however, was again sent by the Chief Engineer vide letter dated July 31, 1964 and at this stage he was given appointment letter and he accordingly took over the charge of the post of Draftsman on August 25, 1964.
The case of petitioner is that even though respondent Nos. 3 to 107 were juniors to him in the merit list prepared by the Board, they were appointed as Draftsmen on March 15, 1964, June 12, 1964 and June 23, 1964 respectively and that he alongwith private respondent was promoted as Head Draftsmen on May 11, 1977.
A tentative seniority list was issued some time in April, 1978 of the Head Draftsmen showing the position as on March 31, 1978.
However, no seniority list of Draftsmen was ever issued.
In the seniority aforesaid, petitioner was shown junior to respondents 3 to 5 as Head Draftsman.
The basis of showing him junior to them was that he was appointed on the post of Draftsman on August 25, 1968 ie after the appointment of respondents 3 to 5 on the post aforesaid.
Whereas, petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 33, respondents 3 to 5 were shown at Sr. Nos. 30 to 32 respectively.
This was, obviously, not to the liking of petitioner and, therefore, he submitted representation to the relevant quarters in May, 1978 and clamoured for his seniority over and above respondents 3 to 5 on the sole basis that in merit list of selected candidates, he was placed higher than them by the Board.
When he received no reply, he followed his request contained in the representations aforesaid vide various reminders from June, 1978 to December, 1985.
When the representation, referred to above, brought no tangible results, petitioner came to this Court asking for the relief as has been indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the two sets of identical written statements, one filed by respondents 1 and 2 and the other by respondent 5, it has been mainly pleaded that there is absolutely no relevancy insofar as order of merit determined by the Board is concerned and it is the date of appointment which is relevant.
Inasmuch as respondents 3 to 5 were appointed earlier in point of time than petitioner, they had to rank senior to him.
While dealing with the case of respondent No. 3, respondents 1 and 2 in their written statement plead that he was originally appointed as Tracer and promoted as Draftsman on April 17, 1964.
Insofar as respondents 4 and 5 are concerned, they were recommended by the Board for appointment as Draftsmen on June 4, 1964 whereas petitioner's name was initially recommended by the Board to the Irrigation Department on June 6101964.
That being so, petitioner could not claim seniority over and above respondents 3 to 5.
It is further pleaded that seniority list of Draftsmen was issued in 1989 by the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle, Patiala and by the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle, Ferozepur, in 1972, prior to the seniority list of Circle Head Draftsmen circulated in the year 1978.
Petitioner was given seniority as Circle Head Draftsman on the basis of seniority list of Draftsman already circulated by the Superintending Engineer.
It is further the case of respondents that if petitioner had any grouse, he should have represented against the seniority lists of Draftsmen circulated in the years 1969 and 1972 which were prepared in accordance with Government circular dated March 15, 1962.
It is further pleaded that the seniority was determined in accordance with the recommendations of the Board rightly.
Whereas, the name of petitioner, on his own showing, was recommended by the Board to the Irrigation Department on June 10, 1964, names of respondents 4 and 5 were recommended on June 4, 1964.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that specific assertion made in paragraphs 2 and 3 that it is the petitioner who was recommended higher in merit than respondents 3 to 5 having not been specifically denied, would amount to admission and that being so the seniority had to be governed by instructions, Annexures P-7 and P-8, dated March 15, 1962 and April 2, 1976 and inasmuch as it has been specifically directed in the instructions aforesaid that a person recommended by the Board higher in merit has to be senior to the others recommended later in point of merit, petitioner was senior to respondents 3 to 5.
Mr. Malhotra for his aforestate contention, relies on a decision of Single Bench of this Court in Manohar Lal Madan v. State of Punjab and others, 1973(1) SLR 875.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that there is no merit in the sole contention raised by learned counsel and, therefore, this petition must fail.
Insofar as respondent No. 3 is concerned, it has been conceded during the course of arguments that the said respondent was initially appointed as Tracer and he was only promoted in 1964 to the post of Draftsman prior in point of time than petitioner.
However, seriousness in the dispute came when the case of petitioner was compared with that of respondents 4 and 5.
It is true that the aforesaid respondents were recommended for appointment alongwith petitioner and from the pleadings of the parties it has to be inferred that petitioner was higher in merit list so prepared by the Board than respondents 4 and 5.
However, on two substantial grounds the petitioner cannot possibly stake his claim of seniority over and above respondents 4 and 5.
Firstly, in view of this Court, the instructions.
Annexure P-7, do not spell out what has been precisely noted above by referring to the contention of learned counsel.
For better appreciation of the contention raised, it shall be useful to reproduce the relevant portion of instructions, Annexure P-7, which reads thus :-  "I am directed to invite a reference to Punjab Government letter No. 1028-GII-57/27804 dated the 29th March, 1957, stating that a temporary appointment made without the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board is just a make shift arrangement and cannot therefore count for seniority, which should, in such cases, be determined with reference to the date on which the recommendations of the Board are received.
It has been represented to Government that the seniority of the candidates recommended by the Board should be determined with reference to the date of issue of the Board's letter and not from the receipt of their recommendation as in the later case the letters are liable to be delayed in transit or mis-sent and diarised very late at destination thereby causing undue hardship to the candidates concerned.
After carefully considering the matter it has been decided that the seniority of the candidates should be determined with reference to the date of issue of the Board's recommendations."
The portion of the instructions, extracted above would reveal that the seniority of the candidates recommended by the Board has to be determined from the issue of Board's letter and not from the receipt of their recommendations.
It has been specifically pleaded in paragraph 14 of the written statement that the seniority was determined in accordance with the recommendations of the Board.
Whereas, the petitioner, on his own showing, was recommended by the Board to the Irrigation Department on June 10, 1964 and to the respondent department on July, 31 1964.
The names of respondents 4 and 5 were recommended to the respondent-department on June 4, 1964.
The respondent-department determined the seniority in accordance with instructions, Annexures P-7 and P-8.
It is a different matter altogether as to whether the instructions, Annexure P-7, lay down a correct criteria for determination of seniority or not.
On that question, the matter is arguable but the petitioner relies on the instructions.
Annexure P-7 and has obviously not even remotely challenged the validity thereof.
That being so, this court refrains from giving any opinion on the method of seniority as envisaged under the instructions, Annexure P-7.
Insofar as instructions, Annexure P-8, are concerned, suffice it so say that the same came into being far after the appointment of petitioner and respondents 4 and 5 and inasmuch as the seniority had to be reckoned and determined immediately or within a reasonable time after the litigating parties of this case came to be appointed, the said instructions cannot possibly be attracted and, thus, applied.
There is yet another ground on which petitioner cannot successfully claim his seniority over and above respondents 4 and 5.
The seniority list prepared earlier i.e. in the years 1969 and 1972, though tentative, was never challenged.
Petitioner and private respondents came to be promoted to the post of Head Draftsmen in the year 1971 and Circle Head Draftsmen in the year 1977 and it is for the first time in the year 1978 that petitioner clamoured for his right over and above them.
In between not only one but two promotions were made and petitioner blissfully sleep over his rights.
It is too late in the day now to say that he was senior to respondents 4 and 5 on the basis of his higher merit determined by the Board.
Insofar as judgment in Manohar Lal Madan's case (supra), relied on by learned counsel for the petitioner, is concerned suffice it to say that the same dealt with the instructions which specifically determined the seniority on the basis of merit fixed by the Board but in the present case the reliance is on Annexure P-1 which, as held earlier, cannot come to the rescue of the petitioner.
6.
Finding no merit, I dismiss this petition.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.