Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was working as a Lt. Col. in the Indian Army, was tried by the General Court Martial at Secundrabad on charges of misappropriation.
On June 15, 1979, he was dismissed from service.
On September 5, 1989, the petitioner was served with a notice ``to show-cause as to how he is entitled to pensionary benefits''.
It was further stipulated that he must submit his reply within 30 days of the receipt of memorandum.
Admittedly, the petitioner submitted his reply on February 11, 1993.
Vide order dated November 30, 1993, it was ordered that ``the President is pleased to decide to forfeit the entire pensionary benefits to which IC-5967 Lt. Col. A S Biji would have been entitled to (sic) had he retired in the normal manner on the date of dismissal.''
Apprehending the passing of this order, the petitioner filed the present writ petition on October 19, 1993 and prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to release his pensionary benefits along with interest.
However, after the filing of the written statement, the petitioner has filed a replication in which an attempt has been made to challenge the order dated November 30, 1993 as being mala fide.
2.
We have heard Mr. C M Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. S K Pipat, the Senior Standing Counsel for Union of India.
3.
Mr. Chopra has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, relying on the judgment of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Major GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1994(3) SCT 335(SC) : 1992(5) SLR 108, he has contended that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of all retiral benefits.
Secondly, learned counsel has submitted that the order of forfeiture of pension cannot operate retrospectively so as to take away the pension which had accrued to him from 1979 to November 29, 1993.
On the other hand, Mr. S K Pipat has contended that the petitioner having been dismissed from service had no right to claim pension after a lapse of so many years and that the order regarding the forfeiture of pensionary benefits was in strict conformity with the provisions of Regulation 16(a).
4.
Before proceeding to consider the respective contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it is apt to notice the provisions of Regulation 16(a).
It provides as under :-  ``16(a) When an officer who has to his credit the minimum period of qualifying service required to earn pension, is cashiered or dismissed or removal from service, his pension, may at the discretion of the President, be either forfeited or be granted at a rate not exceeding that for which he would have otherwise qualified and he retired on the same date''.
A perusal of the above provisions shows that the President of India has been vested with the power to forfeit or grant pension to an officer who has been cashiered or dismissed or removed from service after putting in the minimum period of qualifying service required to earn pension.
It is only fair that before proceeding to pass any order adverse to the interest of the officer, an opportunity to show-cause is given to him.
Accordingly, the petitioner was given a notice to show-cause on September 5, 1989.
The petitioner did not submit any reply within the period of 30 days as stipulated in the notice.
In fact, he took more than three years.
It was only on February 11, 1993 that he submitted his reply.
It was considered and thereafter the order of forfeiture of pension and other benefits was passed.
It has not been shown that this order was in any way contrary to the provisions of Regulation 16(a) as reproduced above.
5.
As for the decision in Major G S Sodhi's case (supra) it deserves mention that no order of forfeiture had been passed.
In this situation, their Lordships of the Supreme Court had taken the view that pensionary benefits could not be denied to the officer.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
The competent authority has passed an order forfeiting the entire pensionary benefits.
The petitioner cannot, therefore, derive any advantage from this decision.
In fact, the petitioner's case is squarely covered by a later judgment of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 831 of 1993, (Maj.
(Retd.)
Hari Chand Pahwa v Union of India and another) which was decided on July 26, 1994.
The action of the Government in forfeiting the pensionary rights of the officer after he had been cashiered from service, was upheld.
6.
As for the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order cannot have retrospective effect, it may be mentioned that no claim to pension etc. had been made by the petitioner from the date of his dismissal viz. June 15, 1979 to October 18, 1993 when he filed the present writ petition.
It was after a lapse of more than 14 years that he had filed the present writ petition.
In the meantime, a show-cause notice had been duly served on the petitioner.
He had filed his reply to this notice after a lapse of more than three years.
After consideration of the reply, it was found that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of pensionary benefits.
In this situation, it cannot he said that the order had been made operative retrospectively or that certain accrued rights of the petitioner had been taken away.
In any case, it is evident that the claim for pension etc. from 1979 to 1989 as made by the petitioner by filing this petition on October 19, 1993 would be clearly barred by limitation.
Accordingly, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed in limine.