Amitava Lala, J - These applications are made an application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 connected with the WP No. 769 of 2004.
As because the applications have been made in the form of affidavits instead of form of petitions the department of this Court is supposed to be directed to convert the applications in such form for the sake of formality as indicated hereunder with certain caution.
It is to be remembered that Rules and Practice of a Court is law of that Court.
Unless it is directly conflicts with the substantive law, such Rules and Practice have to be followed by a litigant.
Those may be handmade of justice for the Courts but not for the litigants unless and until appropriate leave is granted for the purpose of entertaining the same for the sake of substantive law.
Mr. KH Dasan, Learned Counsel appearing for the applicants, brought my notice to Section 17B of the Act to say that such Section speaks about filing affidavit by any workman not any application therefore only affidavit will be filed.
Defect, if any, arising out of Original Side Rules otherwise filing of affidavit is appropriate.
According to me, his submission suffers from misconception of law.
2.
Firstly writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India will be governed by the Rules of this High Court relating to those matters being independent of Original Side or Appellate Side Rules made for this High Court.
Secondly, there are no different Rules for interlocutory business.
Now-a-days, it is more or less uniform.
Rule 36 of the Writ Rules of this High Court says in respect of "Original Side" applications, the Rules of the Original Side relating to interlocutory application, and in respect of "Appellate Side" applications the Rules of the Appellate Side relating to Civil Revisional Cases shall apply mutates mutandis in respect of making those applications, affirming affidavits, filing of petitions and affidavits etc. amongst others.
In further, after introduction of computerized system in the Original Side such applications are called as General Applications (G.A.)
and in the Appellant Side it is called Civil Applications (CAN).
3.
The next questions are what the purpose of making such applications is and what is the co-ordinating zone between procedural law and substantive law ?
4.
To answer the first question I say now the law is settled to the extent that priority of hearing should be given by the Court in hearing application u/s.
17B of the Act.
Therefore, Court will have to hear such application independently and earlier to the hearing of the main writ petition.
The reason behind the same is that due to congestion of the lists, a Court may not complete the hearing of the main writ petition very soon.
But the concerned workman should not be made to suffer for the pendency of the writ petition filed by the management.
Therefore, it is desirable that appropriate interlocutory applications are to be made to get quick relief.
Therefore, in such way procedural law is helping the substantive law which is a beneficial piece of legislation.
5.
To answer the second question I say that the applications of such nature will have to be supported by affidavits but not by way of verification because the concerned workman will have to say on oath that he is not gainfully employed elsewhere which is the cardinal point of determination amongst others.
Therefore, the necessity of filing affidavits under the substantive law is required in that sense.
It has never been said that except by affidavit no other form an application inspite of being supported by affidavit, can be made.
Such submission is wholly erroneous and contrary to the spirit of the law.
It can not be the desire of law that the workman upon being served with a writ petition will file counter affidavit incidentally taking the point of Section 17B of the Act in such affidavit or additionally alongwith such affidavit.
Earliest is the fittest.
6.
Now, let me proceed with the merit of these applications.
In the application on behalf of the workmen they have stated individually that they are entitled to the last drawn salary giving a figure and further stated that they are entitled to such salary month by month from the date of the award i.e. 22nd January, 2004.
Photocopy of the certificate of net amount of their salary per month is annexed with the affidavit.
The management strongly objected.
At the initial stage of making this application the Court passed an order to deposit salary for a period of one month with the Advocate-on-record of the company to hold the same for the time being as the main writ petition likely to be disposed of at the earliest.
It is necessary to mention hereunder that the plea of the management is that there is no master-servant relationship between the employer and employees as such there is a question of termination of service by the employer to the employees.
Therefore, there is no question of their reinstatement with back wages.
Such question is pertinent for the purpose of due consideration by this Court.
However, a collective application by the Union was made in the form of affidavit under Section 17B of the Act but the same was disallowed giving liberty to file individual applications.
As those applications are belatedly made, passing of immediate order for disbursement of salaries may not be necessitated, no purpose of meeting the urgent livelihood is forthcoming now when the main writ petition is about to be disposed of but that does not necessarily mean if the pendency of the writ petition is getting delayed, the workmen should be able to realize any amount from the Court.
Therefore, substantial part of the amount on account of last drawn salaries should be deposited in the Court in the manner as directed hereunder.
7.
Be that as it may only four questions are relevant for the purpose of due consideration hereunder.
8.
The first question is whether applications under Section 17B are maintainable when there is no master-servant relationship in between the employer and employees ?
Mr. Partha Sarathi Sengupta, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the petitioner/employer has brought notice of this Court to a licence agreement in between the principal employer and the company whereunder the company will use the infrastructure as licensee and the liability of payment of salaries will lie with the superior employer.
I do not think such stand can be accepted at this prima facie stage of hearing of the writ petition to stall any payment to the workman under Section 17B of the Act.
Question of perversity of finding of the Tribunal is the subject matter of final decision of the writ petition which is independent of the application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On the other hand, according to me, validity of such type of licence agreement in absence of the Union is also to be adjudged with the proper prospective of law.
9.
Secondly, further question arises about the applicability of Section 17B from the date of the award or from the date of making application before the High r Court or the Supreme Court.
In such question our High Court held in 2002 (1) CHN 572 (Levcon Instruments Pvt Ltd & Anr. v. State of West Bengal & Ors.), that if the words "from the date of the award" are incorporated by necessary interpretation of Section 17B of the Act it will be naked usurping of the legislative power.
Therefore, it means that the workman would get the wages from the date of filing the writ petition.
On the other hand the Division Bench of the High Court held in 2004(2) LLJ 413 (Indra Perfumery Co Through Sudershab Oberoi v. Presiding Officer & Ors.) that workman would be entitled to get the benefit of the order under Section 17B from the date of the award of the Labour Court.
The Supreme Court ultimately held in 2001(5) SCC 169 (Dena Bank v. Ghanshyam) that the statements of objects and reasons for inserting Section 17B in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 indicates that Parliament intended that the workman should get the last drawn wages from the date of the award till the challenge to the award is finally decided.
10.
According to me, although there is a reason to believe that date of initiation of proceedings is the appropriate date of the award due to availability of relief before the appropriate forum for such period in accordance with law but since this Court is loving to direct to deposit a lump sum amount for four months of last drawn salaries hereunder such point seems to be academic at this stage.
11.
So far as the third question is concerned about the liability as regards gross payment or net payment, I am of the view that our High Court held in 2004(2) CHN 390 (Hooghly Printing Co Ltd v. State of West Bengal & Ors.) that the principle of such payment will be applied only to take into account the `take home policy'.
In other words, for such interregnum period what amount of money an employee is carrying to his home for his livelihood is to be directed to be paid.
At the same time it is to be remembered that Provident Fund and other dues which are statutorily deducted are also claimed amount and if the same are not paid now, a provision is to be made for protecting the same.
I am of the view that it is not the final order.
Payment will be made within the interregnum period.
The principle of payment as provided in the Act is to equalize the unequal bargaining position of the litigants.
During the pendency of the dispute the employees should not be deprived of payment so that they can fight out without any financial difficulty and at the same time with the limited resources they can survive.
At the same time Provident Fund and other statutory dues cannot be given directly in the hands of the employees under the `take home policy' of the salary to mitigate the immediate dues for the purpose of immediate survival and to contest the dues.
Hence, net amount is the appropriate amount for the purpose of due consideration and this Court answered accordingly.
12.
The fourth and last point is on account of refusal of payment due to delay in making applications by the petitioners.
The application was made on 26th April, 2004.
On that very day, on the basis of the application by way of affidavit of the Secretary of the Workmen's union a direction was given by this Court to deposit one month's salary with the Advocate-on-records of the company.
Subsequently, after the exchange of the affidavits in the main writ petition the workmen have come forward with individual affidavit with a prayer for withdrawal of the application made by the Secretary as opposed by the petitioner-management about its sustainability.
Such application accordingly dismissed for non-prosecution.
At that juncture they have arrived at a consensus amongst themselves that there should be an analogous hearing of the application under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 along with the main writ petition and virtually the arguments which are to be made in respect of the main writ petition are substantially made.
Thus I feel that there should not be absolute refusal treating the workman harshly but deposit the entire sum as directed hereunder with an independent person with a liberty of withdrawal at times with the leave of the Court.
13.
Therefore, in disposing applications under Section 17B the writ petitioner is directed to deposit three months' salary with the Registrar, Original Side, of this Court within a period of a fortnight from date.
Mr. Subhransu Ganguly, learned Advocate-on-Record of the petitioner, is also directed to withdraw one months' salary which is lying in the Canara Bank, Hare Street Branch, and to deposit the same with the Registrar, Original Side, of this Court within such period.
Therefore, in total, four months; salary will be deposited with the Registrar, Original side, of this Court in the manner as directed above.
14.
Since the applications have been filed in the form of affidavits and hereunder disposed of, for the sake of formalities, such affidavits will be independently treated as "G.A."
applications under the order of the Court by the Central Filing Section in course of this date.
The presentation forms and other formalities will be complied with by the learned advocate for the workmen in course of this date.
15.
The main writ petition will be heard and disposed of on August 24, 2004 at 2 pm as "Specially Fixed Matter."
16.
Xeroxed certified copies of this judgment will be supplied to the parties within seven days from the date of putting requisites for drawing up and completion of the order and certified copy of this judgment.
17.
The Registrar, Original Side, of this Court, the Manager, Canara Bank, Street Branch, and all parties concerned shall act on signed copy of the minutes of this order on the usual undertakings.
Order accordingly.