G S Singhvi, J - These two petitions involve determination of an identical claim made by the petitioners for appointment as Constables in the service of the Police Department of the Government of Haryana on the basis of selection made in the month of September, 1991.
In view of the similarity of the relief claimed by the petitioners, these two petitions are being decided by a common order.
2.
Recruitment to the posts of Constables in various districts of the State of Haryana was initiated by the Director General of Police who gave detailed directions vide his letter dated 1191991 to the various district heads.
In compliance with the directions given by respondent No. 2 Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, issued an advertisement in response to which the petitioner Gaje Singh also submitted his application.
A similar advertisement was issued by the Superintendent of Police, Karnal, and petitioner Ram Niwas applied for recruitment as Constable in district Karnal.
Both the petitioners cleared the eligibility test conducted by the Superintendents of Police of Sonepat and Karnal respectively.
The eligibility test included scrutiny of the educational qualifications, age, measurement of height and chest etc.
The candidates who cleared the eligibility test were directed to report to the Selection Board at Madhuban which was constituted for adjudging the physical fitness of the candidates.
Both the petitioners have made a categorical assertion that they passed the physical fitness test and their names were included in the select list prepared by the Selection Board.
In para 3 of C.W.P.
No. 5473 of 1993, the petitioner Gaje Singh has stated that his name was placed at No. 6 in the merit list of 20 candidates which was displayed by the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, on 16101991.
Similarly, petitioner Ram Niwas has stated that he cleared the physical fitness test and his name was included at Sr. No. 8 in the order of merit in the list of 16 candidates belonging to backward classes.
Both the petitioners have alleged that their respective Superintendents of Police had sent them for medical examination and their character antecedents were also verified from different sources.
They have pleaded that on the basis of selection made by the duly constituted Selection Boards, they acquired a right to be appointed as Constables but the respondents did not take any action to issue appointment orders in their favour and allot constabulary numbers to them.
They made several representations to the departmental authorities and even served legal notices.
Petitioners have further pleaded that denial of appointment to them amounts to denial of right of equality and the respondents have without any reason or rhyme withheld allotment of constabulary numbers to them despite inclusion of their names in the merit lists.
Petitioner Ram Niwas has raised an additional plea, namely, that being a member of the backward classes category he is entitled to preferential treatment in respect of reserved vacancies.
3.
In their separate replies, the respondents have not disputed the averments made in the writ petitions that the petitioners passed the eligibility test and also cleared the physical fitness test held at Madhuban.
In para 2 of the reply to C.W.P.
No. 5473 of 1993, the following statement has been made by the respondents :-  ``The merit list was prepared on the basis of the performance of the prospective candidates in the physical test.
It is admitted that the petitioner had qualified at the physical test at Madhuban but he was not found upto the prescribed specifications in the physical standard so he was not allowed constabulary number because he was not eligible.
As before recruiting and allotting them constabulary numbers, the finally selected candidates were once again measured to fully satisfy that only candidates with prescribed specifications have been selected.''
In para 3 of the reply, the respondents have made this statement -  ``It is admitted that the petitioner had qualified at the eligibility test and his name was sent to the recruitment board at Madhuban for further physical tests.''
In para 7 of the same reply, the respondents have stated as under :-  ``That in reply to para 7 of the petition, it is submitted that before recruiting and allotting them constabulary numbers, the finally selected candidates were once again measured to fully satisfy that the only candidate with prescribed specifications have been selected.
Though the petitioner had qualified at the physical test but when he was measured again in height and chest, he was not found upto the prescribed specifications as his height was less and so he was not allotted constabulary number as he was not even eligible as per specifications prescribed in the rules.''
In their reply to the replication filed by the petitioner, respondents have made the following statement in para 2:-  ``As stated in the written statement the finally selected candidates were once again measured to fully satisfy that only the candidates with the prescribed specifications have been selected.
When the petitioner was measured again the height was found 5'-6'' in 1991 whereas the height prescribed in the rules is 5'-7'' as such he was not allotted constabulary number because he was not eligible.''
In their reply to C.W.P.
No. 15018 of 1993, the respondents have admitted the fact that the petitioner's name was at Sr. No. 8 in the order of merit.
In para 3, the respondents have stated -  ``As stated above, the petitioner was allowed to appear for the physical test alongwith others.
It is pertinent to mention here that before recruiting and issuing the constabulary numbers, the finally selected candidates were once again measured to fully satisfy that the candidates with the prescribed specifications have been selected.
Though the petitioner had qualified at the physical tests but when he was measured again in height and chest he was not found upto the prescribed specifications and so he was not allotted constabulary number.
It is further submitted that the height prescribed in the Punjab Police Rules is 5'-7'' for general category caste candidates and 5'-6'' for backward classes candidates.
The chest measurement prescribed in the Punjab Police Rules is 33''-34-1/2'' for general category caste candidates and 32''-33-1/2'' for backward classes candidates.
The petitioner was a backward class candidate and he was found to be under measurement in both chest and height.
The height measurement of the petitioner found in October, 1991 was 5'-5-1/2'' and chest measurement was 32''-33''.
The petitioner was short of 1/2'' in both height and chest in October, 1991.
It is possible that the petitioner might have made up the deficiency by now by continuous practice as it was above 2-1/2 years back when he was measured in height and chest.''
In para 4 of the reply, an apparently contradictory statement has been made by the respondents but this much is clear from the reply that the petitioner's name was included in the merit list at Sr. No. 8.
This all is evident from the following portion of para 4 of the reply :-  ``It is, however, submitted that as detailed in para No. 3 above many candidates appeared before the Board and complained that they were eligible candidates and were ignored by the concerned Superintendent of Police.
The Board gave them chance to appear in all the physical tests.
The petitioner was amongst those candidates who could not pass the eligibility test but was given chance to appear in the physical test.
It is admitted that the petitioner qualified at the physical test.
It is also admitted that petitioner belongs to backward class and out of total 16 candidates selected from backward classes the name of the petitioner was at Sr. No. 8 in the order of merit.''
4.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that when the petitioners have been found suitable in the eligibility test and physical test, it was not open to the respondents to have denied appointment to them and allotment of constabulary numbers on the specious plea that the petitioners were not found to be of prescribed specifications in height and chest on being subjected to re-measurement.
Learned counsel argued that the very action of the respondents in subjecting the petitioners to the test of height and chest on a second occasion speaks volumes of arbitrariness in the procedure adopted by the respondents.
Learned counsel argued that when the petitioners have been found fit by the Selection Board and the respective Superintendents of Police there is no justification for undertaking a second measurement of their height and chest.
Learned counsel further argued that the District Medical Officer had found both the petitioners to be physically fit from all points of view and, therefore, the action of the respondents in depriving the petitioners of appointment in the service should be declared as unconstitutional.
Learned Assistant Advocate General raised a preliminary objection that relief should not be given to the petitioners because in a number of other petitions the Court has declined relief to other petitioners.
On merits the learned Assistant Advocate General argued that second measurement of the height and chest of the candidates was made in view of the complaints made by a large number of candidates about unfairness in the process of selection.
She argued that the competent authority had every right to call upon the candidates to appear for physical test on a second occasion and if at the stage of second measurements the petitioners were not found up to the standard they cannot complain of violation of fundamental rights.
5.
In regard to the preliminary objection of the learned Assistant Advocate- General, it need only be mentioned that C.W.P.
No. 16864 of 1991 (Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana); C.W.P.
No. 1083 of 1992 (Karambir Singh v. State of Haryana); C.W.P.
No. 877 of 1992 (Kaptan Singh v. Director General of Police Haryana); C.W.P.
No. 6420 of 1992 (Sumer Singh v. State of Haryana); C.W.P.
No. 685 of 1992 (Ramesh Chander v. State of Haryana); and C.W.P.
No. 157 of 1992 (Anoop Singh v. State of Haryana) were decided by the Court without detailed orders.
6.
In C.W.P.
No. 1731 of 1992 (Pawan Kumar and others v. State of Haryana), 1992(3) SCT 98 (P&H) a detailed order was passed by the Court on 19.5.1992 and the Selection Board was directed to re-consider the cases of the petitioners in that case.
Similarly, in C.W.P.
No. 16873 of 1991 (Vinod Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1992(3) SCT 699 (P&H)) a learned Single Judge of this Court allowed the petition on 31.5.1993 and directed reconsideration of the case of that petitioner.
The detailed order passed by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jawahar Lal Gupta shows that he had called for the record and after examining the same he felt convinced that the rejection of the candidature of Vinod Kumar was legally unjustified.
Therefore, mere summary dismissal of some of the petitions by this Court cannot be a ground for denying relief to the petitioners, if one is due to them.
7.
On the issue of petitioners' fulfilling the conditions prescribed for physical fitness it is necessary to bear in mind that as per the admission made by the respondents in their replies the petitioners had qualified in the eligibility test held by the Superintendents of Police of Sonepat and Karnal and had also cleared the physical test held by the Selection Board at Madhuban.
Only at the stage of re-checking of their height or chest measurements the authorities are said to have found that the petitioners were not up to the required standard.
In the case of Gaje Singh, he is shown to be short in height by 1/4'' and in the case of Ram Niwas who belongs to backward class the deficiency is said to be of 1/2" in height and 1/2" in the chest expansion.
However, no cogent reason has been advanced by the respondents for second physical examination of the petitioners.
Moreover, it has not been shown by the respondents that the petitioners were subjected to this test scientifically and on such examination they were found to be lacking the prescribed specifications.
In this view of the matter, the proper course will course will be to direct the respondents to send the petitioners before a Medical Board for checking their physical fitness in the contest of the specifications prescribed by the Department and to appoint the petitioners in case it is found by the medical board that they fulfil the required specifications.
8.
In the result the writ petitions are partly allowed.
Respondent No. 4 in both the writ petitions are directed to send the petitioners before a medical board for re-examination of their physical fitness in the context of the specifications laid down by the department.
If the medical board certifies that the petitioners fulfil the required specifications, it shall be the duty of the respondents to appoint the petitioners as Constables and give them constabulary numbers.
In that event the petitioners shall be entitled to seniority in accordance with the merit number assigned to them by the Selection Board.
This exercise must be completed by the respondents within a period of six weeks from today.
Parties to bear their own costs.