GS Singhvi, J - This petition is being decided along with C.W.Ps.
Nos. 10344 of 1992 and 3408 of 1993 because one of the questions to be decided in all these cases is common.
2.
Dr. Jasbir Singh Sandhu, Dr. Arvind Sharma and Dr. Vijay Katyal, who are petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 15874 of 1992, joined service of the Government of Punjab in the Animal Husbandry Department on having been appointed in the Animal Husbandry Service between 1981 and 1983 after regular selection by the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission').
All the petitioners submitted applications for recruitment to the Punjab Animal Husbandry Service Class II posts, which were advertised by the Government of Punjab vide Annexures P-1.
They were called upon to appear for interview on different dates fixed by the Commission.
The interviews were scheduled to be held in August, 1991.
However, a day before the actual interviews, the Commission intimated the petitioners regarding its decision to cancel the interviews and to stop the process of selection.
3.
While the process of recruitment to the Punjab Animal Husbandry Class II Service was under contemplation a notification dated 1521990 was issued by the Government of Punjab under Rule 3(H) of the Punjab Civil Service (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988 amending its earlier notification dated 2011989.
By this notification Part 'B' of the Second Schedule was amended and the posts of Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Senior Veterinary Officers and Veterinary Officers were placed in one pay-scale of Rs. 3,700-5,300.
This notification was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 7398 of 1990, Dr. Harinder Paul Singh and four others v. State of Punjab and others, in which a challenge was made to the action of the Commission and the Government in making direct recruitment to the three posts of Deputy Directors which were advertised by the Commission on 321990.
Dr. Vijay Katyal (petitioner No. 3 herein) was one of the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 7398 of 1990.
In that case the petitioners had claimed that after the issue of notification dated 1521990 recruitment to the posts of Deputy Directors could not be made except by way of promotion.
This argument did not find favour with this Court and the writ petition was dismissed on 9.8.1990.
The Division Bench held that notification dated 1521990 does not have the effect of modifying the Punjab Animal Husbandry (Class I) Service Rules, 1980 which provides for recruitment to the posts of Deputy Directors from two sources, namely, by direct recruitment and by promotion, in the ratio of 1/3rd : 2/3rd.
4.
Petitioners have pleaded that once a Division Bench of this Court has held that recruitment rules cannot be treated as amended by merely issuing the notification dated 1521990, it is incumbent upon respondents Nos. 1 to 3 to make selections and appointments to the posts encadred in the Punjab Animal Husbandry (State Service Class II) Rules, 1981 strictly in accordance with the said Rules and that the action of the respondents in withholding recruitment to the posts advertised vide Annexure P.1 is without jurisdiction apart from being arbitrary.
Petitioners have further stated that instead of making recruitment to the posts advertised vide Annexure P.1, the respondent-Government has resorted to the methodology of appointing persons holding posts in the lower cadre by way of adjustment.
With this object the Government has issued order Annexure P.6 whereby 12 persons holding lower posts in the cadre have been adjusted against the higher posts.
These persons are being paid salary in their own pay scale but they are enjoying the status of higher posts and are discharging the duties and shouldering the responsibilities of the higher posts.
This, according to the petitioners, amounts to indirect promotion to the next higher post and by issuing order Annexure P.6 the respondents have acted in total disregard of the provisions of the 1981 Rules.
5.
In their reply, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have pleaded that Annexure P.6 has been issued for making a purely temporary adjustment and it cannot be termed as an order of promotion.
While admitting that the petitioners are members of the Animal Husbandry Service and that they had applied for selection and appointment in pursuance of advertisement Annexure P.1, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have pleaded that the posts of Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Senior Veterinary Officers and Veterinary Officers stand merged in a single cadre and, therefore, no recruitment can now be made through the agency of Commission except to the posts of Veterinary Officers.
Their further case is that the Government is contemplating framing of a new set of service rules and the specialised posts will have to be filled in accordance with the new set of rules.
Respondents have pleaded that after the issue of notification dated 1521990, the Government took a decision not to proceed with the recruitment in terms of advertisement Annexure P.1 and, therefore, the Commission was requested not to take further action for making recruitment.
Annexure R. 1 has been placed on record in support of this assertion.
6.
In its separate reply, the Commission has admitted the fact that advertisement Annexure P.1 was issued by it and the petitioners, who had applied in response to the said advertisement, were called for interviews, which were to be held in August, 1591.
Its case is that on account of subsequent communication sent by the Government, the Commission decided not to proceed with the interviews.
Other respondents have not chosen to file any reply.
7.
The only argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that when this Court has interpreted the notification dated 1521990 as the one which has not affected the operation of the Rules relating to recruitment to the Service, the decision taken by the Government of Punjab and the Commission not to make selections for appointments in pursuance of Annexure P.1 is liable to be declared as illegal and a direction should be given to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to make selections and appointments on the basis of Annexure P.1.
An ancillary argument of the learned counsel is that Annexure P.6 by which respondent Nos. 4 to 15 have been promoted to the higher posts is liable to be declared ultra vires to the 1981 Rules.
Shri Walia, AAG argued that Annexure P.6 is not an order of promotion but merely a working-arrangement, and none of the legal or fundamental rights of the petitioners has been infringed on account of the issuance of Annexure P.6.
Shri Walia further argued that after the issue of notification dated 1521990 it was not possible for the Government and the Commission to make recruitment in accordance with 1981 Rules.
Lastly, Shri Walia argued that the Government had taken a policy decision to frame a new set of rules and in contemplation of framing of such rules the interviews for the purpose of selection in pursuance of Annexure P.1 were cancelled.
He pleaded that the Government's action in directing that no selection be made in pursuance of Annexure P.1 does not suffer from mala fides and, therefore, no order be issued in favour of the petitioners.
8.
A bare perusal of notification dated 1521990 shows that it has been issued by the President of India in exercise of his powers under Rule 3(h) of the Punjab Civil Service (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988.
This notification does not bring about any explicit amendment in the Punjab Animal Husbandry (State Service Class II) Rules, 1981.
These rules have been framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Therefore, notification Annexure P 3 cannot be construed as one by which the rules framed by a competent authority for recruitment of the service have been amended.
This is precisely what the Division Bench has held on 9.8.1990 when it dismissed C.W.P.
No. 7398 of 1990.
Shri Walia has not been able to point out any other notification by which 1981 Rules have been amended so as to bring about a retrospective change in the mode of recruitment.
In the absence of any such amendment in the Rules, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 were not entitled to withhold selections and appointments to the posts advertised vide Annexure P.1.
Petitioners did acquire a legal right to be considered for selection and appointment on the posts advertised by the Commission and by arbitrary cancellation of the interviews to be held in August, 1991, this right of the petitioners has been infringed.
9.
In so far as Annexure P.6 is concerned, it need be observed that though termed as an adjustment.
In effect and in substance that order has the effect of giving higher posts to the persons named therein.
It is not a case of merely giving an additional charge of a post.
If that was the intention of the Government, the order would have indicated that the persons named in the said order are being given charge of higher posts in addition to their own posts.
Shri Walia conceded that all the 12 persons who have been adjusted by Annexure P.6 are holding higher posts independently.
They are discharging the duties and are performing the functions of higher posts exclusively.
Therefore, even though benefit of higher pay-scale has not been given to the persons named in Annexure P.6, it is reasonable to treat this as an order of shadow promotion.
I would have dealt with the issue of legality of Annexure P.6 at a greater length, but in view of the fact that I find justification in the claim of the petitioners for issue of a direction to the respondents (Nos. 1 to 3) to make selections and appointments in pursuance of Annexure P.1, I am of the opinion that it would serve no purpose by declaring Annexure P.6 as illegal or by quashing it.
Rather such an order would unsettle the administrative work of the department.
Therefore, it would be proper to allow Annexure P.6 to hold field till regular selections are made in accordance with the provisions of 1981 Rules.
10.
In C.W.P.
No. 10344 of 1992, Dr. Sukh Mohinder Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and another, the petitioners have challenged Annexure P.6 and have at the same time prayed that order Annexure P.6 be declared as an order of promotion and a direction be given to the respondents to implement the reservation roster so that the petitioners who belong to scheduled castes may get preference in promotion.
After considering the submissions made by Shri Sagar and Shri Walia, I am of the view that reservation roster cannot be applied to a case where a post is filled by a method other than direct recruitment or promotion.
Though the rules of 1981 do not contemplate anything like adjustment on the higher post, as I have already held above, quashing of order dated 17.7.1992 will create serious complications and a situation which would not be conducive to public interest.
11.
In C.W.P.
No. 3408 of 1993 an additional plea raised by the petitioners is for issue of a direction to the respondents to give them the benefit of special increment on the basis of their higher qualifications.
Petitioners have pleaded that their case is covered by the Government's decision regarding grant of an advance increment on the basis of higher qualifications.
Respondents have not disputed the claim of the petitioners but have stated that except one of the petitioners others have not even applied for the grant of an advance increment.
Having looked into the rival pleadings, I am of the opinion that ends of justice would be met by giving a direction to the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners for grant of an advance increment in accordance with the policy instructions issued by the Government and to give them benefit of the same in case the similarly situated persons have already been given such benefit.
12.
As a result of the above discussion, these petitions succeed and are allowed.
Respondents are directed to make selections for the posts encadred in the 1981 Rules including those advertised vide Annexure P.1 in C.W.P.
No. 15874 of 1992 strictly in accordance with the provisions of the 1981 Rules.
The Punjab Public Service Commission is directed to continue with the process of selection from the stage where it was abandoned in pursuance of directions of the Government.
The Commission should interview the petitioners who had applied in response to Annexure P-1 along with other candidates who too had applied but who have not approached this Court for issue of a writ of mandamus.
This process of selection should be finalised within a period of four months and the Government should make appointments from amongst the selected candidates within the next one month.
The Government should also undertake an exercise for making promotions in accordance with the provisions of 1981 Rules and pass necessary orders within a period of five months.
Case of Dr. Charanjit Sharma petitioner for grant of an advance increment shall be considered by the Government within two months in accordance with its policy instructions and pass appropriate order.
As soon as regular selections are made by the complaint body the Government should discontinue the system of adjustment to which it has resorted to on the basis of order dated 17.7.1992.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.