Arun Kumar Mitra, J - Writ Petitioners herein are the Instructors of Non formal Educational Centres within West Bengal.
In this Writ Petition since the Petitioners claimed that they have common cause of action, naturally they moved a single Writ Petition.
Along with this Writ Petition 19 other Writ Petitions on the identical cause of action which are mentioned herein below have been heard and are being disposed of by a common order passed in this Writ Petition.
2.
According to the petitioners in 1977 Planning Commission was set up to consider universalisation of education amongst the children of economically disadvantageous rural Section of the community.
The Government of India 1979- 80 introduced Non Formal Educational Scheme for some educationally backward areas including West Bengal.
The Government of India as well as the State Government and the administration of the Union Territory adopted a policy decision to universalisation elementary education in order to achieve one goal of educational development as a part of the Minimum Needs Programme as well as the Twenty Point Programme, 1986.
3.
By and through the said policy, it was decided to ensure that all children who attained the age of about 11 years by 1990 would have atleast 5 years of schooling or its equivalent through the non-formal strength and likewise by 1995 all children would be provided compulsory education upto 14 years of age.
The policy has been adopted to impart education upto a certain level.
4.
The Petitioners in Paragraph 9 of this Writ Petition has stated the basic features of non-formal education :  "9.
The basic features of non-formal education is as follows :- a) learner centered approach with the instructor as a facilitator.
b) emphasis on learning rather than teaching, and for this purpose the capability of the children to learn from each other needs to be highlighted.
c) organisation of activities so as to enable learners to progress at their own pace, but using efficient techniques to ensure fast pace of learning; d) stress on continuous learners evaluation and certification of learners;  e) provision of proper lighting arrangements at the NFC centres and necessary equipment; f) in terms of scholastic achievements (particularly language and maths), following the norms set in the formal system both because of its desirability per as and because it is essential for entry into the formal structures;  g) creation of participatory learning environment and treating the children with the regard they deserve as persons engaged in productive activities;  h) organisation of joyful extra curricular activities including singing and dancing, plays and skits, games and sports, excursion, etc.  i) ensuring that all facilities and incentives given to girls, children of SC/ST, and others in the formal system are made available in the non-formal system as well, in addition provision of free test books and stationery to all pupils; 5.
According to the petitioners, they were given appointment at a fixed remuneration.
The petitioners also stated that it was a centrally sponsored scheme for running of non-formal educational centres in the nine educationally backward states including West Bengal.
Supervisors and Instructors under the scheme were drawn up from the local community and the main criteria for their selection were their commitment to the cause of community service.
6.
Following the policy of the Central Government, the State of West Bengal also prepared a scheme for operating part-time non-formal educational centres and issuing guidelines regarding set up and functioning of each centre.
Duration of the course, the guidelines connected was three years.
Regarding administrative control in rural areas the Ad hoc Committee of the District School Board (presently District Primary School Council) was vested with the power of control over the non-formal schools, who were to draw necessary funds from the government and appoint part-time teachers as admissive.
Such functions in consultations with the Urban Advisory Committee were made by the District Primary School Council.
Ultimately the aforesaid scheme and or project of non-formal education ended in the year 1990.
7.
The Writ petitioners also stated that in the non-formal educational centres they were appointed.
The petitioners annexed appointment letters and certificates of the petitioners regarding their educational qualifications and extra curricular activities which were marked collectively as Annexure-`A'.
8.
According to the petitioners, upon discontinuation of the aforesaid scheme/project after a period of more than 10 says the services of the petitioners as Instructors of the Centres came to an end.
However, in view of their long continuous service as Instructors in non-formal educational centres as aforesaid apart from being eligible to appointed as primary teachers also, the petitioners have gathered vast experience in primary education as well as in its teaching and therefore, they are entitled to be considered as a separate exempted category for the purpose of appointment of primary teachers by the Government under the different District Primary School Councils and other local bodies and authorities.
9.
The petitioner claimed that all the Instructors of the non-formal educational centres including the petitioners possess all the requisite minimum qualifications for being considered for appointment as Assistant Teachers in different Primary Schools under the Primary School Councils, local bodies and authorities.
10.
The petitioners further stated that in consideration of long, continuous and satisfactory services rendered by the Instructors of the non- formal educational centres, the State Government considered the question of submission of their names on priority basis from the Employment Exchanges for the Post of Primary Teachers.
The State Government in the Labour Department had decided that the candidates who were registered with the Employment Exchanges and had experience in non-formal education organised by institutions/organisations authorised by the State Government may be sponsored on priority basis against the vacancies for the Post of Teachers (untrained) on condition that those candidates do possess the minimum qualifications and have recorded their experience in the Employment Exchanges.
The said decision of the government was circulated amongst all the Employment Officers of the State of West Bengal through Memorandum No. 1/87 which has been made Annexure-`B' to the Writ Petition.
11.
The State Government through its Labour Department Memo No. 175 Emp./dated April, 1st, 1987 further decided and directed that 10 per cent vacancies for the Post of Primary Teachers be filled up from the candidates experienced in adult education and non-formal education organised by the institutions/organisations authorised by the State Government on condition that the candidates shall possess minimum qualifications required and registered with Employment Exchanges before the notification of the vacancies.
12.
The scheme was withdrawn and the non-formal Instructors including the petitioners have not only lost their services as such but also their names have not been forwarded with the exempted category candidates for being appointed as Primary Teachers.
13.
According to the petitioners, the Director of Labour Department Government of West Bengal, in the meantime again by a Circular dated, November 12, 1993 and November 30, 1993 provided for, before percentage of vacancies including 10 per cent vacancy reserved for the candidates experienced for non-formal education and adult education for the purpose of recruitment of Primary Teachers under the different District School Boards (presently District Primary School Councils).
14.
The petitioners have annexed Circular of 12th November and 30th November 1993 and marked as Annexure-`C'.
15.
The petitioners stated in Paragraph 26 of the Writ Petition that while the non-formal Instructors including the petitioners were reasonably expecting their employment in view of their commitment towards the society and service towards the society, the Government of West Bengal through Labour Department issued a Circular No. 319 Emp.
Dated July 30, 1996 directed that the Circular No. 1 of 1987 has become inoperative after publication of the rules of recruitment and leave of teachers in Primary Schools in West Bengal through Education Department Notification No. 768 EDN.
(P), dated November 22, 1999 as there is no such provision in the said rules.
16.
The petitioners have annexed a copy of the said Circular dated July 30, 1996 and have marked with an Annexure-`D' to the Writ petition.
17.
In the meantime the petitioners have ultimately crossed the maximum age limit of 40 years as provided in the rules.
18.
In 1999 West Bengal Regulation of Recruitment in State Government Establishment and Establishments of Public Undertakings, Statutory Bodies, Government Companies and Local Authorities, 1999 has come into force w.e.f.
November 15, 1999.
19.
Section 2, sub-section (5) of the said Act of 1999 defined the words "exempted category" and it says that the exempted category means the category of person or persons to be declared by the State Government to be exempted for the purpose of Section 3.
20.
Section 3 of the said Act of 1999 has been quoted in the writ petition in Paragraph 31 which is inter alia as follows :  "31.
Section 3 of the aid Act of 1999 provides that the State Government may, from time to time, by Notification - a) declare any class or category of persons to be exempted category for the purpose of this Act.
b) reserve a percentage of vacancies in the posts in any Government Establishment or establishments of any public undertaking, statutory body, Government Company or local authority to be filled up by the persons from the exempted category.
c)...............  d)...............
The petitioners stated in the Writ Petition that inspite of coming into force the said Act, 1999 no notification under Section 3 of the said Act declaring any class or category of persons to be exempted category for the purpose of the Act has been published by the State Government.
21.
The petitioners claimed that Section 3 of the said Act of 1999 has been published and inspite of revocation and or withdrawal of all Government Orders and or Circulars providing for appointment and quota for exempted category like ex-Census employees, adult education and non-formal Instructors of the District Primary School Councils excepting North 24 Parganas have been making requisitions for sponsoring the names of the ex-Census category candidates and appointing them in terms of the aforesaid repealed Government Circulars issued from time to time from the year 1977 to 1993.
22.
In the writ petition, petitioner have further stated that the recruitment rules, 1991 does not categorically spell out or specify the category of reserved persons and therefore, mere publication of the recruitment rules, 1991 does not and cannot nullify the policy decision of the government as adopted through Circular Nos. 1/87 and 175 (Emp.)
dated April 1st, 1987 dated November, 12 of 1993 and Circular dated November 30, 1993 and as such the Circular dated April, 30 is illegal, malafide and arbitrary.
23.
The petitioners in this writ petition prayed for writ of Mandamus, commanding the respondents from giving any or any further effect to Memo No. 319 dated July 30th, 1996 being Annexure-`D' to the writ petition.
24.
The petitioners also prayed for writ of Mandamus to follow the policy decision of the government as contained in Circular No. 1/87 read with 175 (Emp.)
dated April 1st, 1987, Circular dated November, 1993 and the Memo dated November 30th 1993.
25.
The petitioners further prayed for writ of Certiorari for quashing the Memo No. 319 (Emp.)
dated July 30th, 1996.
26.
This writ petition was contested by the Government and affidavit-in- opposition was filed by Respondent No. 9, the Director of School Education, Government of West Bengal.
27.
One Assistant Director, Mass Education, Extension, Government of West Bengal affirmed the affidavit on behalf of the Respondent No. 9.
28.
In the affidavit-in-opposition the Respondent No. 9 stated that admittedly the petitioners worked as non-formal Instructors.
The Primary Education is formal education and is under the control of the School Education Department.
It differs basically from non-formal education, in respect of the syllabi, for appointment of teachers, the teaching/learning process and in every relevant aspect are different which are all under the administration of the School Education Department.
Non-formal educational centres were run under a scheme introduced by the Central Government, for utilising services of persons within to render service to the society.
Basic qualitative difference is there between formal and non-formal education.
The non-formal educational Instructors were appointed on a part-time basis and on fixed honorarium.
In such circumstances, according to the Respondent No. 9, non-formal education centres cannot be equated with Primary Schools and the Instructors in non- formal education centres are not entitled to demand appointment as primary teachers.
29.
The respondent relied on a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court and annexed a copy of the said judgment as Annexure-`A' to the affidavit-in- opposition.
30.
In the affidavit-in-opposition it has been submitted that in view of the said judgment, the Court negativated the claim of non-formal Instructors and the Hon'ble Apex Court observed that they cannot be equated with primary teachers.
31.
In the above circumstances, the Labour Department, Government of West Bengal by Circular No. 1/99 reiterated that the 1987 Circular providing for priority for non-formal Instructors and all other Circulars stood inoperative by reason of the promulgation of the statutory rules of recruitment of primary teachers.
32.
The Respondent No. 9 has also stated that in view of the judgment annexed to the opposition, the Instructors of the non-formal education centres are not entitled to be treated at per as observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
33.
The Respondent No. 9 further stated that the rules for recruitment of primary teachers are statutory rules, the said rules don't provide for any reservation for non-formal Instructors even though it provides for the statutory reservation for the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates.
34-35.
The fact that besides the statutory reservation for SC, ST candidates, no other reservation is provided in the rules.
It has further been stated that the Circulars/Executive Orders cannot override the provisions of the statutory rules.
It has also been stated in the opposition that since there is specific rule for recruitment of primary teachers, no Executive Order can override the said rules.
35.
The Respondent No. 9 in the opposition in Paragraph 15 stated that the direction of the Labour Department about 10 per cent reservation was apparently issued by mistake of fact and law and in any event the said purported reservation has no binding effect as the Labour Department has nothing to do with recruitment of teachers.
36.
In the opposition it has further been stated that the petitioners have no cause of action for being genuinely aggrieved inasmuch as there is no provision in the statute regarding reservation of 10 per cent quota out of the primary teacher's vacancies as alleged and or claimed by the writ petitioners.
37.
In opposition the Respondent No. 9 has annexed a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 4195 of 94 (State of West Bengal and Ors. v. Monirujjaman Mullick and Ors.).
38.
According to the Respondent No. 9, in this judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court has clearly observed that non-formal education centres cannot be equated with the primary schools which are regularly run by the Education Department of the State Government.
In that judgment the Writ Petitions filed by the Respondents in the High Courts, all stood dismissed.
39.
In the opposition it has further been stated that rules for recruitment of primary teachers are statutory rules.
The said rules don't provide for any reservation of quota for non-formal Instructors.
40.
The Respondent No. 9 further stated that Executive Order cannot override the provisions of the statutory rules.
41.
It has further been stated that all the candidates who are the writ petitioners are over aged and the rules provide age limit for recruitment of teachers.
42.
The Respondent No. 9 prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
43.
The petitioners filed affidavit in reply to the said affidavit-in- opposition filed by the Respondent No. 9.
44.
In the reply, the petitioners reiterated their earlier stand and repeated the submissions made by them in the writ petition.
In the reply the writ petitioners annexed the policy regarding non-formal education, Sarba Shiksha Abhiyan, National Curriculum Framework for Primary and Secondary Education, National Policy on Education, 1986 in support of their claim for reservation of 10 per cent.
45.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Central Government formulated policy decision regarding working structure of the non- formal educational Instructors.
46.
The learned counsel submitted that under this scheme, the Central Government used to employ the persons like the petitioners as non-formal Instructors.
47.
The learned counsel also submitted that for the purpose of disbursement o the payments, the State Government were being entrusted.
48.
The learned counsel further submitted that in the reply they have annexed a guideline on formulation of the perspective District Elementary Educational Plan under Sarba Shiksha Abhiyan.
Under the scheme, several aspects of the educational scenario of the District were exposed.
49.
The learned counsel also submitted that they have annexed in their affidavit-in-reply the National Policy on Education, 1986 and from that policy it appears that various schemes were projected and in that scheme non-formal education has also taken place.
50.
According to the learned counsel, in Clause 512 of the said National Policy of 1986 there is a resolution which runs as follows :-  A RESOLVE  512 The New Education Policy will give the highest priority to solving the problem of children dropping out of school and will adopt an array of meticulously formulated strategies based on micro-planning, and applied at the grass-roots level all over the country, to ensure children's retention at school.
This effort will be fully coordinated with the network of non-formal education.
It shall be ensured that all children who attain the age of about 11 years by 1990 will have had five years of schooling, or its equivalent through the non-formal stream.
Likewise, by 1995 all children will be provided free and compulsory education upto 14 years of age.
51.
The learned counsel for the petitioners relied on a Circular/letter issued by the Director, Labour Department dated 121193 and submitted that this Circular/letter provides for filling up of 10 per cent vacancies in the Post of Primary Teachers from the candidates experienced in adult education and non-formal education.
This letter was issued by the Director of Employment to Sri P Aggarwal, District Magistrate, Jalpaiguri.
52.
The learned counsel further submitted that this Circular/letter has been issued after formulation of the rules for recruitment of Primary Teachers in 1991.
53.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also relied on two judgments delivered by two Single Judges of this High Court, one by Hon'ble Justice Aloke Chakraborty and the other by Hon'ble Justice DP Kundu.
54.
The learned counsel submitted that these judgments have been delivered by the learned Judges very recently.
55.
The learned counsel submitted that by these two judgments the two Hon'ble Judges of this High Court directed the State Government to prepare a scheme within a particular time frame for the purpose of absorption of non- formal Instructors having experience in non-formal education and or adult education.
56.
The learned counsel further stated that the Memo dated 17th November 1995 issued by the Joint Secretary, Education Department, Government of West Bengal is illegal and has been issued to deprive the deserving candidates who are entitled to absorption, being experienced in adult education and or non- formal education.
57.
The learned counsel further submitted that the serialized Instructions being No. 1/99 issued by the Director of Employment, West Bengal which is also an annexure to writ petition is also a Memo which is not only illegal but also malafide and arbitrary and that it should be set aside.
58.
The learned counsel for the Respondent No. 9 submitted that the petitioners should be given appointment and or 10 per cent quota should be reserved for the Instructors who are experienced in imparting non-formal education and adult education.
59.
The learned counsel appearing for the Respondent No. 9 submitted that in the year 1991 rules for recruitment of Primary Teachers have been framed and the petitioners as also the respondent cannot go beyond the rules and any Executive Order or Circular/letter overriding the said provisions of statutory rules cannot have any effect.
60.
The learned counsel for the Respondent No. 9 strongly relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition and submitted that the Hon'ble Apex Court has clearly observed in this judgment that the appointment of the Instructors in non-formal education and adult education were given under a particular scheme and the scheme being over they have been dis-engaged and now they cannot claim any right on the basis of that scheme.
61.
The learned counsel further submitted that the rule for recruitment of Primary Teachers has provided age bar and the petitioners or the respondent authoritive cannot violate the said rule or the said age bar.
62.
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the learned counsel for the Respondent No. 9, considered their respective submissions.
63.
In this writ petition, the petitioners simply relied on a Circular/letter of the Director of Employment, Government of West Bengal issued in 1993 as also a Circular of 1987 where it has been provided that 10 per cent quota is to be made reserved for the persons who are experienced in adult education and non-formal education.
It is a fact that these two Circulars and or Executive Instructions provided for keeping 10 per cent quota for the candidates who are experienced in adult education and or non-formal education but for the appointment in the Post of Primary teachers, in the year 1991 rules were framed.
These rules for recruitment of Primary Teachers provided as to how the Primary Teachers will be recruited.
These rules have also made provisions for reservations for SC and ST candidates.
In these rules admittedly, there is no provision for recruitment of persons having experience in adult education and non-formal education.
64.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment annexed to the affidavit-in- opposition as well as in the other judgments have observed that in a schematic appointment scheme being over, employment also becomes over and the persons appointed under a particular scheme cannot claim as a matter of right, employment even if the scheme is over.
It is also admitted in the writ petition that the petitioners have crossed the age bar and it has been admitted in the writ petition that they have crossed the age of 40.
Rules for recruitment of Primary Teachers provide for age bar and it cannot be suggested that the government or governmental authority should violate the rules.
The writ Court should not also direct the government or the governmental authority to violate the statutory provisions.
This High Court in a judgment reported in 1998 Vol.
I C.H.N.
Page 544 (Debashis Dutta v. State of West Bengal) which is a special Bench judgment, observed clearly that nothing can be done in violation of the statutory provisions.
The same principle has been adopted in the decisions reported in 1991(1) C.L.T.
Page-509 (Zia-ul-Islam & Ors. v. State of West Bengal & Ors.) and in the judgment reported in 1998(2) C.H.N.
Page 241 (DPI & Ors. v. Dr. Ashish Pal).
In so many other judgments delivered by this High Court it has been clearly observed that the statutory authorities or the government authorities cannot violate the statutory rules.
It is also settled principle of law that government orders and or executive instructions cannot override the provisions of the statute.
65.
Nowhere the statutory rules provide for reservation of 10 per cent quota for the persons having experience in non-formal and adult education schemes.
Insofar as the judgment delivered by the learned single Judges (2) of the High Court, I respectfully observed that since the Apex Court and the Special Bench of the High Court has made certain decisions, the said two judgments can be said to be per in curium.
66.
It is also observed that the Circular/letters issued by the Director of Labour Department in 1987 and 1993 are also without effect inasmuch as it goes to contradict and or violate the statutory rules.
67.
In view of the discussions made above, I don't find any merit in this writ petition.
68.
The writ petition is therefore, dismissed.
69.
There will be no order as to costs.
The other Writ Petitions being Nos. WP No. 1912 of 2002 (Gurudas Dutta & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 2019 of 2002 (Swapan Kar.
Ghosh & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1916 of 2002 (Sri Dilip Kr.
Ghosh & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1927 of 2002 (Jaladhar Pal & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 496 of 2002 (Ashima Kundu & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1449 of 2002 (Haradhan Ghosh & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1488 of 2002 (Sanat Ghorui & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1447 of 2002 (Netai Banerjee & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 351 of 2002 (Ashis Kumar Panda & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 2012 of 2002 (Padmabati Koley & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1443 of 2002 (Sibupada Ganguly & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1442 of 2002 (Chunilal Banerjee & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 357 of 2002 (Saraju Dhara & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 356 of 2002 (Bholanath Ghosh & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1487 of 2002 (Shyamapada Ghosh & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 355 of 355 of 2002 (Sant Kr.
Sau & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 495 of 2002 (Raghunath Mondal & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 497 of 2002 (Biswanath Mondal & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1446 of 2002 (Tapasi Ghosh [Biswas] & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), WP No. 1445 of 2002 (Sannyasi Charan Giri & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.), being identical in nature and heard analogously are also dismissed.
Urgent Xeroxed certified copy, if applied for, will be given expeditiously to the parties.
Petitions dismissed.