TS Doabia, J - Nagar Palika Parishad, Lahar has filed this petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India challenging an order of Board of Revenue, Annexure P-1.
The Board of Revenue reversing the decision of the Commissioner, Chambal Division which in turn upheld the order of the Collector, Bhind came to a conclusion that the services of the respondent No. 1 were terminated without holding a proper departmental enquiry.
The counsel appearing for the petitioner does not dispute the fact that an Enquiry Officer was not appointed in this case and the services of respondent No. 1 were terminated without following the procedure of holding a regular departmental enquiry.
The charge against the respondent No. 1 was of absence without leave.
2.
It is well settled that where services of an employee are sought to be terminated on the ground that he has absented himself then this should be preceded by a departmental enquiry.
The Supreme Court in the case of Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan (AIR 1966 SC 492) observed as under :  "The removal of a Government servant from service for overstaying his leave is illegal even though it is provided by the Service Regulation that any individual who absents himself without permission after the end of his leave would be considered to have sacrificed his appointment and may be reinstated only with the sanction of the competent authority."
3.
In this regard reference may be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in Rolston John v. Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court and others (AIR 1994 SC 131).
In this case the services of the workman were terminated on the ground that he had overstayed leave period and had not given proper explanation.
This termination was held to be covered by the term retrenchment and lumpsum compensation of Rs50,000/- was awarded to the workman.
Again in Union of India and others v. Giriraj Sharma (AIR 1994 SC 215), the employee overstayed leave period and his services were terminated.
Nothing was brought on the record to show that there was wilful intention to flout the order by which application seeking extension of leave was rejected.
It was held that the order of dismissal passed on the ground of overstaying leave period is harsh and disproportionate to the misdemeanour.
See also All India Trade Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPJR 129.
4.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforementioned cases, the view expressed by the Board of Revenue is not such a view to which successful challenge can be made under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
No enquiry was held in this case.
As such the order passed by the Board of Revenue is in accordance with law and is being maintained.
5.
The counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner be given liberty to proceed afresh in the matter.
It is again settled law that whenever departmental proceedings are set aside on technical grounds such as non-compliance with the rules of natural justice - the authorities are always at liberty to proceed afresh in the matter.
The fact that this is an old and stale matter may however be taken into consideration when such a decision was taken.
The question with regard to payment of wages would for period of absence will abide the events in case some disciplinary proceeding is taken against the petitioner.
No other point has been urged.
This petition is without any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.