VK Gupta, J - This petition can be disposed of on a very short point and the detailed facts in the petition or the counter filed by the respondents, or for that matter in the rejoinder of the petitioner need not detain us.
It shall, however, be necessary to give a brief resume of the facts.
The petitioner was working as a Lecturer in the Department of Kashmiri in the University of Kashmir.
On 8th July 1988 on the allegation that he had misbehaved with a student Miss Baby Zytoon of his class and had indulged in moral turpitude, by order of the Vice-Chancellor he was placed under suspension.
The petitioner's suspension was followed by the serving upon him a charge- sheet dated 30th July 1988 in which it was alleged inter alia that Miss Baby Zytoon, a student of MA Kashmiri had levelled allegations against the petitioner involving acts of moral turpitude as also the gross misconduct.
The petitioner was called upon to give explanation to the charges.
What followed later was the usual reply submitted by the petitioner and the holding of an enquiry into the charges against him by the Enquiry Committee constituted by the University.
At the culmination of the enquiry proceedings, the impugned order dated 23rd January, 1989 came to be passed whereby the services of the petitioner as Lecturer were terminated with immediate effect.
It is this order which is under challenged in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
The point on which this petition can be disposed of relates to an illegality which crept in the proceedings conducted by the Inquiry Committee which was enquiring into the charges against the petitioner.
The impugned order dated 23rd January, 1989 terminating the services of the petitioner was passed on the basis of the report submitted by the Enquiry Committee, the report of the Inquiry Committee was placed before the University Council which considered the same and after agreeing with it resolved to terminate the services of the petitioner.
If, therefore, the petitioner was thrown out of the services on the basis of the report of the Inquiry Committee, and if there was an illegality in the enquiry proceedings, everything gets vitiated and consequently the termination order would naturally be the casualty.
3.
Mr. P Kohli, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner drew my attention to the averments contained in ground (n) of para 7 of the petition and submitted that the petitioner very clearly, categorically and un- equivocally has pleaded and averred that the enquiry was not conducted fairly against the petitioner.
According to the petitioner, the statement of Miss Baby Zytoon who was the complainant in the case was recorded by the Inquiry Committee in the absence of the petitioner and subsequently when the petitioner came to know that her statement had been recorded in his absence sought to cross-examine her.
Even this prayer of the petitioner for cross-examining the complainant was declined by the Inquiry Committee.
These specific categorical and unequivocal averments of the petitioner have been admitted by the respondents in the counter-affidavit filed by and on their behalf.
It shall be advantageous to reproduce para-7(n) of the counter- affidavit which reads thus :  "7(n) In reply to para 7(n), it is submitted that rules of natural justice have been observed in the case.
The statement of Miss Baby Zytoon was recorded by the Inquiry Committee in presence of her father.
After her statement was recorded, in which she was cross-examined by the Inquiry Committee, the copy of the statement was given to the writ petitioner.
For the reasons recorded by the committee in its meeting dated 21121988, it was felt by the committee that Miss Baby Zytoon may not be subjected to cross-examination by the writ petitioner.
The statement of Miss Baby Zytoon was recorded by the Inquiry Committee on 25111988.
Copy of the statement was given to the writ petitioner on 10.
121988.
A request for recalling of Miss Baby Zyton on 21121988 which, for the reasons recorded by the committee was not agreed to.
It is categorically denied that the enquiry proceedings were closed on 21121988.
As already submitted the defence witnesses were finally examined on 26.121988 and thereafter, only one meeting was held on 211989."
Because a mention has been made of the meeting of the Inquiry Committee held on 21121988, it shall be worthwhile to have a look at the minutes of this meeting so as to find out as to what exactly was done by the Inquiry Committee with regard to the matter relating to the examination of Miss Baby Zytoon and the request of the petitioner for her cross-examination.
The relevant extract of the minutes is reproduced as under :  "The Committee has informed the learned Counsel that the University does not intend to produce before it (Committee) any other witness or document.
Therefore, the Committee asked the Counsel as to whether Mr. Sumbili would like to produce before the Committee any other document or witness in his defence and the same may be produced.
The Counsel replied that I will produce the defence witnesses.
The learned Counsel stated that the statement of Miss Zytoon has been recorded in absence of his client on 25111988 and the statement has been authenticated by her father in presence of the members of the Committee.
Therefore, my client be given opportunity of cross-examining her.
The Committee has informed him that Mr. Sumbili in writing represented before this Committee on 24th November 1988 that he be permitted to be represented by a Counsel of his choice and the same permission was granted to him by the Committee.
However, the Committee has recorded the statement of Miss Zytoon in presence of her father who was accompanying her though on the said date, Mr. Sumbili was neither asked by the Committee to present himself before it nor asked him to cross-examine her because the members were of the opinion that keeping in view the reputation and honour of a girl we should ourselve cross-examine which we did for satisfaction of the Committee and in order to avoid her being subjected to mental harassment we did think it fit to ask Mr. Sumbili to be resent on the occasion and cross-examine her.
The Committee directed Mr. Sumbili that all witnesses and documents whatever he has to present in his defence must be presented before the Committee on 26th of December, 1988 at 1130 am in the office chamber of the Chairman, Committee."
4.
It is a well settled principle of natural justice and a golden rule of modern services jurisprudence that every delinquent official who is facing disciplinary proceedings has a right not only of defending himself, properly and effectively, participate in the enquiry proceedings held against him and on being represented appropriately, but of defending himself in such a manner and participating in the enquiry proceedings so that he does not complain of being treated as an un-equal with same other party or being left out of the process of being defended in accordance with the age old principles of natural justice, openness and fair play.
The right of examining and cross-examining the witnesses who have appeared in the enquiry proceedings, based on the aforesaid principles is one of such valuable rights available and guaranteed to a delinquent official faced with the charge levelled against him and involved in disciplinary proceedings conducted against him by his employer.
It is no doubt true that this court, in the exercise of its extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction does not sit as a court of appeal against the finding of an Inquiry Committee because it is not the province of this court to appreciate or re-appreciate the evidence collected by the Inquiry Committee, but at the same time this court does not hesitate in striking down adverse order against the delinquent official if the Inquiry Committee enquiring into the charges against him did not observe the principles of natural justice, equity and fair play.
Denying to a delinquent official the right to cross-examine a witness who has deposed against him strikes at the very root of the enquiry process.
Denying this right to him when the witness happens to be none other than the complainant results in such a grave fatality that it vitiates the enquiry proceedings in every possible manner and renders the entire process into a sham transaction, setting at naught everything that happened against the delinquent official during the course of the enquiry against him.
5.
The respondents have admitted that the petitioner was denied the right to cross-examine the complainant.
They have also admitted that the statement of the complainant was recorded in his absence.
The entire edifice of the case of the respondents against the petitioner hovered around the allegation that the petitioner had misbehaved with Miss Baby Zytoon, the act of misbehaviour and misconduct involving the petitioner's moral turpitude.
Nothing, therefore, was more important to the petitioner than to be associated with the recording of the evidence of the complainant in every possible manner and to be given a free hand in cross-examining her.
The assertion of the respondents, reflected in the minutes of the meeting of the Inquiry Committee held on 21121988 that subjecting Miss Baby Zytoon to cross-examination by the petitioner and getting her statement recorded in his presence would amount to her being subjected to mental harassment, keeping in view her reputation and honour.
First of all, it is not understood as to what did the members of the Inquiry Committee mean by this assertion.
If a complainant in a charge against a delinquent official is subjected to the cross-examination by the delinquent official with regard to the allegations levelled by her against him, no one can say that she is being subjected to mental harassment or that her reputation and honour would be jeopardized or put at stake.
It is not only golden, but cardinal principle of fair play and justice that no one be condemned unheard and that opportunity of defending properly be provided to everyone.
Following from this undisputed principle is the right of every person either in a criminal case or facing a departmental enquiry to cross-examine every witness who makes any deposition against him.
If in the bargain, the witnesses (including a girl complainant) feels some inconvenience in being cross-examined, one cannot help because the rights of an individual cannot be sacrificed merely because a witness, in the process of cross-examination may intend to feel inconvenienced or harassed, as asserted by the Inquiry Committee.
After all the purpose of cross-examining a witness is not only to elicit truth, but to enable the defendant to build up his case in the manner that he would like it to be projected.
If the approach adopted by the Inquiry Committee was to be approved, in every criminal case being tried in a court of law, involving the persons belonging to the female sex, like offences under sections 376, 366 or 354 RPC, where the complainant happens to be a lady or a girl, there would be no need to insist on the participation of the accused during the trial, the requirement of the statements of all witnesses including the complainant being recorded in the presence of the accused and the accused being allowed to cross-examine them.
That being the case, in all such situations, therefore, if the approach asserted by the Inquiry Committee was to be followed, the accused may be permitted to be convicted of such offences by holding the trial in the aforesaid manner.
The reality of course is that such an approach, apart from being totally illegal and unconstitutional is patently contrary to the well established principles of criminal jurisprudence and the new codified provisions of the Constitution as well as various criminal and penal laws.
These golden principles which have stood the test of time have, therefore, to be imported, lock, stock and barrel into the departmental proceedings or domestic enquiries being faced by the delinquent officials.
6.
The petitioner, based on the aforesaid discussions had a valuable right of not only defending himself properly and effectively at the enquiry but also to insist on the statements of all witnesses including the complainant being recorded in his presence and to be allowed to cross-examine them without any fetters whatsoever.
Because this right has been denied to him, enquiry proceedings against him stand totally vitiated and because the impugned order was based on the report of the Inquiry Committee, and on no other material, it cannot be allowed to be sustained.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, therefore, this petition is allowed.
By issuance of writ of certiorari, the impugned order is quashed and set aside with all necessary consequences.
This, however, should not be construed as any bar for the respondents to initiate appropriate proceedings against the petitioner, if they are so advised and if they so choose, afresh after following the principles laid down in this judgment.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.