A P Chowdhry, J - This is a petition by 40 students of Dehat Vikas College of Pharmacy, Tiagaon, district Faridabad, respondent No. 4, for seeking an appropriate writ or direction to the Technical Education Department of the State Government respondent No. 1 and the State Board of Technical Education (hereinafter referred to as 'the State Board') respondent No. 2 to hold examination for the second and final year of the 2-Year Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
2.
Briefly stated, the material facts are that one Dehat Vikas Educational Society registered under the Societies Registration Act established the aforesaid College at Tiagaon.
In accordance with the provisions of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), the Society applied for approval of the All India Council for Technical Education (hereinafter referred to as 'Central Council') to start the Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
The Central Council initially issued approval vide Annexure P-2 dated January 1, 1992, for the said Course during the year 1991-92 with an initial annual intake of 40 subject to some conditions laid down in the letter of approval.
For the present purposes, the relevant condition was that admission shall be on merits as per the guidelines issued by the Central Council from time to time and that no capitation fee or donation of any kind shall be charged for admissions.
The above letter was followed by letter Annexure P-3 dated September 25, 1992.
This was issued in continuation of the earlier letter Annexure P-2 dated January 1, 1992.
It was stated that on a consideration of the observations and recommendations of the Experts Committee which had visited the College on July 1, 1992.
The Central Council had accorded approval to the Society for starting the Diploma Course at the College for the academic year 1992-93 with an intake of 60 students in the first year of the Course subject to the conditions laid down in the letter.
Condition No. 1 was that infrastructural and other facilities including equipment, faculty etc. for the second year classes should be provided by April, 1993 as per the norms of the Central Council.
In condition No. 6 it was repeated that admissions shall be made on merits and as per the guidelines issued by the Central Council from time to time and no capitation fee or donation of any kind shall be charged for the admissions.
It was made clear that in the event of non-compliance by the College with the conditions laid down, the approval was liable to be withdrawn.
The Society was also informed that the Experts' Committee of the Northern Regional Committee would again visit the College by May 1993 to assess the compliance with the conditions laid down in the letter.
It is not disputed that the admission to various technical institutions in the State is done by the State Board at a centralised place by issuing a common admission notice.
The guidelines referred to in letters Annexures P-2 and P-3, therefore, implied that admission was to be made through the centralised system of admission conducted by the State Board.
It is further not disputed that without following the said procedure the College respondent No. 4 made admissions not only to the first year of the Course but also to the second year of the Course at its own level.
The dispute with regard to the admissions to first year is the subject matter of another writ petition, CWP No. 7410 of 1993, which is pending.
We are concerned with the admission to the second year Course which has been made directly by the College at its own level.
3.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they had taken admission in the Diploma Course in Pharmacy being conducted by a duly approved institution, that they had pursued the curriculum and had attended requisite number of lectures and that for no fault of theirs they being arbitrarily denied registration, so that they cannot take the examination by the State Board respondent No. 2, which is the examining body for the students studying in the Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
They have further stated that there is a provision in the statutory Education Regulations framed under the Indian Pharmacy Act for admission of 10 + 2 candidates with science directly to the second year course of diploma in Pharmacy.
It was in accordance with the said Regulation that they were eligible and had been given admission by the College.
It was further stated in the petition that at one stage the Central Council had served the Society managing the College show cause notice why the approval accorded to the College be not withdrawn, but on the explanation furnished by the Society further action in pursuance of the show-cause notice had been dropped vide letter Annexure P-8 dated October 26, 1993.
It was lastly submitted that the State Board was going to hold examination for the second year from January 5, 1994, and the said Board be directed to register the petitioners, issue them roll numbers and permit them to take the examination and declare their results along with other students appearing in that examination.
4.
Besides the Department of Technical Education and the State Board, the petitioners had impleaded the Central Council-respondent No. 3.
The said respondent was served for December 23, 1993.
It failed to put in appearance and was proceeded ex parte.
At a later stage when the matter was pending motion hearing before a Division Bench, of which I was a member, the Addl.
Advocate-General, Haryana, who represented respondents 1 and 2, was specifically informed that if respondent No. 3-Central Council cared to put in appearance to assist the Court, it was welcome to do so.
However, no appearance has been put in on behalf of the Central Council.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been stated that the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (Act No. 52 of 1987) came into force with effect from March 28, 1988.
The College respondent No. 4 was covered under the definition of 'Technical Institution' and the Diploma Course in Pharmacy was covered under the expression of "Technical Education" within the meaning of the said Act.
It was further stated that Section 10 of the Act, while dealing with powers and functions of the Central Council, specifically laid down that it was a condition precedent for any new technical institution to be started to obtain approval in terms of the provisions of the Act.
The said Council was required to take all steps necessary to prevent commercialisation of technical education.
It was also empowered to provide guidelines for admission of students to technical institutions.
It was further stated that even though there was a provision for direct admission to second year Pharmacy Course, it was only limited to seats becoming available on account of failures of the first year.
This was so specifically provided.
The relevant portion of the Admission Prospectus for the Sessions 1992-93 was reproduced in the written statement.
It was further pleaded that the College-respondent No. 4 had made admissions in an illegal and unauthorised manner in violation of the directions of the Central Council and that the present petition deserved to be dismissed.
6.
Before dealing with the various contentions, it would be convenient to refer to the relevant letters in greater detail.
7.
Annexure P-3 dated September 25, 1992, accorded approval to the Society for starting the course from the academic year 1992-93 with an intake of 60 students in the first year of the course.
It has been so specially stated in the letter.
This intention is made further clear by condition No. 1, which specifically refers to the infrastructural and other facilities including equipment, faculty etc. for the second year classes to be provided by April 1993 as per the norms laid down by the Central Council.
It necessarily follows that by the time of issuing the above approval in September 1992, those infrastructural and other facilities including equipment etc. for the second year classes had not been completed and the Society was given time to provide the same as per norms of the Central Council upto April 1993, whereafter the question of the admission to the second year course would have normally arisen.
8.
Vide Annexure P-4 dated December 1, 1992, specific grounds for the show-cause notice were mentioned as sub-paras (a) to (d).
In sub-para (a), it was stated that admission to the first year of the course had been made prior to the issue of the approval by the Central Council.
In sub-para (b) was stated that admission to the second year of the course had been made when no such approval had been accorded by the Council and the Institute, implying College-respondent No. 4, had started only from the academic year 1992-93.
In sub-para (c), it was stated that admissions of students had been made outside or in violation of the procedure of the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana.
In reply, the alleged violations were not disputed.
Some sort of a justification was sought to be offered why the violations took place.
This reply of the society was considered and the decision of the Central Council was conveyed vide Annexure P-6 dated February 1, 1993, categorically to the effect that approval cannot be accorded to the admission of students to the second year class.
A further attempt was made by the Society to furnish some more explanation, which was mostly, a repetition of what had been stated earlier, and finally the Central Council replied vide Annexure P-8 dated October 26, 1993, to the effect that on a consideration of the explanation submitted by the Society, the Central Council had decided to drop the action of withdrawal of approval.
9.
The contentions of Mr. Govind Goel, learned counsel for the petitioners may be summarised as under :-  (1) The approval accorded vide Annexure P-2 (dated January 1, 1992) was to the 'Course' and not the first year class.
(2) Regulation 10 of the Statutory Regulations framed by the Pharmacy Council contained a provision for admission directly to the second year class of the course.
The only further condition for those getting admission to the second year class directly was to pass in certain additional subjects as laid down in that Regulation.
The petitioners possessed the necessary qualification of 10 + 2 examination in science and they were, therefore, eligible to be directly admitted to the second year class.
(3) Respondents 1 and 2 while issuing admission notice for making centralised admission to various technical institutions in the State did not include the name of the College-respondent No. 4.
The College authorities were, therefore, justified in concluding that they were free to make admissions at their own level subject to the condition that the students admitted fulfilled the condition of eligibility.
(4) The direction of the Supreme Court in JP Unikrishnan v. State of AP, 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) : (AIR 1993 SC 2178) under the scheme was to apply to admissions for the academic year 1993-94 and it did not apply to admissions made prior to that academic year.
The admissions in the instant case were made in 1992-93 and in that sense it was not in violation of the direction of the Supreme Court contained in Unikrishnan.
(5) The petitioners had studied the prescribed curriculum and had attended the requisite number of lecturers and they should not be made to suffer for no fault of theirs.
(6) The Central Council had ultimately decided to drop action for withdrawal of approval apparently on the ground that the infrastructural and other facilities provided by the College authorities were as per norms laid down by the said Council.
In fact, the initial intake of 40 was enhanced by 50 per cent and made 60.
(7) The College had given an undertaking before Respondent No. 2-State Board that it will follow the centralised admission system in future and will not admit students to the Course.
In other words, the deviation in the matter of admission was only a one time affair and is not going to be repeated.
Each of these contentions have been controverted by Mr. S S Khetarpal appearing for respondents 1 and 2.
10.
On a consideration of the relevant documents, it is not possible to hold that the Central Council had given approval to the admission of the second year class.
It must be remembered that the College respondent No. 4 was to be stated afresh and in the beginning of a new College admission is made only in the lowest class.
The students on passing that class are promoted to the next higher class and so on.
In the Admission Prospectus the following provision appear for the Session 1992-93 :-  "The candidates having passed :-  (i) The Intermediate examination in Science.
OR  (ii) The 1st Year of 3 Years Degree Course in Science.
OR  (iii) 10 + 2 examination (Academic Stream) in Science.
OR  (iv) An examination accepted by Pharmacy Council of India as being equivalent to any of the above examination.
shall be eligible for admission directly to IInd year course against failures in the first year course examination, provided the institution has adequate facilities for the conduct of theory and practical classes in the unexempted subjects of the diploma course in Pharmacy (Part I) ie 1st year.
The Institution shall reserve seat(s) within the sanctioned intake for the failed students of 1st Year as and when they are able to secure promotion to IInd year."
There is no manner of doubt that in so far as direct admission to the second year is concerned, it was limited only to the number of failures of the first year.
Regulation 10 relied on by the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot, therefore, be taken to mean that regular admission to the second year could be made in the same way as admission to the first year.
Even in the letter of approval Annexure P-2 dated January 1, 1992, one of the essential conditions for admission was that the same would be made in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Council and it is not disputed that these guidelines included centralised admission to be regulated by the State Board.
The last paragraph of letter Annexure P-2 further clinches the issue that the admission required to be made was only to the first year class.
It reads as under :-  "It is further stated that admissions of students shall not, repeat shall not, be made for starting the course till such time the society makes fixed deposits of at least Rs. 10 lakhs in the name of the College and procure necessary equipment at least for the first year classes in accordance with the relevant AICTE norms and standards."
The next letter Annexure P-3 dated September 25, 1992, expressly referred to admission to the first year course.
The increase in the intake did not indicate that the required facilities for the second year class had been provided by the College.
In fact, in the penultimate.
paragraph of the letter it was expressly stated that an Experts Committee will visit the College by May, 1993 to assess compliance with the various conditions laid down and, thereafter, the question of grant of approval would be considered by the Council.
Reference to the next visit by the Experts Committee furnishes reply to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that increase in the intake can be taken to mean that the Central Council was satisfied about the provision of facilities made by the Council.
11.
Neither the petitioners nor the College respondent No. 4 have placed on record any material that the College authorities approached the State Board-respondent No. 2 with a request to hold necessary test for admitting students to the College.
In fact, the respondents have placed on record copy of the letter Annexure R-2/T dated October 21, 1992, from the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, to the Principal of respondent No. 4-College informing him about the receipt of approval of the Government of India for the conduct of the first year pharmacy Course with an intake of 60 students for the Session 1992-93.
He was further informed that the Principal, Haryana Polytechnic, Nilokheri, was directed to make centralised admission of 60 students to the first year course.
It was made clear that if any admission is made at the level of the College respondent No. 4, such admissions will be treated as illegal and the State Board will not register the names of such admitted candidate for the conduct of the State Board examination and that the College will be fully responsible for making such illegal admissions.
The plea of the petitioners that the centralised admissions were over and respondent No. 4, therefore, thought that it was free to make admissions at its own level, cannot the accepted.
12.
No doubt, the direction under the scheme in Unikrishnan is to apply for the academic year 1993-94.
The admissions in question were required to be made in terms of the conditional approval given by the Central Council and such an approval and imposition of conditions were in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Independently of Unikrishnan, therefore, the condition of centralised admission had been imposed by the Central Council and the same was binding on the College.
13.
The idea of approval by the Central Council is not an employ formality.
The object is to ensure that required standard of studies is maintained and imparting of technical education is not commercialised.
If the College is permitted to make admissions at its own level, it is plain to see that the above object of the Act is likely to be frustrated.
With regard to the Central Council ultimately dropping the withdrawal of approval vide Annexure P-8, I am of the view that dropping of the proceedings does not tantamount to granting of approval for admission to the first year or second year classes.
It follows that the admission made to second year class by the College is illegal and in contravention of the conditions imposed by the Central Council.
14.
The contention that the deviation in the matter of admission being a one time affair may be condoned, especially because the students were bound to suffer for the Act of the College, is attractive in its simplicity and appeal, but in order to carry out the purposes of the Act, it is the duty of the Court to enforce the discipline and this can be done only if the deviations are not countenanced.
The students know or were supposed to know that the necessary approval had not been accorded to the College for admission to the second year.
For the foregoing reasons, the petition fails and the same is dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.