S K Jain, J. (Oral) - Jagdish Chander plaintiff-appellant joined as a teacher in District Board School Jhej and Barju in the scale of Rs. 50-100.
He served that school up to 3091957 against a substantive post and was granted usual increments.
On 1101957, the services of the appellant were provincialised.
He retired on 3151983.
He brought Civil Suit No. 307 of 1986 instituted on 331986 against the State of Punjab and others for a decree of declaration to the effect that he was entitled to pension and other benefits for the period with effect from 2.7.1953 to 3091957 i.e. prior to the provincialisation of the services with 12% interest from due date.
2.
The suit was contested on behalf of the respondents.
Their case is that the plaintiff had retired as a provincialised teacher.
The Punjab Government vide its letter dated 29.11.1973 extended the benefit of service to the employees of the local body schools who started contribution towards contributory General Provident Fund from the date of confirmation or the date of actual contribution, whichever is later.
Confirmation was the criteria for giving the benefit of District Board Service towards pensionary benefits.
The plaintiff was not confirmed under the District Board and as such he was not entitled for the benefit of service rendered under the District Board prior to 3091957.
3.
Parties fought litigation on the following issues :-  (1) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the pensionary benefits from 251953 to 309.
1957 ?
(2) Whether the suit is not maintainable in view of Pension Act ?
Learned trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff vide its judgment and decree dated December 1, 1988.
Feeling aggrieved, the appellant filed Civil Appeal No. 133 of 16.4.1989/5.5.1990 which was also dismissed by Shri A S Sodhi, Additional District Judge, Hoshiarpur, vide his judgment and decree dated May 4, 1991.
It is that judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court which has been appealed against by the plaintiff and which requires my examination of its sustainability.
4.
I have seen the pleadings of the parties in the suit evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and have examined the judgments of both the Courts below.
5.
The learned trial Court in its judgment has stated that the Punjab Government vide letter Exhibit PW3/4 had extended the benefit of service to the employee of the Local Body Schools who started contribution towards contributory General Provident Fund from the date of confirmation or from the date of actual contribution, whichever is later.
The confirmation is the criteria for giving benefits of District Board Service towards pensionary benefits.
Since the plaintiff was not confirmed under the District Board and therefore, he was not entitled for the benefit of service rendered under the District Board prior to 3091957.
6.
The learned first Appellate Court on his turn referred to Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II (hereinafter to be referred as the Rules).
Para No. 14 of its judgment it has stated that the erstwhile employees of local bodies as such only became entitled to count their period of service on non-pensionary post under the liberalised instructions.
Since the temporary service rendered by the plaintiff was in a non-pensionable establishment prior to the provincialisation of his service with effect from 1101957, the service rendered by him on temporary basis in such an establishment could not have been taken into consideration for giving the pensionary benefit as the same was not qualifying service within the purview of Rule 317 of the Rules governing the conditions of his service.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant has firstly argued that Rule 317 was declared ultra vires by a Full Bench of this Court in "Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others", 1988(5) Services Law Reporter 27.
For the appreciation of above argument of learned counsel for the appellant in the context of the facts and circumstances of this case, it is expedient to examine the provisions of Rule 317 of the Rules which is reproduced below for ready reference :-  "If an employee was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of :-  (i) Periods of temporary or officiating service in non-pensionable establishment;  (ii) periods of service in work-charged establishment; and  (iii) periods of service paid from contingencies".
8.
Now coming to the facts of this case, it is admitted on both ends that the appellant served the abovesaid District Board School against a sub-stantive post with effect from 2.7.1953 to 3091957 without any break in temporary capacity.
Prior to 3091957, the appellant was not confirmed.
Establishment wherein the appellant had served in temporary capacity, though against a substantive post i.e. the District Board School, was a non-pensionable establishment.
9.
When the above facts and circumstances of this case are tested on the anvil of the provisions of Rule 317, it is clear that the case of the appellant is squarely covered under Sub-Rule (i) and not Sub-Rule (ii).
The period of temporary service on the abovesaid non-pensionable establishment rendered by the appellant with effect from 2.7.1953 to 3091957 will not count towards qualifying service for pensionary benefits.
In Kesar Chand's case (supra) sub-rule (ii) and not sub-rule (i) of Rule 317 of the Rules had been held to be bad in law.
Therefore, the above argument is not tenable.
10.
The second argument of learned counsel for the appellant is that the appellant was ready and willing to deposit with the Government the share of employer's contribution along with interest from his own pocket in view of letter dated July 11, 1973 but he was not allowed to do so.
For appreciating this argument it is expedient to examine the relevant instructions of the State Government in this regard contained in letter No. 11900-3 Edu-III/73/30333 dated 29.11.1973 Ex.D-1 it is reproduced below :-  "Subject : Extension of pensionary benefits to the Local Body School employees who were above 30 years of age on the date of provincialisation.
I am directed to refer to your letter No. Pen.V/Edu-Misc./Local-Body/1500-52 dated the 11th July, 1973, on the subject cited above and to state that reply to the points raised by you is as under :-  (i) The employees of local body school who were confirmed before the provincialisation of these Schools by Government need not be confirmed again;  (ii) The employees who did not start contributing to the Contributory Provident Fund from the date of their confirmation, are to be given the pension from the date they actually started contributing towards G.P.F.
The employees can, however, become entitled to pension from the date of their confirmation, if, they deposit with Government, the share of employer's contribution, along with interest, from their own pocket; and  (iii) The temporary employees who retired from service before 1.11.1968, are not entitled to pension.
Those temporary employees who retired from service on or after 1.11.1968 will be entitled to pension provided they have the minimum required service for the grant of pension.
This issues with the approval of Finance Department accorded vide their MO No. 5989-6FR-73 dated the 28th November, 1993."
When the facts of this case are examined in the light of the abovesaid letter, it is clear that the case of the appellant does not fall under the said instructions because it clearly talks of the employees of the Local Body School who were confirmed before the provincialisation of the services.
The appellant was admittedly not a confirmed employee of the Local Body School before the provincialisation of service.
11.
Besides what has been stated above, the executive instructions will not supersede the statutory Rule.
Rule 317(i) of the Rules which has been reproduced above and which clearly lays down that the period of the temporary or officiating service of the employees in non-pensionable establishment will not count towards qualifying service in getting the relief.
In the result concurrent findings of fact recorded by two Courts below cannot be faulted and are hereby affirmed.
Sequelly this appeal is dismissed.
No costs.