VK Bali, J (Oral) - Sanjiv Bansal through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him admission in the LL.M.
Part I in accordance with his merit.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that petitioner was placed in first division throughout his career.
He secured 837 marks out of 1200 marks in Matriculation examination i.e. 697%.
In graduation, he secured 431 marks out of 650 marks.
He sought admission in LL.B.
course in the respondent-Department in the year 1989.
He passed the said course by securing 616 marks out of 1000 marks i.e. 616% marks.
In the year 1992, he sought admission in the Department of Law in the LL.M.
course and on the basis of merit, he was granted admission.
He, however, could not complete his lectures due to certain family circumstances as also that on account of accident, he had to remain in the hospital for quite some time.
The obvious result was that he could not appear in the examination, thus, necessitating him to seek readmission in LL.M.
course in the year 1993.
3.
The Department of Laws, Panjab University Chandigarh issued Prospectus for conducting admission to various degree and diploma courses including LL.M.
course for the session 1993-94.
There were 20 seats for LL.M.
and admission was to be made on merit to be determined after giving weightage in certain circumstances.
Further, in accordance with the Prospectus, admission to LL.M.
course had to be granted to candidates who had passed the LL.B.
(Three years decree) course of Panjab University or must have passed an equivalent examination of another University recognised by the Panjab University for this purpose.
Since the petitioner fulfilled all the criteria laid down in the Prospectus, he applied for admission in LL.M.
under the general category.
On 1881993 a joint list of 50 candidates was put on the department notice board.
Petitioner ranked at serial No. 16 in the merit list.
On 1981993, interview was held for 21 seats of LLM Part I Out of 21 seats, 12 were for general category and 9 for reserved category.
Total of 17 seats were finalised on the date aforesaid.
Thereafter a notice was put at the department notice board on 22.8.1993 to the effect that left over seats, if any, shall be filled on 26.8.1993 and that the waiting list shall be displayed on 2581993.
Petitioner was at serial No. 1 to be admitted.
It is pleaded that even though he was at serial No. 1, admission was given to respondents No. 3 to 5 who were below in merit than him.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, on the facts, as noticed above, contends that there are no provision debarring candidates from seeking readmission in the same class of LL.M.
if for some reason they have not been able to complete the lectures in the year preceding when readmission is asked for.
He further contends that persons lower in merit than the petitioner admitted ignoring the preferential claim of the petitioner based on merit.
5.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, it has been pleaded that petitioner was admitted to LL.M.
course in the year 1992 but he failed to complete lectures and attended only 24 lectures out of a total of 226 lectures delivered for the session 1992-93.
The reason for not attending lectures has been given by the petitioner in his statement to the Board of Control at the time of interview for admission to LL.M.
course.
He stated before the Board of Control that he could not complete the required attendance on account of his accident and subsequent hospitalisation in mid-January 1993.
It is further pleaded that petitioner appears to be concocting evidence to hide the real purpose of seeking admission to LL.M.
course, namely he wants to stay at Chandigarh, to get a seat in the Hostel, facilities of library and other oblique motives.
It is stated that he took admission last year in order to appear in the competitive examination and allowed one LL.M.
seat to be wasted in preference to a deserving and serious candidate.
At the time of interview for admission to the LL.M.
course in 1993, the Board of Control asked him numerous questions which were answered by him.
A copy of the answers recorded by the Board of Control on 26.8.1993 has been placed on the records of the case.
6.
On the facts noticed above, Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, contends that the Board of Control is the sole authority to admit students in the department concerned as postulated by Regulation 4 of the Panjab University Calendar, Volume I (1989) and instruction 8(1) of Prospectus, Department of Laws (1993-94).
Since the petitioner was not interested in doing LL.M.
resulting in wastage of one seat in preference to a candidate who was desirous of doing LL.M., the petitioner was rightly ignored.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
Annexure R1/2 are the guidelines for admissions to the courses offered by the University Teaching Department.
The contention of learned counsel for the respondents that by virtue of the instructions aforesaid the respondents could prefer a candidate lower in merit, is hotly contested by learned counsel for the petitioner on the basis of judgment report in Miss Anju Jain v. Panjab University, Chandigarh & others, 1992(1) SCT 314 (P&H) : 1991(6) S.L.R.
725.
There is no necessity, in the facts of the present case, to go into the legality and propriety of the instructions, Annexure R1/2 as the petitioner deserves relief on the ground that while preferring those who were lower in merit than him, no reasonable opportunity was given to him to prove that he was unable to attend to the lectures on account of the fact that he had remained unwell.
Order, Annexure R/1/1 recites that petitioner, who was seeking re-admission in LL.M., was interviewed by the Board of Control and specific questions were put to him as to why he failed to make up the requisite attendance and why he was short of so many lectures as his attendance record showed that he attended only 24 lectures out of 216 lectures delivered during the Session 1992-93.
It was further recited in the order aforesaid that whenever applied even for condonation of lectures nor did he submit any medical certificate in support of his contention that he was hospitalised in mid-January, 1993 on account of accident.
It was also recited in the order that the answers were evasive and it appeared that his sole purpose in seeking admission in LL.M.
was to get a seat in the hostel and stay at Chandigarh and he was not serious about his LL.M.
studies.
It was further mentioned that petition had been absolutely indifferent in attending lectures and did not even submit the medical certificate regarding his hospitalisation following accident.
The order, basic contents of which have been reproduced above, would, thus, reveal that the same was based on mere conjectures and surmises and was passed without giving him an opportunity of proving his case before the Board.
If the respondent-authorities were of the view, as has been expressed in the order aforesaid, petitioner ought to have been given a chance to prove his version.
On the contrary, in the same meeting simply after putting questions to the petitioner, conclusion was arrived at.
This, in view of this Court, violates the rule of audi altram partem which has been so well entrenched by the decisions rendered by the apex Court as also by this Court from time to time.
Non-admission of petitioner to LL.M.
First Year Course while preferring others who were lower in merit than him, has thus to be styled as arbitrary, offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
8.
There appears to be considerable force in the contention of the learned counsel that for readmission in the same class, there was no necessity for the petitioner to compete with the students who were admitted in the next academic session.
However, at this point has not been properly put up in the pleadings.
I need not go into the same.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to admit the petitioner in LL.M.
Part I in the session 1993-94 forthwith.
This petition was admitted on October 18, 1993 and ordered to be heard in the month of November, 1993.
It is obvious that petitioner would even now fall short of lectures but since it was not on account of his fault that he was not admitted, if he makes an application for condonation of lectures, this Court is of the firm belief that the same would be considered sympathetically so that the result of this litigation is not frustrated.
Since the respondents, who were lower in merit and were admitted, have studied for a period of five months by now, it would be inequituous to disturb them at this stage.
In the circumstances, the respondents would create an additional seat for the purpose.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.