Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and appoint them as Junior Engineers with effect from February 8, 1991.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The two petitioners claim that they possess the qualification of Diploma in Civil Engineering.
Petitioner No. 1 claims to have worked as Beldar/Peon/T-Mate at different intervals of time.
While petitioner No. 2 claims to have worked as Work-Mistry, etc. At the time of the filing of the petition, neither of the two petitioners was employed in any establishment.
3.
On February 8, 1991, the Chief Engineer (Canal) Irrigation Department informed the Chief Engineer (Drainage) that the Govt. had decided to appoint 100 junior engineers on purely "temporary basis out of under-employed diploma engineers so that the budget grant could be spent before the close of current financial year...to complete other urgent works well in time."
According to this letter, the appointments had to be made "for 89 days or till the post is available whichever would be earlier".
Furthermore, the candidates were liable to be reverted to their original posts at any time.
It was also provided that "his earlier post would be kept vacant by the Administration."
The petitioners aver that in pursuance to this decision of the department, they had submitted their applications for being considered for appointment as Junior Engineers.
While a large number of other persons who were either junior to them or possessed lesser qualification were appointed, their claims were illegally ignored.
When their response, the petitioners approached this Court through CWP.
No. 1092 of 1992.
Vide order dated January 23, 1992, the Motion Bench directed the respondents "to decide the representations of the petitioners expeditiously preferably within six months" and writ petition was accordingly disposed of.
4.
In pursuance to the aforesaid directions of this Court, the Chief Engineer (Drainage) has by a detailed order rejected the representations of the petitioners.
Aggrieved by the order the petitioners have filed the present writ petition and claim that they had a right to be considered for appointment as Junior Engineers with effect from February 8, 1991.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents today in Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioners was given a copy of this written statement.
Mr. Midha, learned counsel for the petitioners, was specifically asked if he wanted to argue the case.
He expressed a desire to argue the case.
Accordingly, I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
6.
The solitary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the action of the respondents in not considering the claims of the petitioners for appointment as Junior Engineers is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel has submitted that a number of persons who were similarly situated had in fact, been appointed.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
A perusal of the order dated August 18, 1992 shows that the Junior Engineers of the Public Works Department had resorted to an indefinite strike w.e.f.
December 12, 1990.
This affected the works under execution.
In order to ensure timely completion of various projects a decision was taken by the Govt. to appoint certain Junior Engineers temporarily.
For this purpose, the instructions dated February 8, 1991 were issued by the Chief Engineer.
Under these instructions, only 'under-employed Diploma holders' could be considered for appointment.
This meant that if a diploma holder was working as a Beldar, he could be temporarily adjusted on the post of Junior Engineer.
His post in the rank of Beldar had to be kept vacant.
This is also the clear stipulation in the order dated February 8, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
It is the admitted position that neither of the two petitioners was working on any post on February 8, 1991.
In fact, it is clear that petitioner No. 1 had been retrenched in July, 1990 while petitioner No. 2 had been retrenched on November 30, 1988.
Consequently, the petitioners were not eligible to be considered for appointment as Junior Engineers in pursuance to the instructions dated February 8, 1991.
In view of this, no infirmity can be found with the action of the respondents in not appointing the petitioners or in rejecting their representations.
8.
As for the charge of discrimination, Mr. Midha has submitted that certain persons named in paragraph 18 of the petition viz. Sarvshri Hari Saran, etc. had been appointed on the posts of Junior Engineers.
Neither their orders of appointments have been produced nor have these persons been impleaded as parties.
On the basis of a vague averment made in this paragraph it is not possible to hold that they had been retrenched prior to February 8, 1991 and that they were junior to the petitioners.
Still further, it may be noticed that Mr. Midha has produced a copy of an order dated September 10, 1991 passed by Mr. Tarlochan Singh, Chief Engineer (Canals) which shows that Mr. Hari Saran had been reverted on February 25, 1991.
It also appears that he was thereafter posted on the RSDS Project, Shahpur.
This order was apparently issued in pursuance to certain directions given by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 586 of 1991 which was heard along with certain other connected cases.
There is no material to show that the petitioners and the persons mentioned in paragraph 18 as referred to by the learned counsel were similarly situated.
In such a situation, the charge of discrimination as levelled by the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be sustained.
The burden of proving that the action is discriminatory lay on the petitioners.
They have failed to provide any cogent data in support of the claim.
It may be mentioned that the posts had been sanctioned for a period of 89 days only.
This time had lapsed long back.
No relief can be given to the petitioners at this belated stage when even the posts may not be available.
There is no merit in the petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.