SS Nijjar, J - With the consent of counsel for the parties, the writ petition is taken up for final disposal at the motion stage.
2.
In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the order dated 512004 passed by the Departmental Promotion Committee (Annexure P-4) rejecting the claim of the petitioner for promotion from Assistant Commandant (now redesignated as Deputy Commandant to the rank of Second-In-Command).
The petitioner also seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to promote him to the rank of Second-In-Command with reference to the DPC on 1361990.
3.
The petitioner bases his claim on certain observations made by a Division Bench of this Court in the judgment rendered in LPA No. 586/1992 decided on 1272001.
The relevant facts have already been noticed by the Division Bench in the aforesaid judgment which may be reproduced verbatim as follows :-  "This appeal is directed against order dated 11.2.1992 passed by the learned Single Judge in CWP No. 12316 of 1990 vide which the appellants were directed to bring the name of the writ petitioner-respondent on the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second-In-Command from the date when a person immediately junior to him was so promoted and to give him benefits which may accrue to him as a consequence of promotion."
The Facts :  Respondent-AK Narula joined the Central Reserve Police Force (for brevity, CRPF) as Deputy Superintendent of Police on 1.12.1971.
He was promoted on the post of Assistant Commandant on 23.7.1983 superseding officers.
He suffered a set back in the matter of seniority which was down graded as a consequence of the judgment of the Supreme Court in CWP No. 44 of 1975 - U.B.S.
Teetia and others v. Union of India.
In 1990, the Departmental Promotion Committee (for short, the DPC) considered 46 Assistant Commandants including the respondent for approval for appointment as Second-in-Command, but he was not recommended and persons junior to him were approved for promotion.
The respondent challenged his supersession in CWP No. 12316 of 1990 by contending that the DPC had superseded him without any rational reason and notwithstanding his outstanding record of service.
He averred that he was one of the 8 Assistant Commandants from amongst 100 officers selected from Punjab-based battalions for attachment with Punjab Police during Ghalu Ghara Week to work as SP (Operation), Hoshiarpur has been appreciated by the then Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police (Operations), Punjab.
Still further, it was pleaded that since June/July, 1987, he was holding charge of two to three Assistant Commandants and was also performing duties of Second- in-Command from time to time.
Reference was also made to the appreciation letters issued by various officers, namely, Shri JP Virdi, the then Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur and Shri Shiv Mohan Singh, Inspector General of Police.
Reliance was also placed on the facts that his name had been recommended in 1988, 1989, and 1990 for police award and it was submitted that there could be no justification, legal or otherwise to supersede him.
It was also claimed that the record of his service was far meritorious than that of his junior-Shri RS Virk which was recommended for promotion as Second-in-Command .
The stand of the appellants before the learned Single Judge was that according to instructions dated 1031989, an officer who satisfied the bench mark of securing at least four "Very Good" reports out of the last five reports could be eligible for being brought on select list.
According to them, the record' of the respondent did not warrant giving of bench mark "Very Good" which could entitle him to claim promotion.
They relied on instructions vide circular dated 1031989, the relevant extracts of which are reproduced below :  (i) xx xx xx xx  (ii) In respect of all posts which are in the level of Rs. 3700-5000 and above, the bench mark grade should be "Very Good".
However, Officers who are graded as "Out standing" would rank en block senior to those who are graded as "Very Good" and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter seniority in the feeder post.
(iii) xx xx xx xx  (iv) xx xx xx xx  Thereafter the respondent filed Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 in which averments were made that the DPC had the power to modulate the reports and such a power was given by paragraph 221(e) of the instructions dated 1031989.
It was further asserted that the name of the respondent was recommended for award of the Police Medal in the year 1988, 1989 and 1990.
The DPC was under obligation to modulate the reports of the respondent from "Very Good" or "Outstanding" was not in vogue and was introduced for the first time in the year 1989.
The respondent also asserted that the DPC constituted in 1991 did modulate the reports of others to bring them within the periphery of promotion criteria and promoted Shri SOP Mehra, Assistant Commandant who had adverse remarks which were communicated to him and who did not fulfil the bench mark criteria Other examples quoted by him were of Sarv Shri VUS Chauhan, S.S.L.
Sharma and RS Virk who were promoted despite failing to secure the prescribed bench mark.
After considering the rival pleadings and arguments of the counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and held that once the DPC had modulated the remarks in the cases of other persons, its failure to apply the same criteria in the case of the respondent was arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The observations of the learned Single Judge in this regard read as under :-  "........
However, on the second contention of Mr. Randhawa this petition deserves to succeed.
As has been indicated above, there is absolutely no specific denial with regard to the averments made by the petitioner in Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 that the -Departmental Promotion Committee had unfettered discretion to modulate the remarks and that in fact and reality some of those who came to be promoted to the post of Second-in-Command either prior to the petitioner or at the time when the petitioner was superseded or even thereafter did not answer the requisite promotional criteria, spelt out from the instructions issued in the year 1989.
The contention of Mr. AS Tewatia that as per instructions Annexure R-1 as also of 1989, it was in the absolute discretion of the Departmental Promotion Committee to ignore a senior even though he was within the zone of promotion, cannot be accepted for nothing like that is available from reading of the Annexure R-1 and instructions of 1989.
Also, it has not been shown even on facts that those, who were actually promoted by superseding the petitioner, had a better service record.
It is an admitted position between the parties that on account of even newly laid down criteria of promotion, the petitioner had since been promoted to the post of Second-in-Command during the pendency of this petition.
The limited relief that survives is for promoting the petitioner from the date, Junior to him was promoted.
The respondents could not possibly relax the promotional criteria with regard to others and in particular those, who were considered alongwith the petitioner for promotion and yet adopt different yardstick for the petitioner.
The action of the respondents in promoting others by relaxing the criteria or by modulating the bench mark in the case of one and without any differential criteria not doing the same for the petitioner amounts to discrimination and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
A direction shall be issued to the respondents to bring the name of the petitioner in the approved list of Assistant Commands for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command from a date, when person immediately junior to him was so promoted.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential reliefs that may accrue to him because of this judge."
4.
Thereafter the Division Bench noticed the arguments of the counsel for the Union of India.
The main argument was that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for bringing the name of the respondent in the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command with retrospective effect was contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court and, therefore, the same may be set aside.
It was further argued that the post of Second Commandant is a Selection post and, therefore, the petitioner could be promoted only on attaining the Bench Mark as laid down in the instructions dated 1031989.
It was also submitted that the recommendations made by the DPC were based on comparative evaluation of the record of the petitioner and other candidates.
Therefore, the leaned Single Judge was not justified in imposing his opinion over the one formed by the DPC.
It was further argued that the post of Second-in-Command is a selection post, and therefore, there is no question of supersession of a senior person.
Only those Officers who satisfy criteria laid down by the Government can be promoted.
In support of the submission, the learned counsel relied on judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 434, Kuldip Chand v. State of HP and others, AIR 1997 SC 2606 and State Bank of India and others v. Mohd.
Mynuuddin, (1987) 4 SCC 486.
Learned counsel also submitted that the function of the Selection Committee is administrative and not judicial or adjudicatory in nature.
Therefore, it is not required to give reasons for selecting a candidate and rejecting the other one.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences v. Dr. K Kalyana Raman and others, AIR 1992 SC 1086.
He also placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union Public Service Commission v. Hirayalal Dev and others, (1988)2 SCC 242.
It was further submitted that even if the post of Second-In Command is to be considered as a promotional post, then merit-cum-seniority is the criteria as provided under Rule 55 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (for short "the Rules").
Learned counsel also submitted that the Single Judge had acted beyond jurisdiction by issuing direction to bring the name of the petitioner on the approved list of the Assistant Commandant for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command from the date when person immediately junior to him was so promoted.
Learned counsel also submitted that the instructions dated 1031989 have been issued in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Government under Section 4 of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.
These instructions had been upheld by a learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in the case of Devender Kumar v. Union of India and others rendered in CWP No. 2517 of 1993 decided on 2751998.
LPA No. 551 of 1995 filed against the aforesaid judgment was dismissed on 771999.
The order passed by the Letters Patent Bench was upheld by the Supreme Court in SLP No. 16951 of 1999 decided on 2722000.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, had argued that the instructions issued by the letter dated 1031989 were ultra vires to 1955 Rules, and therefore, the same could not have been invoked for making promotion.
He had also argued that the DPC had committed a serious illegality by not upholding the remarks recorded in the confidential report of the petitioner.
The Division Bench considered Rules 4, 5 and 105 of the 1955 Rules.
The Division Bench concluded that although under the Rules, the post of Second-in Commandant is not a promotional post from Assistant Commandant, but the respondents had started treating the aforesaid post as a promotional post.
During the hearing before the Division Bench, the respondents had produced the record of the petitioner and some other officers, namely, S/Shri SB Mehra, VDS Chauhan, S.S.L.
Sharma and RS Virk alongwith the proceedings of the DPC.
After scrutinising the record, the Division Bench observed as follows :  "A bare scrutiny of these files shows that the service record of respondent-AK Narula was similar to that of Shri RS Virk, if not superior.
This is evident from the following comparative table of the remarks recorded in their ACRs of 1985- 86 to 1989-90.
Respondent (AK Narula) (RS Virk)  1985-86 Good Good 1986-87 Very Good Very Good  1987-88 Good Very Good  1988-89 Very Good Good  1989-90 Very Good Very Good  Notwithstanding this, the name of Shri RS Virk was included in the select list of officers by giving him bench mark "Very Good" and that the respondent was placed in the category of officers who were given bench mark "Good".
This factual position emanates from the meeting of the Departmental Promotion Committee convened on 1361990 to consider the cases of Assistant Commandant as 2nd Commandant.
It is also clear that Shri RS Virk was at serial No. 427 whereas the respondent was at Serial No. 429 and that the Selection Committee has followed the guide-lines for assessing the officers for promotion as are given in the letters dated 25111988 and 851990.
In the summary of reports presented to the Selection Committee, it is revealed that for the year 1988-89, the Accepting Authority has rated Shri RS Virk as Good whereas the Reporting Officer as well as the Reviewing Officer has rated him Very Good.
The fact remains that the last report of the Accepting Authority given to Shri RS Virk was Good and that is the entry which should have been made in the ACR of Shri RS Virk.
The DPC, however, upgraded the report of the Accepting Authority from Good to Very Good by recording the reasons that since the Accepting Authority has failed to disclose any reasons for down grading, the report has to be treated as Very Good.
If the same logic and reason is applied to the report of the respondent, then the summary of his report would reveal that for the year 1987-88 he was given Very Good Report by the Reviewing Officer but by the Accepting Officer he was down graded as Good.
No plausible explanation has been disclosed as to how different yardstick has been adopted in the cases of two different officers."
6.
Thereafter the Division Bench held that even if the claim of the petitioner had not been fairly considered, no direction could have been given by the Single Judge for promoting the petitioner.
Hence the following observations were made :-  "Similar view has been expressed in the case of HP State Electricity Board v. KR Gulati, JT 1998(1).
In the result, the appeal is partly allowed.
The direction given by the learned Single Judge for promotion of the respondents set aside.
It is directed that the DPC shall reconsider his case while adjudging suitability keeping in view the observations made in this order.
If on reconsideration, the respondent is found suitable, then he shall be promoted with retrospective effect i.e. the date from which Shri RS Virk was promoted and be given all consequential benefits.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within 3 months of the receipt of attested copy of this order by the learned counsel for the appellants."
7.
Pursuant to the aforesaid decision, the respondents have reconsidered the claim of the petitioner.
Again the same has been rejected.
Relying on the aforesaid observations of the Division Bench, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
8.
The respondents have filed a detailed written statement.
It has been stated that when the petitioner was considered in the DPC held on 1361990, he could not make the grade though he was in the zone of consideration.
Based on the recommendations of the DPC, some of the juniors of the petitioner were promoted.
The petitioner was again considered by the DPC convened on 2621991 and the DPC recommended his promotion.
Accordingly, the petitioner was promoted as Second-in-Commandant.
The respondents have denied that the petitioner had earned very good and outstanding reports for the year 1988-89 and 1990.
The respondents have, however, admitted that the directions were given by the Division Bench in LPA No. 589 of 1992 that DPC shall reconsider the case of the petitioner, keeping in view the observations made in the order.
9.
Against the aforesaid judgment, Union of India filed SLP No. 1577 of 2003 which has been dismissed by the Division Bench on 1182003.
Accordingly, a meeting of Review DPC was held on 4122003 to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Second-in-Command with reference to DPC on 1361990, keeping in view the directions given in the judgment dated 1272001.
Even on review, the DPC which was convened on 4122003, found that in no way, the petitioner met the prescribed Bench Mark Grading.
Therefore, he has not been recommended for promotion to the rank of Second-in-Commandant with reference to DPC of 1361990.
The competent authority has also approved the recommendations of the review DPC.
The petitioner has been informed of the decision through letter dated 512004.
The respondents have further stated in paragraph 11 of the written statement that the observations made by the Division Bench of this Court in the aforesaid LPA that "if the same logic and reason is applied to the report of the petitioner, then summary of this report reveals that for the year 1987, he was given very good report, but he was down graded as "Good" and no plausible explanation has been disclosed as to how different yardsticks have been adopted in the case of two different officers and this is unjustified and incorrect not only legally, but factually also.
Thereafter, the respondents have proceeded to give an explanation for the variation in the case of the petitioner.
It is stated that there were two ACRs for the year 1987-88.
The respondents have submitted that the case of the petitioner is not identical to the case of RS Virk.
It is stated that there were two ACRs in the year 1987-88.
The period was split up from 1.4.87 to 2691987 and from 27.9.87 to 31.3.1988.
The report earned by the petitioner for this period has been depicted as follows :  "Period Reporting Officer' Reviewing Officer Accepting Officer  1/4/87 to 26.9.87 Good Very Good Good  27.9.87 to 31388 Good Good Good  10.
In the case of RS Virk, the ACR was for full one year in which the Reviewing Authority has graded him "Very Good" whereas the Accepting Authority had graded him as "Good".
Therefore, the DPC upgraded the report of the Accepting Authority from "Good" to "Very Good" by recording the reasons that since the Accepting Authority had failed to disclose any reason for down-grading, the report has to be treated as "Very Good".
The respondents have thereafter given a comparative table of the ACRs of RS Virk and the petitioner as follows :  Name Period Reporting Officer Reviewing Officer Superior Officer Sh. RS Virk  1/4/85 to 31/3/86  Satisfactory  Good  Good  1/4/86 to 20/10/86 NIC  - - 21/10/86 to 31/3/87 NIC  -  - 1/4/87 to 30/5/87  NIC  - - 1/6/87 to 31/3/88 Outstanding  V Good V Good 1/4/88 to 31/3/89 V Good V Good V Good  1/4/89 to 31/3/90 V Good V Good V Good  Shri AK Narula 1/4/85 to 10/7/85 worked well  Good  -  11/7/85 to 31/3/86 Very Well Good Good  1/4/86 to 15/7/86 Just & fair Very Hard Working disciplined NC  16/7/86 to 31/3/87 Very Well V Good V Good  1/4/87 to 26/9/87 Good V Good Good  8/10/87 to 31/3/88 Good Good Good  1/4/88 to 25/2/89 Good V Good Good  26/2/89 to 31/3/89 NIC - - 1/4/89 to 31/3/90 Outstanding V Good V Good  The analysis of the aforesaid table is given by the respondents in the following words :-  "From the above, it is amply clear that the reporting officer and reviewing officer have graded Shri RS Virk for the year 1988-89 as very good, whereas the Superior Officer has graded as Good only without giving any justification.
The DPC has, therefore, upgraded the grading of above officer from Good to Very Good for the year 1988-89.
In the case of Shri AK Narula (petitioner the reporting officer and superior officer has graded him Good for the period from 1/4/87 to 26/9/87 whereas only the reviewing officer graded him as very Good.
Further the reporting Officer, Reviewing Officer and Superior Officer have graded him only Good for the period from 3/10/87 to 3113/88.
Therefore, the petitioner could earn only "Good grading for the year 1987-88 which resulted in non-consideration of his case for promotion to the rank of Second-in-Command by the DPC held on 1361990.
The DPC which convened on 13/6/90 have given benchmark grading of "Very Good" in the case of Shri RS Virk and "Good" in the case of the petitioner."
11.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
We are of the opinion that the arguments which are sought to be raised now, were available to the respondents when the matter was argued before the learned Single Judge in CWP No. 12316 of 1990.
These very arguments were available to the respondents when the matter was argued in the LPA No. 586/1992.
The same record which has been produced before us, was produced before the learned Single Judge as also before the Division Bench.
After considering the entire matter, the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that the petitioner had been unfairly treated and a direction was issued to the respondents to include his name in the list of Officers to be promoted as Second-in-Command.
The Division Bench again considered the entire matter and found that there was no distinction between the case of RS Virk and the petitioner.
The submissions which have been made before us and the facts which have been pleaded in the written statement were available to the respondents at the time when SLP No. 1577 of 2003 was filed against the Division Bench judgment in LPA No. 586/1992 dated 1272001.
12.
We have perused the record produced before us.
We see no reason to take a view different from the view taken by the earlier Division Bench.
In RS Virk, the accepting authority had rated him as "Good" in the ACR for the year 1988-89.
The DPC upgraded the ACR to "Very Good".
The reason given for upgrading was that the Reporting Authority had graded him as "Very Good" and the Accepting Authority had graded him as "Good" without assigning any reason.
Surprisingly, the DPC upgraded the report from "Good" to "Very Good" also without assigning any reason.
If the report of the Reporting Authority has to be accepted, the petitioner also has to be graded as "Very Good".
Separate criteria cannot be adopted for grading two officers who are otherwise similarly situated.
The reason given by the respondents in the written statement, have already been rejected by the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of this Court.
SLP filed against the judgment of the earlier Division Bench has been dismissed.
The petitioner clearly has to be rated as "Very Good" for the year 1987-88.
13.
Learned counsel for the UOI, Mr. Gurpreet Singh submitted that it is not the function of this Court to interfere with the assessment made by the competent authorities with regard to the grading to be given to a particular officer.
In support of the submission, learned counsel relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Badri Nath v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others, (2000)8 Supreme Court Cases 395.
In our opinion, the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case, supports the petitioner rather than the plea of the respondents.
After considering the entire case law, the Supreme Court culled out the following principles :-  (1) Under Article 16 of the Constitution, right to be "considered" for promotion is a fundamental right.
It is not the mere "consideration" for promotion that is important but the "consideration" must be "fair" according to established principles governing service jurisprudence.
(2) Courts will not interfere with assessment made by the DPCs unless the aggrieved officer establishes that the non-promotion was bad, according to Wednesbury principles or was mala fides.
(3) Adverse remarks of an officer for the entire period of service can be taken into consideration while promoting an officer or while passing an order of compulsory retirement.
But the weight which must be attached to the adverse remarks depends upon certain sound principles of fairness.
(4) If the adverse remarks relate to a distant past and relate to remarks such as his not putting his maximum effort or so on, then those remarks cannot be given weight after a long distance of time, particularly, if there are no such remarks during the period before his promotion.
This is the position even in cases of compulsory retirement.
(5) If the adverse remarks relate to a period prior to an earlier promotion, they must be treated as having lost their sting and as weak material, subject however to the rider that if they related to dishonesty or lack of integrity they can be considered to have not lost their strength fully so as to be ignored altogether.
(6) Uncommunicated adverse remarks could be relied upon even if no opportunity was given to represent against them before an order of compulsory retirement is passed."
14.
The Supreme Court also observed that every Officer has a right to be considered for promotion under Article 16 of the Constitution of India, to a higher post, subject to eligibility, provided he is within the zone of consideration.
But the manner in which his case is to be considered, is a matter of considerable importance in service jurisprudence as it deals with "fairness" in the matter of consideration for promotion under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Undoubtedly, it has also been held that normally the Supreme Court does not enter into the question of correctness of assessment made by the DPC.
But this is only the general principle.
However, it is not, as if there are no exceptions to this general principle.
Thereafter, the Supreme Court noticed the occasion on which a writ in the nature of Certiorari was issued and the impugned orders were quashed.
Some of the instances where the Supreme Court has interfered and issued a writ in the nature of Mandamus, have been noticed in paragraph 8 of the judgment which we may notice.
"88.
We may, however, point out that it is not as if there are no exceptions to this general principle.
The occasions where the Court issued a writ of certiorari and quashed an order and had also issued a mandamus at the same time to the State or public authority could be very rare but we might emphasise that the power of this Court to mould the relief in the interests of justice in extraordinary cases cannot be doubted.
In Comptroller & Auditor General of India V.K.S.
Jagannathan, such a power on the part of this Court was accepted by a three-Judge Bench, Madon, J referred to the observations of Subba Rao, J (as he then was) in Dwarka Nath v. ITO wherein the learned Judge explained that our Constitution designedly used wide language in Article 226 to enable the Courts to "reach justice wherever found necessary" and "to mould the reliefs to meet peculiar and complicated requirements of this country".
Justice Madon also referred to Rochester Corpn.
RV Revising Barriester for the Borough of Hanley, Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture Fisheries and Food and to a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
Vol. 1, p.59, Finally Madon, J observed : (SCC pp. 692-93, para 20).
"20.
There is thus no doubt that the High Court in India exercising their jurisdiction under Article 226 have the power to issue a writ of mandamus of a writ in the nature of Mandamus or to pass orders and give necessary directions where the Government or a public authority has failed to exercise or has wrongly exercised the discretion conferred upon it by a statute or a rule or a policy decision of the Government or has exercised such discretion mala fide or on irrelevant considerations or by ignoring the relevant considerations and materials or in such a manner as to frustrate the object of conferring such discretion or the policy for implementing which such discretion has been conferred.
In all such cases and in any other fit and proper case a High Court can, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226, issue a writ of mandamus or a writ in the nature of mandamus or pass orders and give directions to compel the performance in a proper and lawful manner of the discretion conferred upon the Government or a public authority, and in a proper case, in order to prevent justice resulting to the parties concerned, the Court may itself pass an order or give directions which the Government or the public authority should have passed or given had it property and lawfully exercised its discretion.
(Emphasis supplied).
We emphasised the words underline in the above passage to the effect that the Court may in some rare situations itself pass an order of give directions which the Government of the public authority should have passed or given had it properly and lawfully exercised its discretion.
The same view was expressed by another three-Judge Bench in BC Chaturvedi v. Union of India, even regarding disciplinary cases Verma, J (as he then was) observed (at SCC p. 762, para 18) as follows :-  "The High Court/Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the relief, either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority in reconsider the penalty imposed, or in shorten the litigation.
It may itself, in exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support thereof, (emphasis supplied).
The underlined words reiterate the powers of this Court in rare and exceptional cases."
15.
These observations make it abundantly clear that the High Court has the jurisdiction to mould and grant appropriate relief, in exercise of jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
16.
As noticed earlier in the present case, a learned Single Judge of this Court in the judgment passed in CWP No. 12316 of 1990 and a Division Bench judgment of this Court passed in LPA No. 586/1992 on 1272001 had held that the petitioner has not been treated fairly.
The respondents had been directed to grant the necessary relief to the petitioner.
Even after the SLP was dismissed by the Supreme Court against the Judgment of this Court dated 1272001 passed in LPA No. 566/1992, the respondents have reiterated the earlier decision.
Such being the situation, we are left with no option, but to quash the impugned order dated 512004 (Annexure P-4), by issuing a writ in the nature of Certiorari.
We also direct the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioner for promotion with reference to DPC held on 1361990 by treating the entry for the year 1987-88 as "Very' Good".
The petitioner be granted the necessary consequential relief within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Order accordingly.