SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns selection of police constables for the lower school course.
2.
The relevant provisions governing the selection of constables for the lower school course is rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, as applicable to the State of Haryana (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
This rule requires the Superintendent of Police to maintain a list known as 'list B' containing names of all constables selected for the said course.
The rule further provides, "Names shall be entered in the list in the order of merit, determinated by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in (i) Parade (ii) written test in general law (Indian Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act and such other Local and Special Laws as may be specified (iii) interview and (iv) examination of Services Record."
3.
For the purposes of this rule 137, by sub-rule 3 thereof, the Departmental Promotion Committee in each district comprises, "District Superintendent of Police and two Deputy Superintendents of Police, to be named by the D.I.G.
concerned.
"The rule as it stood at the relevant time also contained the proviso that, "no constable shall be considered eligible 'or lower school course until the entry of his name in the list has been approved by the D.I.G.
of the Range."
4.
The petitioners in this bunch of writ petitions and appellants in these Letters Patent Appeals are all those who had been selected for the lower school course in the test for selection held by the Departmental Promotion Committee at Yamunanagar on January 4, 1991.
This Departmental Promotion Committee had prepared a merit list of 53 candidates which was then submitted for perusal and approval to the Deputy Inspector General of Police Ambala Range.
It is said that in view of the verbal complaints regarding the award of marks by the Departmental Promotion Committee in the written test, the Deputy Inspector General of Police called for the answer-sheets of this examination and proceeded thereafter to re-rvaluate the answer-sheets himself, purporting to exercise this power as the approving authority of the list.
A fresh merit list in accordance with the marks given by him on re-evaluation was then prepared.
The petitioners and the appellants were the ones who were rendered ineligible for this course and this is what led them to approach this Hon'ble Court in its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
5.
Before proceeding further, at the very outset, it deserves mention that the said rule 137 now stands amended by the notification issued on September 8, 1992.
A somewhat different mode of selection for constables for the lower school course has now been prescribed, with the notable omission of the requirement of any approval by the Deputy Inspector General of Police of the candidates selected for the course by the Departmental Selection Committee.
Be that as it may, the issue raised in the present set of cases has, however, to be considered and decided in the content of this rule as it stood before this amendment.
6.
The main and crucial question which arises for consideration is whether approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, as per the proviso to sub-rule 2 of rule 137, includes within its scope and ambit the requisite authority to the Deputy Inspector General of Police to re-evaluate the answer papers of the written test as he has done in the present case.
In deeling with this matter, we must hasten to add that we have had the occasion to examine the re-evaluation of the answer papers of the petitioners and some others as was done by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and found no reason to attribute any flaw in his marking.
The point, however, remains, whether or not he had the power and authority to do so.
7.
A plain reading of the provisions of rule 137 would show that the merit of constables to be sent to the lower school course must be determinated by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police can only name the persons to comprise such committee but the undisputable aspect of it is that the Departmental Promotion Committee does not function as a delegate of the Deputy Inspector General of Police nor does it derive its authority to determine merit of the constables concerned by what is delegated to it by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
This being so, the Deputy Inspector General of Police clearly exercised a jurisdiction not vested in him by arrogating to himself a role which the rule did not confer upon him.
The approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police can in this context only by construed, as a power to decline it in a particular case or to confirm, sanction or ratify, what the Departmental Promotion Committee may have done, but not that he could take upon himself to do, what according to the rules, the Departmental Promotion Committee had been enjoined upon to do.
Seen in this fight, there can be no escape from the conclusion that the re-evaluation of the answering-papers by the Deputy Inspector General of Police was not a course permitted by law and this being so, the re-evaluation done by him has consequently to be disregarded.
It would follow from this, that as per the merit list prepared by the Departmental Promotion Committee, the petitioners and the appellants were indeed.
entitled to be sent to the lower school course.
8.
Turning now to the relief to be granted, we are informed that during the pendency of these matters in this Court, some writ petitioners had qualified for the lower school course in the subsequent tests held by the Departmental Promotion Committee for the purpose.
Be that as it may, we hereby direct that if they have not already been sent to the lower school course, all the writ petitioners and the appellants be deputed to the next lower school course.
As further promotion is dependent upon the merit of the constables in the lower school course, it would be fair and just that their merit be fixed in the course that they would have gone to on the basis of their selection in January 1991, by taking the marks obtained by them in the lower school course that they may now go to or had gone to during the pendency of these matters in this court, as having been obtained by them in the course they were originally selected for.
In other words, whatever marks they earn in the lower school course they go to in pursuance of the orders of this Court now, or that they may have in any already gone to by virtue of being selected in any subsequent test during the pendency of these matters in this Court, the marks obtained by them in such course be deemed to be the marks they obtained in the course to which they would have gone to, on their selection for it in January 1991 and further that they be deemed to have passed the lower school course at that time.
Both these Letters Patent Appeals and these writ petitions are hereby allowed and accepted in these terms.
The petitioners and the appellants shall be entitled to Rs. 1,000/- as costs (one set only).