AP Chowdhri, J - Brief facts giving rise to this writ petition are that Dr. Khem Raj Tuli, petitioner was appointed Medical Officer vide appointment letter Annexure P-1 dated 421987 on short term basis.
He has served for the required period of three years in rural areas and he is continuing to serve as an adhoc PCMS Doctor in the service of State.
Admission to Post-Graduate studies is regulated by notification Annexure P-1 dated 821993 in accordance with the directions of the Supreme Court in CMNo.
7657 of 1987.
Out of the seats 25% are filled on all India basis through competitive entrance test of the remaining 60% seats are to be filled from amongst eligible PCMS/PCDS in service doctors while 40% seats are to be filled from fresh graduates from the open market.
The petitioner applied for admission to Post-Graduate Course in Surgery against 60% quota of in-service doctors.
He also took the requisite test and secured 3907 marks out of 80 and was placed at Sr. No. 149 in the general merit list.
His name was not included in the general merit list relating to 60% quota on the ground that he had not been regularised in PCMS and continued to be on adhoc basis.
At one stage there was constituted one committee headed by the former Chief Justice SS Sandhawalia.
The recommendations of the Committee were accepted by the State Government.
Gist of the various recommendations made by the Committee is given in the Press Note Annexure P-4 with regard to the adhoc doctors, it was recommended in paragraph -15 that the State Government should consider regularisation of services of adhoc doctors who had completed 4 years of service provided they were otherwise found fit.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that in terms of the said recommendation which was accepted by the State Government, the petitioner was entitled to be regularised and in any case treated on the footing that for the purposes of admission to the Post-Graduate Course, he is entitled to be considered against 60% quota.
As the petitioner was not getting the requisite relief, he instituted C.W.P.
No. 8514 of 1993.
A number of adjournments were caused to enable the State Government to file a written statement.
The State Government, however, failed to file any written statement.
The petition was disposed of by a Division Bench vide order dated October 22, 1993 with a direction to the respondents to decide the case of the petitioner with regard to regularisation of his services by 1111993 and in case the petitioner was found to be entitled to the regularisaton, it was further directed, that he would be granted admission in the Medial College against the quota meant for in-service candidates according to his merit and in accordance with the relevant rules.
In spite of the above directions, however, the respondents failed to regularise the services of the petitioner which necessitated his filing the present writ petition.
The petitioner seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioner as a regular PCMS candidate against 60% quota meant for in service PCMS candidates for purposes of admission to the Post-Graduate Medical/Dental Degree Colleges in the State of Punjab.
3.
In response to the notice of motion, written statement has been filed by the State.
The material facts set out above have not been disputed.
The only plea raised is that the State Government has taken up the question of regularisation of the doctors yearwise and the case of the petitioner would be dealt with when his turn comes.
So far as his services have not been regularised in accordance with the recommendations of the Sandhawalia Committee which, undoubtedly, has been accepted by the Government It is not disputed in the written statement that the petitioner is serving as adhoc PCMS Doctors.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The only reason which stands in the way of the petitioner from being considered against the quota of 60% in service doctors is that he has not been formally regularised though it can hardly be disputed that in terms of the recommendations of the Sandhawalia Committee, which has been accepted by the State Government, the petitioner has become eligible be regularised as he has completed the requisite number of years of service on adhoc basis.
In spite of the direction given by this Court in the earlier petition, to which a reference has been made in the fore-going part of this order, the State Government has not regularised the services of the petitioner.
If that direction had been complied with, the petitioner would not have been obliged to file this writ petition.
There is no reason why the petitioner should be made to suffer for the delay which is being caused by the respondents in taking further action in the matter of regularisation according to law and as per directions of this Court.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and it is directed that the case of the petitioner shall be considered as per his merit and relevant rules on the footing that he is eligible in service doctors for the purpose of admission to the Post-Graduate course in various disciplines, and this exercise shall be completed within one month from today.
Respondents are directed to take further action in accordance with these directions.
A copy of this order be given Dasti to the petitioner.