Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Head Constable in the Haryana Armed Police, has approached this Court with a multitude of grievances.
At the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner had initially raised various contentions but finally confined the challenge to the order dated 1.10.1993 by which the punishment of 'Censure' was imposed on him.
With regard to the remaining matters, the learned counsel has stated that the petitioner would make a representation to the appropriate authority.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable in District Ambala on December 20, 1979.
On January 23, 1980, the petitioner was deputed to the Haryana Armed Police.
In October 1983, the petitioner was sent to the Police Training College for training.
At the end of this training, the petitioner qualified the Lower School Course in March 1984.
Soon thereafter, on April 4, 1984, his name was brought on List 'C' and he was promoted as a Head Constable on April 24, 1984.
He was even deputed to the Police Training College, Madhuban in April 1985 where he was promoted as an Assistant Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis on November 4, 1987.
On January 31, 1988, the petitioner was confirmed as a Head Constable in the Haryana Armed Police.
3.
In 1991, the petitioner approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 666 of 1991 praying inter alia for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to depute him to the Police Training College for passing the Intermediate School Course.
This writ petition was admitted and in pursuance to the interim directions given by the Court, he was deputed for the course which he qualified in May 1991.
The writ petition was allowed by a learned Single Judge of this Court vide judgment dated April 29, 1991.
4.
The petitioner was repatriated to the 4th Battalion, HAP which was stationed at Madhuban in May 1992.
On May 17, 1992, he was suspended for an alleged dereliction of duty.
He was ultimately charge-sheeted along with three other persons and a regular enquiry was held.
The precise charge against the petitioner was that he showed negligence in performance of his duty on account of which some unwanted persons had entered the Police Complex, Madhuban on May 13, 1991.
The Enquiry Officer vide his report dated September 6, 1991, an extract from which has been produced as Annexure P-1/A found that the petitioner as also the other persons "were neither negligent of their duty nor guilty of lack of control on their subordinates."
Accordingly, the petitioner as also the other persons who had been charge-sheeted along with him were exonerated.
In spite of this, the Commandant 4th Battalion, HAP (Mr. M S Mann, IPS) gave a show cause notice to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why he may not be "awarded a punishment of stoppage of four future annual increments with permanent effect."
A copy of this show cause notice has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted his reply vide letter dated September 26, 1991 (Annexure P-3).
Vide order dated October 29, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, the competent authority awarded the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect to the petitioner.
He filed an appeal.
Vide order dated October 1, 1993 which was passed during the pendency of this writ petition, the appellate authority reduced the punishment of stoppage of one increment to that of 'Censure' and also ordered that he will not be entitled to the payment of "anything more for the period of suspension as he has not been fully exonerated."
Since this order had been passed during the pendency of this writ petition, the petitioner amended the petition and has inter alia prayed for the quashing of this order.
5.
A reply to the amended writ petition has been filed by Mr. R N Chahalia, IPS, Deputy Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, on behalf of all the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was enrolled as a Constable on December 20, 1979 and not on October 20, 1979.
It has been admitted that the petitioner was deputed for the Lower School Course which he passed in March 1984 and that his name was brought on List C- I It has been further averred that the petitioner was confirmed as Head Constable in 1988 and that he had been promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector at the Police Training College on ad hoc basis.
He was repatriated from the Police Training College vide order dated March 1, 1991 after he had served there for about six years.
6.
According to the respondents, the petitioner on his repatriation to the Haryana Armed Police, was posted as Guard Incharge, Mandir Guard.
He was also asked to supervise the Guard at Canal Bridge No. 1 which was very near to the Mandir Guard.
The petitioner's averment that he had been asked to look after the Guard at Canal Bridge No. 1 at 730 pm on May 13, 1991 has been denied and it has been averred that "when the unwanted elements entered in Haryana Police Complex, Madhuban, the petitioner was Incharge of the Mandir Guard and was also supervisory officer of the Guard at Canal Bride No. 1".
It was on account of his carelessness and negligence that the petitioner was placed under suspension on May 17, 1991 along with Sub Inspector Gurdeep Singh and ASI Wattan Singh.
The punishing authority having not agreed with the report of the enquiry officer, it passed "a well reasoned and speaking order after applying the mind and so no separate order of disagreement" was required to be passed.
Ultimately, punishment of stoppage of one increment had been imposed which was subsequently reduced to that of Censure.
The respondents have controverted the petitioner's challenge to this and various other orders and prayed that the petition may be dismissed.
7.
I have heard Mr.
I S Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. J V Yadav, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents.
8.
At the outset, it is relevant to notice that this case had initially come up for hearing on November 2, 1993.
The departmental file relating to the enquiry against the petitioner had been produced.
A perusal of the record showed that the enquiry officer had exonerated the petitioner and held that the charges were not proved.
The perusal of the record further revealed that the report of the enquiry officer was not processed in the office of the Commandant 4th Battalion nor were any reasons recorded by him for dis-agreeing with the findings of the enquiry officer.
It is, thus apparent that the punishing authority had not recorded any reasons for not accepting the findings recorded by the enquiry officer.
Not only that.
Even while issuing the show cause notice to the petitioner, the punishing authority did not inform him as to why it was not accepting the findings of the enquiry officer.
In fact, it was only said that "I disagree with the findings of the enquiry officer."
In such a situation, it could not have been possible for the petitioner to effectively reply to the show cause notice given to him.
The conclusions recorded by the enquiry officer were based on the evidence on record and if the punishing authority had any reason/s for taking a different view, it was only fair for it to have conveyed the reason/s to the petitioner so as to enable him to effectively put forward his case.
This having not been done, the punishing authority acted in violation of the rules of fair play and its order did not conform to the principles of natural justice.
That being so, the order dated October 29, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, is apparently violative of the principles of natural justice and cannot be sustained.
9.
It is true that the appellate authority has set aside this order and has reduced the punishment to that of censure.
However, since the original order itself had been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice and without giving any adequate opportunity to the petitioner, even the appellate order in the circumstances of this case, cannot be sustained.
It may also be noticed that the appellate authority while reducing the punishment from stoppage of increment to that of censure, further directed that the petitioner will not be entitled to "receive anything more for the period of his suspension as he has not been fully exonerated."
Admittedly, the implication is that the petitioner would be entitled only to the subsistence allowance already paid to him and not to full wages.
Mr. J V Yadav concedes that even before passing this order, no opportunity was given to the petitioner.
10.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that even the appellate order cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the orders at Annexures P-4 and P-7 are quashed.
11.
Mr. Balhara also pointed out that the Deputy Inspector, Ambala Range had already passed an order during the pendency of this petition for the petitioner's posting in the Anti-Extremist Cell.
The counsel submits that the petitioner is willing to join there.
Mr. Yadav accepts this position and states that the respondents will depute the petitioner for his posting in the Anti-Extremist Cell within two weeks from today.
Consequently, nothing remains to be done in this behalf.
12.
In the writ petition, the allegations of mala fide have been made.
In view of the statement made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that he would be submitting a representation to the appropriate authority, the learned counsel has not pressed those allegations at the time of the hearing of the case.
13.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed to the extent that orders at Annexures P-4 and P-7 are set aside.
The consequential benefits shall be allowed to the petitioner.
With regard to the claim for confirmation, implementation of the order passed by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 666 of 1991 and repatriation to the District Police, the petitioner will be entitled to make representation to the appropriate authority which Mr. Yadav states, shall be decided within three months.
However, as already stated by Mr. Yadav, the petitioner will be deputed to the Anti-Extremist Cell within two months from today.
14.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.