VK Bali, J - This order will also dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10639 of 1990, ...... 8774, 10169 and 10621 of 1991 as common questions of fact and law are involved in the same.
Facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 16639 of 1990 "Vijay Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others.
1994(2) SCT.
401" As the learned Deputy Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State has also referred to written statement filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 8774 of 1991 "Siri Krishan v. State of Haryana etc.", the defence projected in that case as also this one would need a necessary mention.
2.
Petitioner Vijay Kumar was initially recruited as a Constable Operator-cum-Technician on 19.6.1971 in the Wireless Section of the Police Department of Haryana.
He was promoted as Head Constable with effect from 1361975 and later as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on 1921981.
It is pleaded that he had a clean record of service and his integrity has not been doubted at any stage of his service career spanning over a period of 20 years.
However, in the year 1981-82, he was conveyed adverse remarks to the effect that though he was working satisfactorily yet, he should improve his radio-theory.
The same remarks were repeated in the subsequent two years.
It is for that reasons that he was held up at Efficiency Bar due with effect from 141982, 141983 and 141984 vide orders dated 1071984.
He made a representation against the remarks aforesaid which was accepted and, thus, he was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar with effect from 141982 vide orders dated 11111985.
In consequence thereof, he was paid arrears of pay amounting to Rs. 2,33220 p. He continued working with utmost devotion and dedication and in recognition of his distinguished service, he was awarded as many as 18 Commendation Certificates.
In the year 1988-89, the then Superintendent of Police Wireless on the basis of some mis-understanding recorded some vague remarks not connected with his integrity.
He, however, made a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, against the said remarks which was accepted vide orders dated 391990 and the adverse remarks were expunged.
However, on account of fact, that he was held up at Efficiency Bar and later on some adverse remarks were made in his report for the year 1988-89, he was ignored from promotion.
On that count as well, he made representation seeking as even personal interviews for considering him for promotion as Sub Inspector with effect from the date when his immediate junior was promoted.
However, no orders were passed on his representation even though he was verbally told that since he had not passed T.O.G.Grade I and II examination, he could not be promoted in view of the instructions dated 2331987, Annexure P4.
The case of the petitioner is that instructions, Annexure P4, were not applicable to him inasmuch as he was due for promotion with effect from 29101984 after adverse remarks had been expunged and he was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar with effect from 141982 vide orders dated 11111985.
The instructions, it is pleaded, could not operate retrospectively.
Even otherwise, the said instructions were not being applied to the existing staff.
It is pleaded that respondents were promoting other police officials as Assistant Sub Inspectors and Sub Inspectors who had not passed T.O.G.
Grade-I Examination.
By way of example, it is pleaded that vide orders dated 3111988, 13 persons including Sub Inspector Bhola Nath were promoted to the rank of Inspector without their having passed T.O.G.
Grade I and II examination.
The action of the respondents is, thus, styled to be discriminatory.
It was further stated that the petitioner had passed two years diploma in Radio Mechanic Trade from ITI Chandigarh which was recognised by the Central Government and later on passed T.O.G.
Grade II and III course.
The instructions are also stated to be against the statutory Punjab Police Rules.
When the representations of the petitioner brought no tengible results, he has filed the present petition seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his case for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector from the date his immediate junior was promoted with all consequential benefits.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed by Sh. Sheel Madhur, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Wireless Haryana on behalf of respondents No. 2 and 3, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objection that the next promotion to the petitioner is for the post of Sub-Inspector of Police (Wireless) which is not governed by any statutory Rules but by way of passing the departmental technical courses, introduced from time to time as envisaged by the Technical Standard Committee Report of 1987.
The petitioner could not pass Radio Technician Grade I, the requisite promotion course along with his juniors and as such he could not be promoted.
He, therefore, lost his inter se seniority.
As regards his promotion to various ranks as detailed above, it is stated that he gained promotions by passing certain pre-requisite departmental promotion courses and not on account of his meritorious service.
He was ignored from promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector as he did not pass the pre-requisite Radio- Technician Grade I course and not because of any other reason as alleged by him.
In the absence of any statutory Rules, it is pleaded that the persons belonging to the petitioner's cadre only become eligible for further promotion when they pass the prescribed courses as enshrined in the Technical Standard Committee Report, 1987, Annexure R1.
It was, thus, mandatory for him to have passed the Radio Technician Grade Course so as to become eligible for further promotion as Sub-Inspector.
The petitioner was sponsored to undergo the Radio Technician Grade Course which is termed as promotion course in accordance with his turn and seniority.
The petitioner could not pass the said course and, therefore, he could not get the next promotion as Sub-Inspector along with other promotees who got promotion as Sub-Inspectors vide orders dated 18101988.
While dealing with the case of ASI Siri Krishan i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 8774 of 1991, it has further been pleaded that the personnel belonging to Haryana Police, Telecommunication (Operator Cadre) are in a separate cadre as vide notification dated 2021984, the Cadre of Haryana Police, Telecommunication has emerged as a separate cadre from the cadre of general police line.
The service conditions with regard to maintenance of seniority, promotion, courses and duties of the employees who are in the telecommunication cadre are not governed in accordance with the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 but in terms of some instructions as contained in Annexure R1, R2 and R3.
As promotion of petitioner is governed in accordance with the instructions as envisaged in Annexures R1 to R3 and not in terms of Rule 131 of the Punjab Police Rules, no case for considering the petitioner without his having complied with the conditions contained in the instructions can, thus, be considered.
The petitioner is required to pass ROG-1 course for becoming eligible for the post of Sub Inspector which he failed to do.
It shall be useful at this stage to deal with instructions Annexures R1 to R3 as it is these instructions on which reliance has been placed by the respondents primarily.
4.
Annexure R1 is a copy of memo dated 1851960 from the Home Secretary to Government of Punjab to the Inspector General of Police, Punjab.
It deals with enlistment of Civilian Radio Personnel under Section 2 of the Police Act V of 1961.
Sub para (a) of para 2 deals with enlistment of the existing Civilian Radio Personnel under Section 2 of the Police Act V of 1861, in their present pay scales in the police ranks as indicated below :-  Existing Post and designation Scale of Pay Rank after enrolment (i) Police Radio Officer Rs. 600-40-1000-1000-1050-1050-1100-1100
1150 Superintendent of Police (Wireless) (ii) Chief Operators/Chief Technicians Rs. 120-10-280/20-400 Inspector of Police.
(iii) Supervisor Operators/Supervisor Technicians Rs. 100-8-140-10-300 Sub Inspector of Police.
(iv) Radio Operators/Radio Technicians Rs. 80-5-120/8-200
10/2-200 Assistant Sub Inspectors of Police.
(v) Workshop Fitters Rs. 40-2-60 Constable (SC).
5.
In paragraph 3, it is mentioned that the incumbents of the posts of peon/messenger will not be given any police ranks and in future recruitment against these posts will be made in the rank of Constable (Time scale) except in the case of one peon.
While dealing with future set up, it is mentioned that operators will be initially recruited in the rank of Constable (Time scale).
On completion of their training successfully, they will be given special pay (Wireless).
However, special pay which will be determined separately will be granted in three grades namely first, second and third.
The new entrant will be given the third grade of special pay on his qualifying as an Operator.
The second and first grade of special pay will only be granted when he achieves the requisite standard as laid down in Appendix "A".
When as Operator he achieves the standards of second grade and is given the grade pay, he will be promoted from Constable (Time Scale) to constable (Selection Grade) provided there is a vacancy.
Similarly when he qualifies the first grade he will be promoted to the rank of Head Constable provided there is a vacancy.
Promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police will only be considered in the case of exceptionally outstanding operators.
When an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police (Operator) rises to the post of Supervisor, he will be promoted to the post of Sub Inspector (Time scale) provided there is a vacancy.
The Sub Inspector Control Range Headquarters at Chandigarh will be given selection grade.
After mentioning so, the scales of pay for different police ranks have been mentioned.
Appendix "A" is part of Annexure R1 and the same recites the technical standard of Grade III, Grade II and Grade I Operators.
It also recites technical qualifications required of Grade III Technicians, Grade II Technicians and Grade I Technicians.
It also talks of practical experience as required.
6.
Annexure R2 is an extract from "Technical Standards Committee Report" of Director Communication Police Wireless of 1984 and 1987.
While dealing with the case of Sub Inspectors, it mentions that the mode of recruitment except for operator should be 33% by direct recruitment and 67% by departmental promotion as also that the departmental candidates should be qualified Grade I ASI (RM)/Operator and must have five years practical experience in his trade as ASI.
While dealing with the case of Inspector (Telecommunication), it is mentioned that a Sub Inspector Radio Mechanic or Operator of Sub Inspector with five years experience in his grade as Sub Inspector is eligible for promotion as Inspector (Telecommunication).
He must possess the requisite qualifications.
7.
Annexure R3 is circular letter No. 2 of 1987 and the same reads as follows :-  "The draft guidelines for promotions in the Wireless section envisage that in future all promotions to the rank of Head Constable, Assistant Sub Inspectors and Sub Inspectors (Operating) will be subject to the qualifying of TOG-III, TOG-II and TOG-I respectively from the State or Central Institutes besides other conditions as laid down in PRVolume-II, Chapter XIII.
All the H.Cs.
and NGOs who have not done (TOG-III, TOG-II and TOG-I) respectively shall have to undergo and qualify the same in their order of seniority and availability of seats at short notice in conformity with these draft guidelines.
All concerned are, therefore, advised to acquire pre-course knowledge of Radio theory, practicals and procedure for the course which he is required to attend so that they do well in these courses and are in a position to keep pace with the latest developments in tele communications."
8.
The crucial question that, thus, needs determination is as to whether instructions Annexures R1 to R3 are against the Punjab Police Rules or that with a view to get promotion, it is necessary for Head Constable or Assistant Sub Inspectors to equip themselves with the qualifications spelled out in the instructions aforesaid.
9.
Assuming that the instructions, Annexures R1 to R3 are inapplicable being against the Rules, or being in the nature of instructions cannot add to the Rules, the respondent-department can introduce some qualifications of a test with a view to judge suitability for promotion even under the Punjab Police Rules or that a Head Constable has to be promoted in accordance with seniority is another question that needs adjudication.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in all the matters have chosen to straightaway cite the case law as they plead that the matter is not res integra and is rather covered by the judgments rendered by this Court from time to time in their favour.
10.
In the first case relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners reported as "Harjit Singh, Sub Inspector of Police v. Inspector General of Police, Haryana and others", 1969 Services Law Reporter 845, the instructions under consideration i.e. Annexures R1 to R3 were also noticed.
The facts of the case aforesaid, however, reveal that the petitioner who was officiating as Inspector of Police was reverted to his substantive rank or Sub Inspector for failing to quality the Radio Technicians Operators Test.
When he was promoted as Inspector of Police, no such condition was prescribed to qualify the said test.
The same was prescribed for future entrants and it is in the context of the facts of this case that it was held that the petitioner could not be resorted on the ground that he failed to qualify the test.
It was not open to the Government to prescribe any qualifications for the existing personnel after they had been promoted without any condition as to the acquisition of the prescribed qualification by mere executive instructions.
The facts of the case, however, further reveal that the petitioner joined the police wireless deptt.
in January 1948 after his release from the Army where he had served from April 1941 to 1946.
In the Army, he worked as wireless mechanic and underwent the basic Technical Training Course, Grade II which he completed in February, 1942.
He also passed Grade II Trade Board Test of Army Signals in 1944 and was undergoing training in Grade I Course in the year 1946 when, due to the termination of the second world war, he was released from the Army and thus was not able to complete his course.
In January, 1948, the petitioner joined the Punjab Police Wireless Headquarters at Simla, as a constable/wireless mechanic.
He was promoted to the post of Radio Technician/Assistant Sub Inspector with effect from June 1, 1948.
In recognition of his good performance, he was promoted as supervisor/Sub Inspector with effect from July 1, 1948.
He was confirmed as Supervisor/Sub Inspector Maintenance with effect from February 1, 1952.
He was further promoted as Inspector Maintenance in charge Police Radio Workshop and Stores, with effect from August 28, 1963.
This promotion was on officiating basis against a permanent vacancy.
Consequent upon the re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab, the petitioner was provisionally allocated to the Haryana State and was reverted from the post of Inspector of Police Maintenance to his substantive rank of Sub Inspector with immediate effect vide notification dated 15.1.1968.
The reason stated in the order of his reversion was that he failed to qualify the Radio Technician Operator Grade I Test.
The basic point raised in the case aforesaid was that the Service Rules applicable to the petitioner were those contained in the Police Rules 1934 and no qualification had been prescribed for the post of Inspector of Police Maintenance in the Wireless Department.
No rule had been framed prescribing any qualification for that post.
When the petitioner was promoted as Inspector of Police.
Maintenance, no condition was prescribed to qualify the Radio Technician/Operator Grade I Test to be conducted by the Directorate of Co-ordination, Government of India.
In the return filed it was admitted that the Rules governing the service of the petitioner were those contained in the Police Rules, 1934 and no qualification was prescribed therein.
The Department came into existence in 1944-45 while the Police Rules had been framed in 1934.
There was, thus, no question of prescribing any qualification for the personnel of the Wireless Department in those Rules.
It was further made out that in 1948, by the order of the Government of East Punjab, the recognisation of the Police Wireless Section East Punjab was effected into a new Police Radio establishment.
The Technical Standard Committee made its report in 1959 and prescribed the syllabus of Grade I Technicians.
On the basis of the report, the Governor of Punjab sanctioned the enlistment of civilian personnel of the Police Radio Section under Section 2 of the Police Act (V of 1861).
The existing civilian radio personnel were enlisted under Section 2 of the Police Act in their pay scales in the police ranks as indicated against each post and designation.
No qualifications for holding these posts were, however, prescribed.
For future entrants qualifications were prescribed which were not made applicable to the existing staff.
No rules have been amended or framed to prescribe qualifications for the old incumbents.
After considering the facts aforesaid, a single Judge of this Court, thus, came to the conclusion "I, therefore, find force in the submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner could not be reverted on the ground that he had failed to qualify the Radio Technicians/Operator Grade I Test conducted by the Directorate of Co- ordination (Police Wireless) Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi."
It was further held that "in the light of the above judgments, I am of the opinion that it was not open to the Government to prescribed any qualifications for the existing personnel of the Wireless Department after they had been promoted without any condition as to the acquisition of the prescribe qualification by mere executive instructions.
But in the instant case, no such instruction was ever issued by the Inspector General of Police or the State Government.
The Superintendent of Police required the petitioner to pass the test as Grade I Technician which was not warranted by any statutory rule or Government instructions.
The petitioner could, therefore, not be reverted to the post or Sub Inspector of Police on the ground mentioned in the impugned order."
11.
As to whether the instructions that have been now placed on the records were issued by a competent authority or not would be dealt later but in so far as the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that no instructions can even be issued vide which a minimum prescribed standard might be set up for promotion and that, too, for the staff that came to occupy their respective posts after the instructions were issued is not made out from the reading of the judgment aforesaid.
12.
Reliance has also been placed on a Single Bench decision of this Court in "Ram Kishan Head Constable v. The Inspector General of Police, Haryana and others', 1968 Services Law Reporter 661.
The facts of this case reveal that a Head Constable was not brought on list 'D' as for being placed on list 'D' he had not come in the merit in the test conducted on that behalf.
While dealing with Rule 139 of the Punjab Police Rules, in accordance whereof, list 'D' is drawn, it was held "it is apparent that there is nothing in it which empowers the Superintendent of Police or any other police authority to hold an examination before framing the list 'D' for promotion or deputing Head Constables for undergoing the Intermediate School Course.
It is true that while framing List 'D' for the purpose of promoting Head Constables to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector, the authorities concerned have not to be guided by seniority alone but have also to otherwise judge fitness of the candidate, but in the instant case non inclusion of the petitioner's name in List 'D' is justified solely on the ground that he had failed to secure a position of merit in the examination held for the purpose.
Since it has been found that the examination, or the test prescribed by the police authorities, had no sanction in the Police Rules or any other law, the authorities could not disqualify the petitioner from being brought on the list 'D' for his failure to secure a position of merit in that examination.
The result of the examination has to be totally ignored and if it has been taken into account by the authorities in judging whether the petitioner is fit to be brought on the list, their decision stands vitiated and constitutes violation of Rule 139.
The petitioner was entitled to have his case considered for promotion and for inclusion in List 'D' without his having taken the examination and since his failure to secure a position of merit in that examination is the primary factor which has been used against him, the order of the authorities cannot be upheld."
13.
A perusal of the extracted portion from the judgment would manifest that the matter was exclusively for bringing a Head Constable on list 'D' and it is in accordance with the seniority alone that a person has to be so brought in the said list.
It was not a case of promotion from the post of Head Constable to that of Sub Inspector of Police.
While considering the case for such promotion, an element of merit certainly comes in.
For bringing on list 'D', it is seniority alone which is determining factor.
Even though this case deals with a Head Constable governed by the Punjab Police Rules to whom admittedly instructions Annexures R1 to R3 are not applicable, would provide no solace to the petitioner as the same does not deal with the case of promotion and as said above, it exclusively deals with bringing Head Constable on list 'D'.
14.
The next reliance of learned counsel for the petitioners is on Full Bench decision of this court in case reported as "Sardul Singh, Head Constable v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab and others," 1970 Service Law Reporter 505.
This again deals with the right of a Head Constable to be brought on list 'D'.
Every Head Constable on list 'C' has a right to be sent for the Intermediate School Course in the order of his seniority determined in accordance with Rule 138.
While sending the Head Constable for the Intermediate School Course, the Deputy Inspector General of Police shall first send the confirmed Head Constables.
After their list is exhausted, the Head Constables on probation will be sent and last of all, officiating Head Constables will be sent.
It is in this context that it was held by the Full Bench that selection for the Intermediate School Course does not form part of the process of promotion of a Head Constable to the rank of an Assistant Sub Inspector which process starts only from the stage when the names are considered for entry in list 'D' under Rule 139 and that stage is reached only when a Head Constable has passed the Lower School Course and the Intermediate School Course.
15.
The last case reported as "Inspector General of Police, and another v. Harbhajan Singh Through L.Rs.
and another, 1989(4) Services Law Reporter 630, relied by the learned counsel for the petitioners was decided by a Division Bench of this Court.
The facts of said case reveal that Harbhajan Singh was promoted to the rank of officiating Sub Inspector in the Radio Technicians Branch on 16.11.1971.
He was reverted to the substantive post of a Head Constable vide orders dated 181975.
One of the reasons for reversion as set out in the order was that he was not qualified for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector (Technical).
The learned Single Judge before whom the matter came up for final disposal held that Harbhajan Singh was senior to one Gian Parkash and was duly qualified to hold the post of Sub Inspector (Technical) to which he was promoted in 1971 and it is in Letter Patent Appeals the learned counsel for the appellants was asked to show any Rule which might prescribe the qualifications for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector (Technical) but as he was unable to produce the same, the Letter Patent Appeals were dismissed.
All that is mentioned in paragraph 6 is that "Learned counsel for the appellants was asked to show any Rule which prescribes the qualifications for promotion to the post of Sub Inspector (Technical) but he was unable to produce the same as the same were never prescribed.
As such we do not see any merit in the two Letter Patent Appeals and dismiss the same with no order as to costs."
I am unable to persuade myself to hold on the basis of judgment rendered by the Division Bench in Harbhajan Singh's case (supra) that anything like instructions Annexures R1 to R3 could not be issued or that they were not applicable being not prescribed under the Rules.
16.
While dealing with the case of promotion of a Head Constable in the Wireless Section to that of Sub Inspector on the basis of passing the promotion course while not dealing with the instructions Annexures R1 to R3, but exclusively basing my judgment on the basis of Rule 131(1), which even according to the learned counsel for the petitioners is the only Rule under which the petitioners could be promoted to the post of Sub Inspector.
I have held in Civil Writ Petition No. 4351 of 1983 "Ashwani Kumar Head Constable etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., 1991(2) SCT.
670" that "a perusal of Rule 131(1) would go to show that promotion from one rank to another, inclusive of from the post of Head Constable to that of Assistant Sub Inspector had to be made by selection tempered by seniority.
The emphasis is upon selection.
It is true that the selection is tempered with seniority but all that it means is that in the process of selection, seniority would also play its due role.
If seniority alone was the criteria there was no need to mention selection in the Rule.
Seniority alone is not the sole determining factor is also made out from the last three lines of the Rule which go to show that when qualifications of two officers are otherwise equal, the junior shall be promoted.
It necessarily follows that when senior has better qualifications, he can score over his senior.
Correct reading of Rule 131(1) of the Punjab Police Rules, in my opinion, cannot be interpreted to say that whatever be the circumstances, whatever be the qualifications of Head Constables and whatever be their merit, only senior Head Constables who have passed the qualifying course first have to be promoted before the one who have done the said course later.
It was further held that "Passing of Carrier wave course in the present case, in my considered view, would not form part of process of promotion of a Head Constable to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
Such process would start only from the stage when the names are considered for promotion after passing the qualifying course.
Reliance on the observations made by the Full Bench in Sardul Singh's case (supra), far from helping the petitioners in fact go against them."
17.
A reading of Annexure R1 manifests that memo dated 1851960 was issued by the Home Secretary to Government Punjab to the Inspector General of Police Punjab.
It deals with the enlistment of Civilian Radio Personnel under Section 2 of the Police Act V of 1861.
Sanction of the Governor of Punjab was accorded to the enlistment of existing Civilian Radio Personnel under Section 2 of the Police Act V of 1861 in their present pay scales in the police ranks.
A future set up of Wireless Department has been detailed.
The new entrants are to be given the third grade of special pay on his qualifying as operators.
The second and first grade of special pay is to be granted when they achieve the requisite standard laid down in Appendix 'A'.
When the Operators achieve the standard of second grade and are given grade pay, they will be promoted from Constable (Time scale) to Constable (Selection Grade).
Similarly when they qualify the first grade, they will be protected to the rank of Head Constable.
Promotion in the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police will only be considered in the case of exceptionally outstanding Operators.
When an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police (Operator) rises to the post of a Supervisor, he is to be promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector.
As mentioned earlier Appendix 'A' is part of Annexure R1 and the same prescribe Technical Standard for Grade I, Grade II and Grade III Operators.
Annexure R2, as mentioned earlier, is true extract from Technical Standards Committee Report and deals with the qualifications and experience for various posts in the Directorate Communication of Police Wireless.
Annexure R3 is instructions of the year 1987 and in fact only reiterate what has already been mentioned in Annexures R1 and R2.
Inasmuch as these instructions came into existence after receiving assent of the Governor and to the extent they deal with the qualifications or the qualifying courses for promotion, in my considered view they are not against any Rule contained in the Punjab Police Rules.
Rule 131(1) deals with promotion from one rank to another and from one grade to another in the same rank.
Promotions have to be made by selection tempered by seniority.
Rule 131(1) runs thus :-  "13.1(1) Promotion from one rank to another and from one grade to another in the same rank, shall be made by selection tempered by seniority.
Efficiency and honesty shall be the main factors governing selection.
Specific qualifications whether in the nature of training courses passed or practical experience, shall be carefully considered in each case.
When the qualifications of two officers are otherwise equal, the senior shall be promoted.
This rule does not affect increment within a time-scale."
If seniority is not to be the only determining factor and the element of selection is also involved then it cannot be said that the respondents authorities cannot judge the merit of a person by holding a test.
To Judge the merit, test is one of recognised methods.
In this context even if it is to be held that the petitioners are governed by the Punjab Police Rules and not instructions Annexures R1 to R3 even then the instructions are not against Rule 131 of the Punjab Police Rules.
18.
The only other contention of learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in almost all the cases is that persons junior to the petitioners were promoted who had also not passed T.O.G.
Grade I and II examinations.
This fact has been emphatically denied in the various written statements.
In Vijay Kumar's case, in reply to petitioner's assertion that those who had not passed TOG Grade I and II Examinations and junior to the petitioner have been promoted it has been mentioned in the corresponding para of written statement that vide orders dated 1311988, as many as 13 persons were promoted as Inspectors without passing TOG Grade I and Grade II course but those officials are not from the petitioner's cadre.
They are, in fact of the tele- communication (Operation) cadre whereas the petitioner is from tele- communication (Technical) cadre.
Their courses are different from the petitioner's cadre.
In the event of their promotions, they cannot be treated on the same footing as passing of two years diploma in radio mechanical trade and further qualifying the TOG Grade II and III course do not make the petitioner eligible for promotion as Sub Inspector until and unless he passes the pre-requisite radio technical Grade-I course.
While dealing with the case of ASI Siri Krishan and in particular the allegations made against respondent No. 4 who was junior to the petitioner and was promoted as Sub Inspector, it has been pleaded in the corresponding para of written statement that the petitioner was sponsored to pass the ROG II course alongwith respondent No. 4 in Batch No. 4 at Police Wireless Training Centre, Panchkula in accordance with seniority so as to make them eligible for further promotion as Sub Inspector.
Whereas the petitioner failed, respondent No. 4 was declared pass and on account of that alone, respondent No. 4 scored over petitioner and was promoted to the post of Sub Inspector.
This is the position in all the cases.
19.
For the reasons recorded above, all these petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.