RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This writ petition is confined only to petitioner No. 2 at this stage, inasmuch as during the pendency of the writ petition, petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 have since been appointed as District Sainik Welfare Officers (now designated as Deputy Directors) which is a Class-I post in the Punjab District Sainik Welfare Officer (State Service Class-I) Rules, 1986.
2.
Petitioner No. 2 is an ex-emergency commissioned officer and was released from the Army on 171970 in a phased programme.
At that time, he was serving as a Captain.
3.
Punjab Public Service Commission advertised posts of Assistant District Sainik Welfare Officers and petitioner No. 2 was selected and appointed as such on 6.10.1986.
State of Punjab on 30.4.1986 notified the rules known as Punjab District Sainik Welfare Officers (State Service Class-I) Rules 1986 (hereinafter called Class-I Rules).
Rule 8 of Class-I Rules, which provides for method of appointment and qualifications, is in the following terms :-  "8.
Method of appointment and qualifications :- (1) Appointment to the Service shall be made - (i) by direct appointment of (ii) by transfer of an officer already in the Service of the Government of India or of a State Government  2) Whenever any vacancy arises, the appointing authority shall determine the method by which the same is to be filled in.
3) No person shall be appointed to the service unless he - a) is an ex-Indian Commissioned Officer of the rank of Second Lieutenant, Lieutenant, Captain or Major or an Officer of equivalent rank of the Indian Navy or the Indian Air Force; Provided that the Government may, in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax this condition; Provided further that in case no suitable person as specific in this Clause is available, an Ex-Emergency Commissioned Officer of any of the ranks mentioned therein shall be eligible for appointment to the service; b) produces a dossier and recommendation certificate from the concerned Defence Services Headquarters, and c) is a Matriculate of a recognised university or possesses equivalent qualifications.
Explanation - Indian Army, Air Force or Navy Special Certificate of Education will be treated as equivalent to Matriculation Certificate."
4.
Rule 19 of Class-I Rules provides that the Punjab District Soldiers Sailors and Airmen's Boards (State Service Class II) Rules 1968 were being repealed.
Thereafter, State of Punjab promulgated another set of Rules known as the Punjab District Sainik Welfare (Class-II) Service Rules 1987, which were notified on 1131987.
The Assistant District Sainik Welfare Officer is a member of Class-II according to these rules.
5.
The grievance of the petitioner is that there is no provision in the Class-I Rules for promotion of an officer belonging to Class-II Service.
The only method provided in Class-I Rules, under Rule 8 is by direct appointment or by transfer of an officer already in the service of the Government of India or of a State Government .
This, according to the learned counsel, causes stagnation and is bound to affect the efficiency in service.
An officer in a particular class, expects reasonable chances of promotion to a higher class.
Further, according to the learned counsel petitioner was fully qualified to be appointed to Class-I Service.
In fact, according to him, petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 who were similarly situated as petitioner No. 2, were appointed to Class-I during the pendency of the writ petition, though by direct recruitment.
In support of the contention that reasonable promotional opportunities must be provided by a rule for promotion to a higher class, learned counsel relied upon two judgments of the Apex Court i.e. Raghunath Prasad Singh v. Secretary, Home (Police) Department, Government of Bihar and others, AIR 1988 SC 1033 and Dr. Ms. OZ Hussain v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 311.
In the former case the Apex Court observed as under :-  "Reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of public service.
That generates efficiency in service and fosters the appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of promotional prospects, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly.
We would, therefore, direct the State of Bihar to provide at least two promotional opportunities to the officers of the State Police in the wireless organisation within six months from today by appropriate amendments of Rules."
In the latter case, it was observed by the Supreme Court in para 7 of the judgment as under :-  "7.
This Court, has on more than one occasion, pointed out that provision for promotion increases efficiency of the public service while stagnation reduces efficiency and makes the service ineffective Promotion is thus a normal incidence of service.
There too is no justification why while similarly placed officers in other ministries would have the benefit of promotion, the non-medical 'A' Group scientists in the establishment of Director General of Health Services would be deprived of such advantage.
In a welfare State, it is necessary that there should be an efficient public service and, therefore, it should have been the obligation of the Ministry of Health to attend to the representations of the Council and its members and provide promotional avenue for this category of officers.
It is, therefore, necessary that on the model of rules framed by the Ministry of Science and Technology with such alterations as may be necessary, appropriate rules should be framed within four months from now providing promotional avenue for the 'A' category scientists in the non-medical wing of the Directorate."
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the petitioner has in fact been officiating against Class-I post for the last about 3 years, though, in his own pay scale.
The State Government should have, under these circumstances, appointed the petitioner on regular basis on a Class-I post by promotion or otherwise by invoking Rule 17 of Class-I Rues which gives power to the State Government to relax the rigour of a particular rule or rules.
The learned counsel on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that the petitioner has no right to be promoted to Class-I as the rule making authority thought it proper not to have any promotional avenue for Class-II officer to Class-I and the only method of appointment which was provided, was by direct recruitment or by transfer.
7.
It has been observed by the Supreme Court in the authorities noticed above that in every wing of Public Service, reasonable opportunities of promotion should be provided as it generates efficiency in service and fosters the appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service and in the absence of promotional avenue, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly.
In the present case, the petitioner is discharging the duties of a Class-I officer, meaning thereby that he is good enough and qualified to discharge the duties of Class-I officer.
In my considered view some promotional avenues should have been provided for Class-II officers.
Maybe that since Class-I Rules came into being on 30.4.1986 and Class-II rules came into force on 1131989, no provision was made in Class-I Rules regarding filling up of some posts by promotion from Class-II.
To tide over a situation like this, the respondent could consider the case of the petitioner under the relaxation clause (Rule 17 of Class-I Rules).
Non-providing of promotional avenue and getting the duties from an officer of Class-I brings in frustration to the officer, who is asked to discharge the duties of Class-I, without being really made a member of that Class, and without remuneration of Class-I Officer.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and respondent-State is directed to frame suitable rule, rules to provide some promotional avenues to Class-II Officers.
This exercise may be done within six months of the receipt of copy of this order.
It would be desirable if the respondents also consider the case of the petitioner for appointment to Class-I by invoking the provisions of Rule 17 of Class-I Rules.
I make no order as to costs.