VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8615 and 3211 of 1991 as common questions of fact and law are involved in both the petitions.
Facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 8615 of 1991.
2.
Satish Kumar and others through the present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek a direction to be issued to the respondents to regularise their services as Shift Attendants as also to pay them the same pay scales with other benefits which their counter-parts doing the same job are getting.
The relief indicated above stems from the following facts.
3.
Petitioners were appointed as work-charge on daily basis in the year 1978 except petitioner No. 1 who was appointed on 1.2.1979.
They all were made work-charge employee with effect from 1561987.
They were thereafter made Shift Attendants with effect from 2511988.
It is pleaded that all of them joined on 26.1.1988 on the said post.
The last post they came to occupying by way of promotion as their work and conduct, during this period was found to be good.
One of the colleagues of the petitioners, Krishan Lal filed Civil Writ Petition for regularising his service in the year 1991 in this Court.
This matter came up for hearing before the court on 21.5.1990 when the following order was passed.
"The petitioner is seeking regularisation of his services in view of Piara Singh's case, 1988(4) S.L.R.
739, without making any representation.
He may make a representation to the authority who will pass appropriate order on the same within six months thereof.
Status quo regarding service to continue from the date of receipt of representation.
This writ petition stands disposed of accordingly."
4.
On 2251990, Krishan Lal filed representation to the Board but the same was rejected on 1921991.
It is, on this ground, it is pleaded that there was no point in making representations to the Board and, therefore, it is only through the present writ petition that they could make a complaint of injustice done to them.
5.
On the facts as have been noticed above, the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners, Mr. AP Bhandari contends that by now the petitioners have worked as Shift Attendant for more than five years and for three years even prior to the filing of the present petition, the Government instructions issued from time to time as also judgment rendered by the Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) S.P.J.
1 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) would entitle the petitioners for regularisation or in any case for considering their case for regularisation.
He also contends that the petitioners are doing the same job as is being alone by the other Shift Attendants and, therefore, the condition mentioned in the promotion letter that the petitioners would be working on the posts of Shift Attendants in their own pay scale is wholly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
6.
The matter has been opposed and in the writ ten statement riled on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 to 5 through their Executive Engineer 'OP', Haryana State Electricity Board, Naraingarh, it has been pleaded that the petitioners were posted as Shift Attendants on purely provisional basis against the vacancies then in existence.
The postings were made purely on temporary basis as per stipulation contained in order Annexure P-1.
In paragraph II of the written statement, it has also been pleaded that the petitioners did not possess necessary qualifications for the post of Shift Attendant as per promotion policy issued on 10101988.
7.
After the petitioners came to know about the defence projected as noticed above, they amended the petition wherein it has also been pleaded that when the petitioners were promoted as Shift Attendants on 2511988, no qualifications were prescribed for the post of Shift Attendant.
In accordance with the policy then in existence, 50% of the posts were to be filled from departmental candidates and the qualifications prescribed were Matric.
Reliance of the respondents on Annexure P-4 by virtue of which it has made minimum qualifications as Matric with two years ITI Course in the Electricity/Electronics/Wireman Trade is stated to be not applicable to the petitioners as the qualifications above were introduced in the policy after the petitioners were promoted to the posts of Shift Attendants.
It is further pleaded that one Dharam Singh son of Shri Ahmed Singh who is junior to the petitioners was regularised on the post of Shift Attendant.
In February 1988 and he, too, did not pass Matriculation examination with ITI The petitioners have also claimed the pay scale of Rs. 880-1150 admissible to the Shift Attendants on the basis of equal pay for equal work.
It has been pleaded that the petitioners are doing identical work is as being done by the permanent Shift Attendants and inasmuch as they are continuing in service for more than three years continuously without any break, they cannot be discriminated.
In that context, examples of some employees working in the Haryana State Electricity Board who too, were initially appointed on daily basis and were thereafter assigned jobs on work-charge basis and who, too, have been equated with the regular employees have been given.
8.
Respondents No. 2 to 5 have filed written statement to the amended writ petition wherein it has been pleaded that the posting of the petitioners was made purely on provisional and temporary basis without considering the claim of all eligible T-Mates.
Till such time, the claim of all the T-Mates who were eligible for promotion was not considered, no right accrues to the petitioners on account of their simply discharging the duties of Shift Attendant.
Further, inasmuch the petitioners were appointed provisionally, the revised policy wherein qualifications of Matric with ITI had been prescribed was applicable to the petitioners.
In so far as the claim of the petitioners with regard to the same pay scales is concerned, nothing much has been mentioned in the written statement filed to the amended petition.
With regard to those who were regularised as Shift Attendants prior to the issuance Recruitment and Promotion Policy, it is pleaded that the new policy was not applicable to them.
It further pleaded that the normal time of promotion of T-Mates is Assistant Lineman whereas the petitioners were claiming promotion to the post of Shift Attendant which is not regular line of promotion.
It is further pleaded that the condition prescribed in the Recruitment and Promotion Policy dated 10101988 has to be fulfilled by the petitioners before they can be appointed as Shift Attendants.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am, however, of the considered view that whereas there is no merit in the claim of the petitioners with regard to their regularisation on the posts of Shift Attendants, they have made out a case for grant of equal pay on the basis of well established principle known as equal pay for equal work.
It is vide orders dated 2511988, Annexure P-1, that the petitioners were posted as Shift Attendants.
Note appended to the said letter reads thus :  "The above promotions and posting orders have been issued in their own pay scales on provisional basis against the existing vacancies.
These promotions have been made on purely temporary arrangements in the interest of Board's work and can be dispensed with any time without notice.
If at any time the Broad objects to the above promotions as such these officials will not claim any benefit of regular scale seniority of Shift Attendant and they will be reverted back to their original work-charge post."
10.
The posting of the petitioners being, thus, purely provisional without considering the claim of others who might be senior to them and having requisite qualifications, no case for regularising the petitioners simply on account of their having worked for a period of three years or more is made out.
Ad hoc, provisional or temporary arrangement promotions cannot confer any indefeasible right on all employee who even does not have requisite qualifications for the post under contention.
Such posting orders are made with a view that the work of the employer may not suffer when for Some administrative reasons, case for regular appointment cannot be considered.
If during the currency of such appointment, the qualifications for the post change or are revised, it can not again be said that the same would not apply to the person who stood already posted or promoted as the said post, as referred to above, was only on temporary basis.
That apart, the positive case of the respondent-Board is that the normal line of Promotion of T-Mate is Assistant Lineman and thereafter to the post of Shift Attendant.
The petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Shift Attendant without first getting promotion of Assistant Lineman has no prop to stand.
11.
In so far as the claim of the petitioners with regard to equal pay for work is concerned, it has nowhere been denied in the written statement that they are doing the same job as is being taken from the regular T-Mates and as long as the petitioners continue to do the same job, they cannot be discriminated, whatever be the nature of their job.
Even a daily wager who is doing some job is entitled to the Same wages as are being paid to the regular employees.
In "Surinder Singh v. Engineer in Chief, C.P.W.D.," AIR 1986 Supreme Court 584, it was held thus :  "The persons employed on daily wage basis in the Central Public Works Department are entitled only to daily wages but are entitled to the same wages as other permanent employees in the department employed to do the identical work."
12.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds partly.
Whereas the claim of the petitioners for regularisation is found to have no substance, the same is rejected.
However, in so far as the claim of the petitioners for equal pay for equal work is concerned, the same is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to give them the pay scale of Rs. 880-1150 which the permanent or regular T-Mates are getting till such time the petitioners continue to perform the duties of T-Mates.
Let the arrears that may be due be paid to them within a period of three months from today.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.