GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition No. 4275 and 6955 of 1993.
1.
A challenge has been made to the order of the State Government in the Department of Irrigation and Power (Personnel-II Branch) dated June 16, 1992, whereby the representation dated September 14, 1991 filed by Shri Harjit Singh, Line Superintendent and others was rejected.
2.
Civil Writ Petition No. 4275 of 1993 has been filed by the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate Junior Engineers Association, Patiala through its Vice President and Civil Writ Petition No. 6955 of 1993 has been filed by Harjit Singh, Balwant Singh and Ram Rattan, Assistant Electrical Inspectors in the office of the Chief Electrical Inspector to Government, Punjab Patiala.
The petitioners have made grievance to the prescription of qualifications for recruitment to the posts of Assistant Electrical Inspectors in these petitions.
The qualifications for the said post have been prescribed under the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (State Service Class II) Rules, 1979.
Harjit Singh, petitioner No. 1 in Civil Writ Petition No. 6955 of 1993 moved this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 1386 of 1991 wherein he made similar grouse as has been made in this writ petition.
This court directed that the petitioner should file a representation to the appropriate authority and the writ petition was disposed of on September 7, 1991.
Before that the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 6955 of 1993 had made a similar grievance by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 7928 of 1989.
The writ petition was dismissed by a learned single Judge of this Court on September 5, 1990.
The petitioners unsuccessfully assailed the judgment of the learned Single Judge in L.P.A. No. 1119 of 1990.
Being aggrieved, the judgment in the Letters Patent Appeal was challenged in the apex court through special leave to appeal (Civil) Petition No. 4720 of 1991 and the same was dismissed vide order dated July 29, 1991.
3.
Through the present writ petitions, third attempt has been made by the petitioners to undo and unsettle what has been already settled.
4.
The Governor of Punjab in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, framed the Rules called the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1979 (for short, the Rules).
Clause (f) of Rule 2 of the Rules says that service means the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate State Service Class II and the service's shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix 'A' to these Rules.
Appendix 'A' reads thus :  Sr. No., Name of Post, Pay Scale, No. of Posts  1.
Class II Assistant Electrical Inspector, Rs. 400-30-700-40-1100, Permanent, Temp.
Total  Rule 9 says that no person shall be appointed to the Service by direct recruitment unless he (a) possesses educational qualifications and experience specified in Appendix 'B' to these rules and (b) is a person with a satisfactory character and antecedents, verification in respect of which shall be arranged through the Government agency except in cases where such verification may have already been made at the time of his entry into Government service.
In Appendix 'B' qualifications and experience for direct appointment or by transfer from any other Department of the State Government to the post of Assistant Electrical Inspector have been prescribed and these are as under :-  "(a) Possesses a Degree or Diploma equivalent to Degree in Electrical Engineering from a recognised university or qualifications equivalent to such Degree or Diploma;  (b) has been regularly engaged for a period of at least three years in the practice of Electrical Engineering and in the Administration of Act and Rules made thereunder of which not less than one year has been spent in an Electrical or Mechanical Engineering Workshop or in generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the administration of Act and Rules made thereunder, in a position of responsibility; and  (c) possesses knowledge of Punjabi language in Gurmukhi script of Matriculation standard or its equivalent."
Rule 8 of the Rules provides for method of appointment to the posts in the service.
It says that appointment to the posts in the service shall be made in the following manner :-  (i) 60 per cent by direct appointment;  (ii) 40 per cent by promotion from amongst the Line Superintendents, who have rendered service as such for not less than ten years in the case of Diploma holders and five years in the case of degree-holders in the Electrical Inspectorate;  (iii) By transfer if no suitable candidate is available by the afore- mentioned two methods;  (iv) All promotions to the posts in the service shall be made by selection on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and no person shall be entitled to claim as of right, promotion to such post on the basis of seniority alone."
5.
The petitioners are Line Superintendents.
40% posts in the Service have been reserved for the Line Superintendents by promotion and the petitioners are entitled for consideration for promotion against the 40 per cent promotional quota.
Concededly, the 40 per cent promotional quota already stands filled.
6.
The petitioners' grouse that prescription of qualifications "possesses a Degree or Diploma equivalent to Degree in Electrical Engineering from a recognised University or qualifications equivalent to such Degree or Diploma" is not justified.
They say that a Line Superintendent possessing a Diploma in Electrical Engineering should have been permitted to apply for direct quota posts in the service.
We find no merit in the submission made for the following reasons :  (i) It is for the appointing authority to prescribe the minimum qualifications for a post in the service;  (ii) The judgment rendered inter parts in Civil Writ Petition No. 7928 of 1989, which was decided on September 5, 1990, has attained finality as it was affirmed by the Letters Patent Bench and the apex Court; and  (iii) The appointing authority can prescribe that a candidate with higher qualifications than the minimum prescribed will be preferred for the post and if such a provision is made, no fault can be found with it.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in these petitions.
The same are dismissed.