VK Bali, J (Oral) - As to whether a rightful claim can be scuttled on mere technicalities or innocent mistakes is the question that has been posed for adjudication by Miss Manisha, a student of Computer Engineering Branch by filing this writ petition.
She seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow her to continue studying in the Computer Engineering Branch and further to issue a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the order dated 1561993 in so far as it pertains to her, whereby her branch has been changed from Computer Science to Electrical.
2.
The brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner who had brilliant academic record cleared her Matric with 84% marks and further cleared 10+2 examination with 80% marks.
Being eligible, she applied to the Regional Engineering College Kurukshetra for four years course of Engineering.
For the purpose of selection, merit is determined by marks and that, too, by Common Engineering Entrance Test popularly known as CEET In the examination, she secured good marks and, therefore, she ranked at serial No. 97 in the merit list.
In accordance with her merit in the CEET she was admitted in the Engineering Course in the branch of Computer Science.
There were 11 seats to be filled in Computer Science from amongst students qualifying from Haryana.
In all there were five branches offered to the students and normally the preference of students is as follows :-  1.
Electronics.
2.
Computers  3.
Mechanical  4.
Electrical  5.
Civil.
3.
The petitioner who was at rank No. 97 in the CEET could not get her first priority because the last candidate who got Electronics was at merit No. 75.
Thereafter, in the second priority, the petitioner with her rank at 97 was the third candidate admitted in Computers and the merit for Computers went upto 160.
She was, thus, given admission in her second priority i.e. Computers.
She started her classes and being a brilliant student, completed first and second Semesters within first chance in June 1993.
After the completion of her first Semester in June, 1993, she came to know that some application forms were available in the office of the College which were required to be filled in order of preference of Branches.
She initially filled all the four branches except the one at number 2 i.e. Computers in order of her preference.
She was later guided that the said application form was for change to other branch from the branch where she was already studying.
Therefore, she did not sign the first form in which she initially filled all the branches of her preference but on realising the mistake, she filled up another form wherein she only filled up the branch of Electronics and Communication Sciences and also filled in the column of present branch as Computer Science.
It is pleaded that this was done by her as she was anxious to get a better branch and she was also hopeful that she having done well in the first Semester would get this branch.
In June 1993 a notice appeared on the Notice Board that the branch of the petitioner was changed from Computer Engineering to Electrical and she realised that probably by bonafide mistake, the wrong application which was unsigned by her was submitted by her friend.
On further enquiry, she came to know that as per procedure, the change of branch was allowed by the College before the start of third Semester on the basis of result of first Semester.
The relevant provision runs thus.
"For subsequent vacancies, the readjustment will be allowed only before the start of third Semester on the basis of result of first Semester irrespective of the State quota/category.
In no case the strength in a discipline will be allowed to fall below 75% of the sanctioned strength of that Branch."
4.
In view of the fact that according to the relevant provision, readjustment in the branches could only be made prior to the start of the third Semester and in view of the fact that under bonafide mistake, she filled up all the branches excluding her own branch, i.e. Computers, she immediately submitted a representation on June 17, 1993.
When she visited the office of the College, she came to know that her representation was not being considered.
Her father who is a Lecturer in a College at Ambala thereafter made a number of representations but when no decision was taken in the matter, she has approached this Court for the relief as has been indicated in the earlier part of judgment.
5.
Mr. Agnihotri, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, contends that the petitioner cannot be punished for a bona fide mistake made by her.
She never intended to submit the said application form as in no circumstance a student would offer for a change to the branch which is offered to the students of lower merit.
The very fact that she had not signed the application form shows that the application which has been acted upon for ordering change was not intended to be submitted by her.
6.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been pleaded that even though as per academic record of the petitioner as has been mentioned in the petition, she was admitted to the branch of Computer Engineering as per her own choice in order of merit but the various branches in the College are not allotted to the candidates by the College simply on merit but on the choice of candidates in order of merit.
It is further pleaded that even in the year when the petitioner was admitted, candidates with higher merit in CEET then the petitioner opted for Mechanical Branch and were admitted.
It is thus pleaded that the choices are subjective.
It is further pleaded that the petitioner is twisting the facts of the case according to her own suitability and in fact the petitioner had filled up the prescribed form in her own handwriting for change of branch from Computer Engineering to Electronics & Communication Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Civil Engineering as per her choice in order of preferences.
The said application was duly considered and as the application was in her own handwriting, her branch was changed as per her own choice in order of merit.
She did not submit any other form for the change of her branch from Computer Engineering to Electronics and Communication/Mechanical/Electrical/Civil.
It is further pleaded that there was no vacancy in Computer Engineering and her case cannot be considered at this stage.
If she is allowed to change to Computer Engineering Branch at this stage, the College shall have to allow more students who had applied for change to Computer Engineering and have more marks in BTech first Semester than the petitioner.
It is further pleaded that this will lead to far reaching implications resulting in the increase of seats in the other branches as well.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the petitioner who on the basis of her performance in the CEET and the marks obtained therein was admitted to a Computer Course should not be penalised for innocent mistake made by her particularly when from the reading of her application form, it was not difficult to decipher that she was not asking for change of branch.
Immediately on being shifted to Electrical course when she had informed the authorities that there was a bona fide mistake, if at all, it was a mistake, it was not difficult for the respondents to have done justice to her.
On reading of application for change of branch Annexure P1, it will be seen that she under the column "present branch has mentioned Computer Science whereas in the column of "preference of branch" she has mentioned Electronics and Communication, Mechanical, Electrical and Civil.
The manner in which the form has been filled clearly shows that only in case a change was necessitated that she was asking her first preference to be shifted to Electronics and Communication and thereafter the Mechanical and others.
This is clearly made out from Annexure P3, a letter addressed to the Deputy Registrar, E REC, Kurukshetra immediately after she was shifted to Electrical.
The same reads as follows :-  "According to my application given to you, my branch has been changed from Computer to Electrical (which was my third preference).
I was not aware of the fact that my present branch has to be included in my preference list.
As I am not interested in Electrical, I will be obliged if you allow me to continue with my original branch i.e. Computer Science."
The other representations which have been made by the father of the petitioner also contain similar pleas.
From the facts that have been given above, it is, thus, proved that the petitioner while giving application form Annexure P1 was not intending to shift from Computer Science to Electronics and Communication and others and in fact thought that this format is only in a case, a necessity arises for shifting her from Computer Science to some other branch.
When application form was received by the authorities they should have pointed out to the petitioner that she has to mention clearly her preferences in various branches for the purpose of shifting to another branch other than the one in which she was already studying.
This course was admittedly never adopted by the respondents.
Not only that, when she made the authorities aware that there was an apparent mistake which was honest and bona fide as well, immediately after she was shifted to another branch, no action was taken in the matter.
It is, thus, a case where injustice has been perpetuated by adhering to technicalities and punishing a citizen on innocent mistakes and that cannot permitted by this Court.
8.
Mr. Virk learned counsel appearing for the respondents only contends that at this stage it shall be very difficult to shift the petitioner as the others, as per their preference, have been accommodated and there is no additional seat available in the Computer Course.
Mr. Agnihotri has pointed out that in earlier years, the College has been increasing seats on the directions issued by the Union of India and that, too, on the permission sought by the College itself.
This clearly shows that on compassionate grounds, it is permissible to increase a seat.
If that can be done by the Union of India on the asking of the College, the same can also be done by the Court in a given case where the facts and circumstaces so warrant.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to accommodate the petitioner in BTech.
(Computer Engineering Branch) even if it has to be done by creating additional seat.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
10.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to observe that the petitioner had not been attending the lectures because of her shifting to a wrong branch which has been held to be not correct and the same would not come in her way in taking the next examination.