RK Nehru, J - The plaintiff-appellant has come up in Regular Second Appeal against the judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court reversing on appeal those of the learned trial Judge and dismissing his suit for declaration that the order of his termination from service contained in order No. 12-E/24 dated May 29, 1973 was illegal.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant (hereinafter the plaintiff) came to the Court with the allegations that he was appointed as substitute Khalasi by the Assistant Executive Engineer with all facilities available to Railway servant.
He had fallen sick but the Assistant Medical Officer, Ambala Cantt under instructions from the department discharged him from service on May 31, 1973.
He was told that his services have been terminated but the order of termination was never communicated to him.
Madan Mohan Lal who was junior to the plaintiff was appointed as substitute Khalasi and his appointment is illegal.
3.
The defendant-Union of India (hereinafter the defendant) denied that the plaintiff was ever appointed against a permanent post.
He was only a casual labourer.
So, the question of his discharge or removal from the service does not arise.
Madan Mohan Lal was appointed on compassionate grounds and his appointment has no relevancy.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1) Whether the order of AEN, Ambala Cantt.
dated 2951973 is illegal, unconstitutional, void and invalid for the reasons stated in the plaint?
OPP  2) Whether the suit is barred under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act?
3) Whether the suit is time barred?
OPD  4) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form?
OPD  5) Whether the notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, is invalid?
If so, to what effect?
OPD  6) Relief.
The learned trial Judge answered issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff.
Issues No. 2 to 5 were decided against the defendant.
In the ultimate analysis, the suit was decreed with costs.
5.
The defendant challenged the judgment and decree of the learned trial Judge in the first appeal.
6.
The first Appellate Court on appraisal of the evidence, came to the following conclusions :-  i) That there is no evidence on record to show that the post of substitute Khalasi was a regular post against which the plaintiff was alleged to be working;  ii) That the evidence on record indicates that the post of substitute Khalasi has always been treated as a casual employment;  iii) That when Madan Mohan Lal was appointed, the junior most casual labourer was ordered to be discharged from the service.
This fact is borne out from Ex. P9 and the document does not refer to the plaintiff;  iv) That the plaintiff admitted that his signatures were obtained on mustard roll;  v) That Ex. P16 is a list of casual labourers working as Khalasis.
This list does not indicate any seniority of the plaintiff in regulations from permanent appointment.
On these established facts, the learned first Appellate Court came to the conclusion that the plaintiff was only engaged as a casual labourer and was never employed as a permanent or regular employee.
7.
The learned counsel for the appellant could not successfully challenge the findings of fact arrived at by the first Appellate Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant also could not refer to any material on record indicating that the plaintiff was ever appointed on temporary or permanent basis against any regular vacancy.
The evidence on record suggests that the plaintiff was engaged as a casual labourer.
The term "substitute Khalasi" indicates that it was a casual employment made as and when exigencies arose.
The material on record does not suggest that a casual labourer acquires any right to any post.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff referred to the following authorities to substantiate that even casual employment gives the plaintiff a right to the post.
i) L Robert D'Souza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, AIR 1982 SC 854;  ii) Ram Bilas Paswan v. Union of India, 1991(1) SLR 304, and  iii) Union of India v. Basant Lal others, 1992(2) SLR 74 : 1992(2) SCT 297 (SC).
I am afraid that these judgments have no relevancy to the facts of the instant case.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal fails and the same is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.