VK Bali, J - Petitioners, Kulwant Singh & others, through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint them as Arts & Crafts teachers in the Education Department, Haryana on the basis of their selection having been made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana in pursuance to the advertisement issued for recruitment of Arts & Crafts teachers.
2.
Brief facts, on which the relief aforesaid rests, reveals that the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, advertised in the daily Tribune in February, 1988 some posts of Arts & Crafts teachers and other teachers of different categories.
The pre-requisite qualification for the post of Arts & Crafts teacher, was Matric in full subjects as also diploma in Arts & Crafts, of two years duration from Haryana Industry/Industrial Training Institute.
There is an alternative qualification as well but that being not material, need not be mentioned here.
After doing matriculation, petitioner No. 1 obtained two-year diploma in Arts & Crafts from the Department of Technical Education & Industrial Training, Punjab in the year 1981.
Obviously, he had have joined the said course in 1979.
A certificate to this effect was issued to him by the Director of Technical Education & Industrial Training, Punjab.
Similarly, petitioner No. 2 joined the Diploma in Arts and Crafts in the year 1980 and finally passed in the same in the year 1982.
Insofar as petitioner No. 3, is concerned, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has informed that he has since been appointed during the pendency of this writ petition and the writ on his behalf has become infructuous.
That being so, there is no necessity to discuss the details of petitioner No. 3.
On the basis of the interview, petitioner No. 1 and 2 were selected for the post of Arts & Crafts teachers and their names were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana to the Director of School Education, Haryana, Chandigarh for appointment to the posts, aforesaid.
Information to that effect has been placed on record of this case as Annexure P-4.
On the basis of the selection of petitioners respondents got their characters and antecedents verified from the police.
In the wake of their selection in the manner aforesaid, when the petitioners were waiting for their actual appointment they were surprised to know that they are not going to be appointed as the respondents were of the view that inasmuch as, the petitioners had done diploma in Arts & Crafts from Punjab and not from Haryana Industry/Industrial Training Department, Haryana, they lacked the requisite qualification for the post of Arts and Crafts teachers.
It is in the wake of the circumstances, aforesaid, that they have been constrained to agitate the matter by way of present petition.
3.
The claim of the petitioners has been opposed and in the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been pleaded that the eligibility criteria has been spelled out in the advertisement itself and the petitioners are not fulfilling the same, and as such cannot claim appointment on the posts of Arts & Crafts teachers.
It is pleaded and so argued that the relevant date for considering the eligibility of the petitioner for the said post, is to be seen on the date of advertisement.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the records of this case, I am of the considered view that petitioners( No. 1 and 2) deserve the desired relief asked for through present petition.
As has been depicted above, both petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 joined the diploma in Arts and Crafts, which is of two years duration, in Punjab prior to the date when the said course was de-recognised, to be precise the said course was de-recognised on April 28, 1981.
Before de-recognistion of the diploma, both the petitioners had already joined the course.
If the petitioners had even passed the course prior to de-recognition of the diploma.
This court in Madhu Bala Sethi v. State of Haryana and Ors, 1990(1) SLR 754, while dealing with the same point, found force in the contention of learned counsel for petitioner that since the petitioner had joined Arts & Crafts Teachers Training Course in the Institute at Chandigarh, the said course was recognised by the State of Haryana.
Subsequently, the State of Haryana could not disqualify such persons who have passed the said course in the matter of recruitment to the post of teachers.
While so holding, as referred to above, AL Bahri, J relied upon a decision of Supreme Court in Suresh Pal & Ors v. State of Haryana & Ors, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2027.
The ratio of the judgment aforesaid, is as under :-  "We are of the view that since at the time when the petitioners joined the course, it was recognised by the Govt. of Haryana and it was on the basis of this recognition that the petitioners joined the course, it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time of their joining the course it was recognised, yet they can not be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificate obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course, it was de-recognised by the State Government on 9th January, 1985.
We would, therefore, allow the appeal and direct the State Govt. to recognise the certificates obtained by the petitioners and others similarly situated as a result of completing the certificates course in Shri Hanuman Vayayam Parsarak Mandal Amravati for the purpose of appointment as Physical Training Instructor in Govt. Schools in Haryana.
Of course, if any person has joined the certificate course after 9th January, 1985 he could not be entitled to the benefit of this order and any certificate obtained by him from the said institute would be of no avail."
I am in respectful agreement with the view expressed by AL Bahri, J, referred to above, which is based upon a judgment of the Supreme Court.
This matter is squarely covered by the decision in the case of Madhu Bala Sethi (supra).
A direction is issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioners as Arts & Crafts teachers forthwith.
They are further directed to do so within two months from today.
Since the petitioners have been deprived of getting their due which should have been given to them way back when the persons junior to them were appointed, they shall be entitled to seniority which shall be fixed as if they had been appointed a day prior to the persons lower in merit from them.
The petitioners also deserve the costs of this petition as the matter is not res integra and the question motted in the present petition, stood answered against the State in the cases of Madhu Bala Sethi and Suresh Pal and Ors, (supra) and still in the manner noticed above, the rightful claim of the petitioners was denied.
This petition is, thus, allowed with costs.