P N Nag, J - The petitioner, Shri Sukhbir Singh, in this writ petition has challenged the validity of the orders dated 2631977 (Annexure P/1) and 311978 (Annexure P/2) whereby the Selection Grade already granted to the petitioner has been withdrawn and granted to respondent No. 6 consequent upon his reversion to the post of Laboratory Assistant.
2.
The short facts for determining the controversy between the parties are that the petitioner is working as a Laboratory Assistant in a Government aided school known as V S Agricultural Higher Secondary School, Khera Ghadi, Delhi (for short 'the School').
There are two posts of Laboratory Assistants in the School.
On one of the posts, one Shri Ramanand was appointed in 1947 and was confirmed in the said post.
On the second post of Laboratory Assistant, respondent No. 6.
Shri Sardar Singh, was appointed on 17.9.1954 and he was confirmed on 111957.
At that time the scale of pay of Laboratory Assistant was Rs. 40-90.
The Appointments Sub-Committee of the Managing Committee of the School vide resolution passed on 2091959 decided to promote Shri Sardar Singh, respondent No. 6, as a Library Clerk in the pay scale of Rs. 68 - 170.
In pursuance of its resolution, the case of respondent No. 6 was forwarded to the Director of Education on 21.9.1959 and respondent No. 6 joined his duties as Library Clerk on 22.9.1959.
3.
In the meantime, the petitioner was also given the letter of appointment as Laboratory Assistant and he joined duties in the School w.e.f.
22.9.1959 and he was confirmed in the said post on 111962.
In fact, the petitioner was appointed against the vacancy which arose consequent upon the appointment of Shri Sardar Singh, respondent No. 6, as Library Clerk.
4.
Respondent No. 6 after being appointed as Library Clerk w.e.f.
22.9.1959 continued to work in that capacity till he was reverted back to the post of Laboratory Assistant, i.e. 621974, which was his original post.
5.
Since respondent No. 6 was not qualified and trained librarian, therefore, he was ordered to be reverted from the post of Library Clerk to the post of Laboratory Assistant vide resolution dated 9.12.1973 which reads as under :  "An application of Shri Sardar Singh came up for consideration.
It was unanimously decided that as it is being stressed by the Central Board to appoint a trained Librarian in the School and whereas Shri Sardar Singh is not a trained Librarian, he may be reverted back to the post to which he was appointed and confirmed, i.e., Laboratory Assistant which is still lying vacant and approval of the Education Department for keeping him as Lab.
Asstt.
be sought and thereafter a trained Librarian be appointed in his place."
Vide letter dated 1411974 the Education Officer accorded approval to the reversion of respondent No. 6 as Lab.
Assistant in the vacancy of Shri Ramanand and respondent No. 6 joined duty as Lab.
Assistant w.e.f.
621974.
6.
It may be mentioned here that vide Ministry of Education Government of India's circular No. F.48/27/71/UT2 dated 26.11.1971 Selection Grade for various posts was introduced in all government schools as well as aided schools.
The Selection Grade for the post of Laboratory Assistant was introduced as Rs. 275-375 which was to be granted on the basis of seniority and to 15% of sanctioned number of posts and where the sanctioned number of posts was less than 9 but more than one, the Selection Grade was to be given to one person who was the senior-most.
Shri Ramanand was, therefore, granted the Selection Grade w.e.f.
5.9.1971, being the senior-most Laboratory Assistant.
Shri Ramanand retired from the School on 2321973.
Consequent upon the retirement of Shri Ramanand, again, one post of Laboratory Assistant fell vacant.
7.
The petitioner being the senior-most Laboratory Assistant was awarded the Selection Grade with effect from 621974.
8.
Some time in March, 1976, respondent No. 6 made a representation for the grant of Selection Grade to him instead of the petitioner which was accepted and the order dated 2631977 (Annexure P/1) was passed.
Thereafter again a further direction was issued on 311978 (Annexure P/2) directing the school to grant the Selection Grade to the respondent No. 6 after withdrawing the same from the petitioner.
Both these orders dated 2631977 and 311978 have been challenged in this writ petition.
9.
According to the petitioner, respondent No. 6 was appointed substantively to the post of Library Clerk and he ceased to have a lien on the post of Lab.
Assistant and, therefore, he could not be reverted back to his old post, i.e., Lab.
Assistant.
The respondent No. 6 was appointed afresh on the post of Lab.
Assistant on 621974 on compassionate grounds and thus, he was junior to the petitioner and, therefore, he has no right to get the Selection Grade from correspondingly withdrawal of Selection Grade from the petitioner from the petitioner was wholly unjustified in the eyes of law.
10.
In this connection reliance has been placed by the petitioner on a letter dated 1121973 (Annexure P/15A) written by respondent No. 6 himself to the Principal of the School, relevant portion of which reads as under :  "I have applied for reversion to the post of Lab.
Asstt.
from that of Lib.
Clerk.
If my request is acceded to and the same approved by the Education Officer.
I shall not claim seniority over Sh. Sukhbir Singh who is already working as Lab.
Asstt."
On a complaint made by the petitioner to the department that respondent No. 6 had submitted to the department a fake and forged document in support of his claim that he continued to have a lien on the post of Laboratory Assistant and for grant of Selection Grade a Punishing Authority was constituted to go into the details.
The Punishing Authority after investigating into the matter came to the conclusion that the letter has been manoeuvred and the Selection Grade to the petitioner be continued without any interruption.
The report of the Punishing Authority (Annexure P/18) was submitted to the Education Officer Zone - II (Boys) for onward transmission to the Directorate of Education for necessary orders.
However, in spite of such recommendation by the Punishing Authority appointed by the Director of Education, the Selection Grade was given to respondent No. 6 by the respondents authorities arbitrarily and the grant of Selection Grade to the petitioner was finally withdrawn vide orders dated 2631977 and 311978.
11.
No counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of Delhi Administration which has passed the impugned orders Annexures P/1 and P/2.
However, respondent No. 5 the School has filed his counter affidavit.
It has substantially admitted the case of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 5 has in unequivocal terms has stated that respondent No. 6 being not qualified to the post of Library Clerk as well as to the post of U.D.C., the Managing Committee had no other alternative but to dispense with his services.
It is at his request that he was appointed afresh as Laboratory Assistant on compassionate grounds on the specific ground that he would not claim seniority over the petitioner who is already working as Laboratory Assistant (Annexure P/15A).
Respondent No. 6, however, has denied the averments made by the petitioner and has taken the stand that the confirmation of the petitioner as Lab.
Assistant w.e.f.
111962 was illegal as at that time respondent No. 6 was holding a lien to that post and unless his lien was terminated, the petitioner could not be confirmed against that post.
He was never confirmed to the post of Library Clerk and his term to the post was stop-gap arrangement but no suitable and qualified person was available at that time to hold the post and the promotion was subject to his acquiring the necessary qualifications for the post, i.e., Library Science Diploma.
As he could not get the said Diploma, he was reverted back to the post of Lab.
Assistant.
It has further been stated by respondent No. 6 that no reliance could be placed by the petitioner on the letter dated 1121973 (Annexure P/15A) as according to him such document was got signed by the Principal by putting undue pressure on him and he being a mere ordinary employee could not resist such pressure from the School and this letter was got signed by him some time after 4.3.1974 and it was ante-dated as 1121973.
Furthermore he has stated that the Certificate dated 1791959 issued by Shri Dhani Ram Rana, Manager of the School, Annexure R-6/1 clearly refers to his lien to the post of Lab.
Assistant while he was working as a Library Clerk in the School w.e.f.
22.9.1959.
12.
The focal point of this controversy whether or not the Selection Grade can be withdrawn from the petitioner and given to respondent No. 6 depends upon the question whether respondent No. 6 while being promoted as Library Clerk retained his lien on the post of Lab.
Assistant.
there is no dispute, that Selection Grade can be granted to only one Laboratory Assistant who is senior-most, and in case respondent No. 6 if held a lien on the post of Laboratory Assistant being senior to the petitioner, shall be entitled to Selection Grade.
13.
Mr. Bhardwaj, learned counsel for the petitioner, has drawn my attention to various documents to demonstrate that respondent No. 6 after being promoted as Library Clerk ceased to have a lien on the post of Lab.
Assistant and that his appointment as Lab.
Assistant was considered as afresh and substantive.
According to him respondent No. 6 could not be reverted to the post of Lab.
Assistant.
It is apparent from the periodical increments certificate (Annexure P/6) that respondent No. 6 was holding the post of Library Clerk on substantive basis w.e.f.
22.9.1962 and further the petitioner was holding the post of Lab.
Assistant w.e.f.
22.9.1962 substantively (Annexure P/7).
These periodical increment certificates clearly show that the lien of respondent No. 6 stood transferred to the post of Library Clerk as two persons cannot hold the post substantively against one post.
Further the letter dated 24101972 (Annexure P/9) written by Shri D S Rana, Principal of the School, to the Secretary, Central Board of Secondary Education also shows that respondent No. 6 was working in the permanent capacity as Library Clerk.
In response to the letter dated 331972 of the Central Board of Secondary Education that respondent No. 6 should be replaced by a qualified person who had necessary qualification of a Librarian, it was stated by Mr. D S Rana that it would not be possible for the School to replace respondent No. 6 as he has 13 years experience and could carry on the work of Librarian in the School and that further that he was a permanent employee.
This clearly shows that the School has been treating respondent No. 6 as Library Clerk in substantive capacity.
This stand of the petitioner is fully corroborated by the counter affidavit of the School, respondent No. 5 whereby it has been made clear that respondent No. 6 being not qualified for the post of Library Clerk as well as for the post of U.D.C., the Management has no other alternative but to dispense with his services.
It was at the request of respondent No. 6 that he was appointed as afresh as Lab.
Assistant on humanitarian grounds on the specific condition that he would not claim any benefit of his seniority with respect to his past services in future.
His own application, Annexure P-15A, reveals that he himself was conscious that he could not be reverted to the post of Lab.
Assistant as he had no lien to that post and that is why he had undertaken that he would not claim seniority over the petitioner working as Lab.
Assistant.
The version of respondent No. 6 that this letter was secured from him under pressure and duress cannot be accepted being inherently improbable.
Even the report of the Punishing Authority, Annexure P/18, also reveals that respondent No. 6 had no lien to the post of Lab.
Assistant and that has lapsed and the Selection Grade to the petitioner therefore should continue without interruption and further the letter written by Shri D R Rana, Manager of the School, was without any authority of the Managing Committee or the Principal.
In fact the retired principles of the School Mr. Ajaib Singh vide letter dated 23.10.1977 (Annexure P/18) has also supported the stand of the petitioner that respondent No. 6 was adjusted against the post of Lab.
Assistant on humanitarian grounds though he was not qualified for that post also and the letter dated 1791959 signed by Shri Dhani Ram Rana was never received by him.
In these circumstances there seems to be no reason why the version of the School that respondent No. 6 had no lien to the post of Laboratory Assistant should be not accepted.
14.
Furthermore, the Delhi Administration has chosen not to file reply.
In pursuance of my order, the file was produced by their counsel in Court and I found that, enquiry was instituted into the matter and as already stated it was recommended that Selection Grade should continue to the petitioner, however, in spite of that arbitrarily the Selection Grade was withdrawn from him and given to respondent No. 6.
15.
In pursuance to the query of the Court to the petitioner whether or not any order has been issued for confirmation of the petitioner formally, the counsel for the petitioner submitted that such an order had in fact been made by the Managing Committee of the School and the Court asked him orally to file that order in Court along with an affidavit with advance copy to the opposite counsel.
Consequently the affidavit dated 1151993 has been filed on behalf of the petitioner and the same is taken on record.
No counter thereto has been filed.
Resolution No. 4 dated 2811962, Annexure B, filed alongwith the affidavit dated 1151993, shows that the application of the petitioner for confirmation as Laboratory Assistant was taken up by the School Executive Committee held on 2811962 and he was confirmed w.e.f.
111962.
Consequently his Provident Fund Account was also opened, which is apparent from Annexure A to the affidavit dated 1151993.
16.
This clearly shows that apart from other evidence already discussed, the petitioner has been appointed substantively to the post of Lab.
Assistant and the order of confirmation has already been made in favour of the petitioner by the Executive Committee.
17.
It goes without saying that two or more employees cannot be appointed substantively to the same permanent post at the same time and that an employee cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another employee holds a lien.
Since the petitioner has demonstrated that he was appointed substantively to the post of Lab.
Assistant and he holds a lien on that post, another employee obviously cannot have a lien on such a post as two persons cannot be appointed substantively on the same permanent post at the same time.
Therefore, it necessarily follows that the respondent No. 6's lien on the post of Lab.
Assistant was terminated on his appointment as Library Clerk the moment the petitioner was appointed against that post and substantively.
18.
Mr. G D Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent No. 6, has vehemently submitted that respondent No. 6's appointment to the post of Library Clerk was only a stop-gap arrangement as he did not fulfil the necessary questions of Library Clerk and, therefore, he could not be confirmed against that post and, therefore, he continued to have a lien to the post of Lab.
Assistant from the post he was promoted.
Confirmation of the petitioner against the post of Lab.
Assistant, therefore, is bad in the eyes of law.
He also states that two persons cannot be appointed substantively against one permanent post.
19.
In my opinion if this rule is applicable in the present case to the employees of Government aided schools, this will not advance the case of respondent No. 6 as already been held, that respondent No. 6 was appointed substantively against a permanent post as Library Clerk and, therefore, he holds a lien on the post of Library Clerk.
20.
Mr. Gupta relied upon Fundamental Rule 14-A.
According to him it applies to Government aided schools also.
It provides for that;  "FR 14-A (a) Except as provided in clauses (c) and (d) of this rule and Rule 97, a Government servant's lien on a post may, in no circumstances, be terminated, even with his consent, if the result will be to leave him without a lien or a suspended lien upon a permanent post."
"(d) A Government servant's lien on a post shall stand terminated on his acquiring a lien on a permanent post (whether under the Central Government or a State Government) outside the cadre on which he is borne."
Mr. Gupta has relied upon certain authorities.
One of the nearest authorities on which he has relied upon is Union of India v. P M Jayarajan (1976 - SLR 197) : AIR 1976 (SC) 218 wherein it has been held that in the absence of written request by an employee, lien on post permanently held by him cannot be terminated.
21.
I am afraid this authority does not advance the case of respondent No. 6.
In that case, the Supreme Court has interpreted clause (a) of Rule 314 of Punjab Civil Services Rule Vol. 1 Part I, which situation does not arise here.
That case deals with different situations as contemplated in different clauses and suspension of lien and substantive appointment outside the cadre etc.
In the present case, as has already been found and held that the respondent No. 6 was appointed substantively as Library Clerk and has ceased to have lien on another post of Lab.
Assistant.
The present case is not a case of suspended lien, or leaving the respondent No. 6 without a lien.
22.
Apart from that the impugned orders suffer from serious legal infirmities that these have been issued without complying with the principles of natural justice.
As has been stated above, the petitioner was granted Selection Grade after respondent No. 6 was promoted as Library Clerk and that he was confirmed as Lab.
Assistant and, therefore, he held lien on that post.
Therefore, the lien of respondent No. 6 on that post ceased to exist the moment he was appointed as Library Clerk substantively as two persons cannot be appointed substantively against one post and that the petitioner has also enjoyed the Selection Grade for some years.
The withdrawal of Selection Grade from the petitioner and grant the same to respondent No. 6 is, therefore, visits the petitioner with serious civil consequence.
Passing of the impugned orders without affording any opportunity of being heard to the petitioner for the withdrawal of the Selection Grade is against the principles of natural justice.
23.
In Vivek Prakash v. State of Rajasthan (1988 - 6 SLR 761) it has been held that the order of withdrawal of promotion and confirmation without affording an opportunity of being heard is prejudicial to the interest of the petitioner and is in violation of principles of natural justice.
24.
State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei (AIR 1967 SC 1269) it has been held that even the administrative orders which involve civil consequence have to be passed consistently with the principles of natural justice.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders, Annexures P/1 and P/2, are quashed.
Respondents 1 to 5 are directed to grant the Selection Grade to the petitioner as if it was never discontinued.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to consequential benefits.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, however, I make no order as to costs.