R K Nehru, J :- Bhai Fateh Jang Singh claiming that he was a Member of the Punjab Provincial Legislative Assembly from 1936 to 1946 has challenged the constitutional validity of the provisions of Section 2 of the Punjab State Legislature Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977 (for short, the Act) in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The Act was enacted to make a provision for allowing pension and medical facilities to Ex-Members of the Punjab Legislative Assembly, the Punjab Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union provided they have served as members for a period of at least five years.
Sections 3 and 4 of the Act provide for pension and medical facilities to the person who became a member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly, or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union or partly as a member of the Legislative Assembly and partly as a member of the Legislative Council.
Section 2 deals with the definitions and it reads thus :-  "In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires `member' means a person who, after the commencement of the Constitution of India, has been a member of :- (i) the Punjab Legislative Assembly; or (ii) the Punjab Legislative Council; or (iii) the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union; or (iv) Partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other."
3.
The petitioner's counsel submitted that the words "after the commencement of the Constitution of India" appearing in Section 2 of the Act are ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Foundation has not been laid in the body of the writ petition as to how this provision is ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The statement of Objects and Reasons suggest that the Act was enacted primarily with a view to provide pension and medical facilities to Ex-Members of the Punjab Legislative Assembly, the Punjab Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly of erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union, provided they have been members of either House for a period of atleast five years.
The five year period could be determined even with reference to a period for which a person has been a member partly of the Punjab Legislative Assembly or partly of Punjab Legislative Council or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union.
The membership must be of either the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the Patiala and East Punjab States Union after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
The framers of the legislation in their wisdom have provided the benefits of the provisions of the Act to the members of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council after the commencement of the Constitution.
Article 14 provides for right to equal treatment in similar circumstances both in the privileges conferred and in the liabilities imposed.
There should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject-matter of the legislation their position is the same.
What Article 14 prohibits is class legislation and not reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
The principle mentioned in Article 14 does not take away from the State the power of classifying persons for legitimate purposes.
Every classification is in some degree likely to produce some inequality and mere production of inequality is not enough.
If the Legislature takes care to reasonably classify persons for legislation purposes and if it deals equally with all persons belonging to a well defined class, it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that the law does not apply to other persons.
In order to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from other left out of the group, and (ii) that that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
In the instant case, the Legislature made reasonable classification between the Members who became members of the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union after the commencement of the Constitution of India and before the commencement of the Constitution.
The Members of the Punjab Provincial Legislative Assembly were elected to it under the Government of India Act, 1935.
Under that Act, number of seats were to be filled by persons chosen to represent backward area classes and backward tribes, Sikh Community, Muhammadan community, Anglo-Indian community, European community, the Indian Christian community, the interests of commerce, Industry, mining and planting; landholders; University, interests of labour.
A person could seek election to the Punjab Provincial Legislative Council from the Constituency for election to the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union was held under the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The classification for membership prescribed under these Acts is different and distinct from the one prescribed under the Government of India Act, 1935.
The Legislature in its wisdom made proper classification between the members of the Punjab Provincial Legislative Assembly constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935 or the membership of the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Council acquired after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 of the Constitution guarantee equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matter of appointment to any office or of any other employment under the State.
Clauses (3) to (5) of this Article, however, lay down exceptions to the above rule of equal opportunity.
We do not find how this provision of the Constitution is attracted to the instant case.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of the learned Single Judge of this Court in Hari Singh v. State of Haryana, 1991(3) SCT.
422, (Civil Writ Petition No. 4282 of 1988), decided on July 31, 1991 : 1991(3) SCT 422 (P&H), to contend that identical provisions of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pensions of Members) Act, 1975 (for short, the Haryana Act) were construed to mean that the benefit was allowed to a person who ever had been a member of the Punjab Provincial Legislative Assembly or the Council.
In that case, the learned Single Judge was dealing with the constitutional validity of identical provisions of sub-section (4) of Section 7-A of the Haryana Act, which was inserted by the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowance Commencement and Pension of Members) Amendment Act, 1978.
Sub-section(4) of Section 7-A reads thus :-  "In this section, a member means a person who, after the commencement of the Constitution of India, has been a member of :- (i) the Haryana Legislative Assembly, or (ii) the Punjab Legislative Assembly; or (iii) the Punjab Legislative Council; or (iv) the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union, or (v) partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other, representing any of the territories of the State of Haryana as formed by Section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, and who is ordinarily resident of the said territories."
In Hari Singh's case (supra), the petitioner had challenged the validity of Section 7-A(4) of the Haryana Act.
Sub-section(4) of Section 7-A postulated that benefit under that Act would be available to a member who has been a member of the Haryana Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab State Union or partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other representing any of the territories of the State of Haryana is formed by Section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
The learned Judge, relying upon the ratio of the Apex Court's decision in DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 130, came to the conclusion that sub-Section (4) of Section 7-A of the Haryana Act so far as it relates to disentitlement of pension to the members who were elected and served as such before the commencement of the Constitution of India was invalid.
The learned Judge, after referring to D S Nakara's case(supra) observed thus :-  "Thus following the views exercised in the case of D S Nakara(supra) and by reading down the provision and by severing that portion which cuts down the scope of the provision the conclusion is inevitable that the petitioner who was a member of the Legislative Council in the late twenties is entitled to the benefit of pension.
The provision of the Act of 1975 limiting the grant of pension to those persons who have served the legislative bodies after the coming into force of the Constitution is not reasonable or rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
It is accordingly declared that the petitioner is entitled to the pension on the same basis on which other members of the Legislative bodies has been given the benefit.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to release the pension to the petitioner w.e.f.
April, 1977 and the arrears therefore be paid within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
No order as to costs."
With respect to the learned Single Judge, D S Nakara case(supra), to answer the question posed, has no relevancy.
In this case, the following questions arose for consideration :-  (1) Whether the pensioners entitled to receive superannuation or retiring pension under the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 formed a class as a whole.
(2) Whether the date of retirement is a relevant consideration for eligibility when a revised formula for computation of pension is made effective from a specified date?
These questions arose for adjudication in the apex Court in the wake of the orders issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance contained in Memorandum No. F-19(3)-EV-79, dated May 25, 1979.
Under this order, liberalised formula for pension was made applicable to Government servants who were in service on March 31, 1979 and retired from service on or after that date.
This liberalised pension formula was applicable to employee governed by the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (`1972 Rules', for short) retired on or after the specified date, i.e. March 31, 1979.
The pension for service personnel, which will include Army, Navy and Air Force staff, were to be governed by the relevant regulations.
By Memorandum No. B/5/A6/164- C/1816/AD/Pension/Services, dated September 28, 1979, issued by the Ministry of Defence, the liberalised pension formula introduced for the Government servants governed by the 1972 Rules was extended to the Armed Forces personnel subject to limitations set out in the memorandum with a condition that the new rules of pension would be effective from April 1, 1979, and may be applicable to all service officers who become/became non-effective on or after that date (i.e. specified date).
The resultant effect of these two Government orders was that the liberalised pension formula became applicable prospectively to those who retired on or after March 31, 1979 in case of Government servants covered by the 1972 Rules and in respect of defence personnel, those who become/became non-effective on or after April 1, 1979.
Those who retired prior to the `specified dated' would not be entitled to the benefit of the liberalised pension formula.
It was on these established facts that the apex Court held that the pensioners form a class and the computation of pension cannot be by a different formula affording unequal treatment solely on the ground that some retired earlier and some later.
It will be relevant to reproduce the following observations of the apex Court :-  "If it appears to be undisputable, as it does to us that the pensioners for the purpose of pension benefits form a class, would its upward revision permit a homogeneous class to be divided by arbitrarily fixing an eligibility criteria unrelated to purpose of revision, and would such classification be founded on some rational principle?
The classification has to be based, as is well settled, on some rational principle and the rational principal must have nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
We have set out the objects underlying the payment of pension.
If the State considered it necessary to liberalisation pension scheme, we find no rational principal behind it for granting these benefits only to those who retired subsequent to that date simultaneously denying the same to those who retired prior to that date.
If the liberalisation was considered necessary for augmenting social security in old age to government servants then those who retired earlier cannot be worse off than those who retire later.
Therefore, this division which classified pensions into two classes is not based on any rational principle and if the rational principle is the one dividing pensioners with a view to giving something more to persons otherwise equally placed, it would be discriminatory.
To illustrate, take two persons, one retired just a day prior and another a day just succeeding the specified date.
Both were in the same pay packet, the average emolument was the same and both had put in equal number of years of service.
How does a fortuitous circumstance of retiring a day earlier or a day later will permit totally unusual treatment in the matter of pension.
One retiring a day earlier will have to be subject to ceiling of Rs. 8,000/- pa and average and average emolument to be worked out on 36 months' salary while the other will have a ceiling of Rs. 12,000/- pa and average emolument will be computed on the basis of last ten months' average.
The artificial division stares into face and is unrelated to any principle and whatever principle, if there be any, has absolutely no nexus to the objects sought to be achieved by liberalising pension scheme.
In fact this arbitrary division has not only no nexus to the liberalised pension scheme but it is counter productive and runs counter to the whole gamut of pension scheme.
The equal treatment guarantee in Article 14 is wholly violated inasmuch as the pension rules being statutory in character, since the specified date, the rules accord differential and discriminatory treatment to equals in the matter of computation of pension.
A 48 hours' difference in matter of retirement would have a traumatic effect.
Division is thus both arbitrary and unprincipled.
Therefore, the classification does not stand the test of Article 14.
Further the classification is wholly arbitrary because we do not find a single acceptable or persuasive reason for this division.
This arbitrary action violated the guarantee of Article 14.
The next question is what is the way out?"
The ratio of the aforesaid authority has no bearing to the proved facts of the instant case.
5.
The short question before us is: whether the Legislature in its wisdom could provide that the benefit under the Haryana Act would be available only to the members who have been members of the Haryana Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union or partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other, representing and of the territories of the State of Haryana as formed by Section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
The competency of the State to provide benefit to the members who became members of the aforementioned bodies after the commencement of the Constitution of India cannot be disrupted.
As observed earlier, the Legislature in their wisdom has grouped separately the members of the aforesaid bodies after the commencement of the Constitution and those who had been members of the Provincial Legislative Assembly prior to the commencement of the Constitution.
This classification is founded on an intelligible differentia has a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
The members of the Punjab Provincial Legislative Assembly or the Punjab Provincial Legislative Council were representatives of particular communities as mentioned in the Government of India Act, 1985 and by nature of the constituency which they represented were espousing the cause of a particular community or class.
It was in this context that the Haryana Legislature in their wisdom provided that the benefit of the Haryana Act would be available to the persons who were elected to either of the Legislative Bodies mentioned in clauses (i) to (b) of sub-Section(4) of Section 7-A, ibid, after the commencement of the Constitution of India.
We do not find that this classification suffers from any infirmity or that the classification is not reasonable.
The learned Single Judge in Hari Singh's case(supra) did not invite his attention to this aspect of the matter.
Accordingly, the judgment rendered by him cannot be sustained and the same is overruled.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.