BM Thulasidas, J - Late Subramonia Iyer was Assistant Administrative Officer and PA to the 2nd respondent, Senior Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India.
He died on 31-3-1988 at the age of 46 leaving behind his 70-year-old mother, his wife the first petitioner and two daughters, one of whom is the second petitioner.
By his sudden demise the family has been put the extreme hardships.
Taking advantage of the Circular, copy of which is Ext.
P1, the first petitioner made an application for employment assistance for her daughter, the second petitioner, which was rejected by the second respondent by a cryptic order, copy of which is Ext.
P3, which was challenged before this court in O.P. No. 13488 of 1991.
By Ext.
P3, Ext.P2 was set aside and the first respondent was directed to consider the request of the petitioners afresh and pass appropriate orders giving reasons.
But then, allegedly without adverting to the nature of the claim made by them, the first respondent again declined to entertain the claim by Ext.
P4 dated 28-9-1992, which is under challenge in this Original Petition.
Several grounds have been urged against the impugned order, which will be referred to wherever necessary in the course of the judgment.
2.
In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that the prayer for a declaration what proviso (iii) to clause 22 of Ext.
P1 is unconstitutional and ultra vires is barred by constructive res judicata in view of the Ext.
P3 judgment in O.P. No. 1388 of 1991, where this court only set aside the order of the competent authority, which declined the benefit of employment under the dying in harness scheme and gave a direction to reconsider the claim as per the rules.
It was therefore a case where they did not press or gave up the relief regarding declaration above-mentioned.
Therefore they are not again entitled to pray for the same relief in this Original Petition.
It is also submitted that Ext.
P1 is only by way of a concession extended to the near relations employees of the Corporation who died while in service.
Relaxation of the age, and educational qualifications admissible under the scheme can be extended only where none of the members of the family of the deceased, viz., widows, sons and unmarried daughters is gainfully employed.
Such relaxation shall either be to the widow or to one of the children as specified.
Those who seek employment under the scheme must necessarily comply with its terms.
It is not possible to agree that only such of the beneficial concessions could be acceptable and such others which are not achieved.
The challenge to proviso (iii) to clause 22 of Ext.
P1 is misconceived.
The Corporation had received representations from the petitioners for employment assistance.
It was found that the eldest daughter of the first petitioner is gainfully employed even at the time of death of date Subramonia Iyer and therefore the first petitioner was informed by Ext.
P2 that it may not be possible to offer employment to the second petitioner.
The said order was challenged in O.P. No. 13488 of 1991, which was disposed of by Ext.
P3 judgment.
It was found that employment assistance could not be extended under the terms of Ext.
P1.
As directed by this court, a detailed order, copy of which is Ext.
P4, was passed, to which exception could not be taken.
No discriminatory treatment has been meted out.
The first respondent has not added anything new to P1, which is strictly followed in the matter of granting employment assistance.
There was no illegal denial of employment assistance as stated and the allegations in that regard are unwarranted.
The Original Petition therefore deserves to be dismissed.
3.
Heard.
4.
The prayers that the petitioners sought in this Original Petition are (a) to quash Ext.
P4 and to declare that proviso (iii) of Clause 22 of Ext.
P1 is unconstitutional; and, (b) to issue a direction to the first respondent to provide employment assistance to the second petitioner under the dying in harness scheme.
5.
This is the second Original Petition the petitioners have filed as dependents of late Subramonia Iyer claiming employment assistance under the scheme.
Virtually the prayers claimed are the same as those claimed in O.P. No. 13488 of 1991, which was disposed of by Ext.
P3 judgment.
This court set aside the impugned order, Ext.
P7, which is Ext.
P2 in this Original Petition and directed the first respondent to consider the request of the petitioners afresh and pass appropriate orders giving reasons, in the wake of which Ext.
P4 was passed, which, as already stated, is under challenge in this Original Petition.
6.
The respondents have urged that prayer (a) is barred by constructive res judicata in view of Ext.P3 judgment.
There is no merit in this contention.
In the earlier Original Petition this court did not adjudicate upon the dispute as to the vires of proviso (iii) of clause 22 of Ext.
P1.
In fact that question was not adverted to or considered in Ext.
P3 judgment.
Obviously the parties did not also invite an adjudication of dispute, but were satisfied with a direction as given after setting aside the impugned order.
In my view, the petitioners are not barred from raising the question as to the vires of the above provision in Ext.
P1 in this original petition.
7.
It cannot be denied that employment assistance under the dying in harness scheme provides an exception to the regular mode of recruitment.
The conditions of the scheme must be satisfied to get employment assistance.
A challenge to the conditions on the ground that they are arbitrary, unconscionable or involved breach of the relevant provisions of the Constitution could indeed be countenanced.
The object of the scheme cannot be permitted to be destroyed by orders seeking to impose conditions not warranted by the provisions and which are per se unreasonable.
The specific complaint is with regard to proviso (3) to clause 22 of Ext.
P1 by which relaxation is made admissible only where none of the members of the family, widow, son or daughter is gainfully employed.
The assumption is obvious that by reason of the death of the bread-winner the family is not in distress and needs no assistance by way of employment to a eligible dependent on compassionate grounds.
The above proviso is an integral part of the scheme and must be given effect to being not inconsistent with the scheme.
There is nothing arbitrary or irrational about it, to merit interference.
8.
On the facts too, the petitioners have not made out a case.
The eldest daughter of the first petitioner was employed in the New India Assurance Company Ltd, at the time of death of the late Subromonia Iyer and continues to be so gainfully employed.
That she got married no doubt is a relevant aspect; but that did not render invalid the decision of the respondents taken at the relevant time.
Besides, it is admitted that the heirs of late Subramonia Iyer received by way of terminal benefits about 232 lakhs rupees, besides the insurance amount under the policies held by him.
These relevant facts were rightly noticed in the impugned order, which in my view does not deserve to be interfered with.
The Original Petition fails and is dismissed.