VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9248/1993, 9235/1993, 9438/1993, 9698/1993, 9784/1993, 10248/1993 and 10308/1993 as basic point involved in all the matters is the same.
The facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 9248 of 1993, Vipin Kapoor v. Union Territory, Chandigarh & others, 1994(1) S.C.T.
129.
2.
Petitioner, Vipin Kapoor, after successful passing his 10+2 examination from DAV School, Chandigarh with 65% marks, appeared in Combined Entrance Test popularly known as C.E.T.
under Roll No. 36844.
In the test aforesaid he stood at merit No. 2783.
He applied for consideration of his case in sports category as he had represented the SGGS Club, Chandigarh in Chandigarh Senior State Championships in Khokho in the year 1992-93.
The team, in which admittedly petitioner was a member, secured 2nd position being runner up.
On the basis of the policy then in existence for giving various grades to the sports persons, the Chandigarh Administration, Directorate of Sports, adjudged him in category 'C' (i) vide certificate issued on that behalf, copy whereof has been annexed as Annexure P-1.
This gradation done by the Chandigarh Administration was accepted by the Goverment of Punjab as also the Director Sports, Government of Punjab, vide his endorsement dated July 1, 1993 placing the petitioner in grade 'C' for the purpose of admission in any college of the State of Punjab.
The case of petitioner is that in view of his gradation in Sports, he was eligible to seek admission in the Engineering Colleges of State of Punjab against a seat reserved for Sports category.
Petitioner applied for seeking admission in Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology, Patiala as also Government College of Engineering & Technology, Bhatinda, Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana as also at Longowal.
However, in the column meant for giving preference of the institution, he mentioned Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh to be his first preference.
The candidates, who were issued gradation certificates by the Director, Sports UT Chandigarh, were called for trials in respective Sports that they had representated on different dates.
Petitioner, however, was called for the trial that was to be held on July 15, 1993 at 9 AM The case of petitioner is that he performed well and his Khokho gradation was up-held.
Thereafter, the District Sports Officer on behalf of Director Sports, addressed a letter to the petitioner on July 19, 1993 asking him to deposit the original certificate as the same was required to be counter-signed.
It was mentioned in the letter aforesaid that without countersigning the said certificate it would not be valid for any purpose.
On receipt of the letter, petitioner deposited the original gradation certificate but the same was not returned to him after counter-signing the same.
When he made enquiries, he was told that one official from the Sports Department, Chandigarh would always remain as a member of the Joint Admission Committee constituted for giving admissions to various Colleges in the State of Punjab and Chandigarh and that the said official would take the original gradation certificates at the time of interview.
The petitioner was called for interview which was to be held on 27.7.1993 at Panjab University Campus, Chandigarh for all the Engineering Colleges in the State of Punjab.
Delivering the information that was received by petitioner that original certificate would be produced at the time of interview at the Panjab University Campus, Chandigarh, petitioner, inconsequence of the call for interview given to him, attended the same but to his complete dismay he found that no official of the Chandigarh Administration had come there alongwith gradation certificates.
Non-availability of the original gradation certificate, thus, resulted into refusal of admission to petitioner.
The case of petitioner is that before holding the interview, a member of the Joint Admission Committee was verifying the inter-se merit of the candidates who appeared for interview on that date.
On verification of the merit of petitioner in C.E.T.
as also his gradation in sports, he was placed at Serial No. 40 whereas 107 candidates were called for interview in the category of Sports at Panjab University Campus.
It is stated that there are 29 seats reserved for sports persons in the BE course in all the concerned colleges and number of seats in Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology are four.
Petitioner, on the aforesaid facts is of firm belief that he could secure admission as per his merit in the C.E.T.
test read with his sports gradation particularly in the reserved quota of sports.
After the petitioner was refused to be interviewed, he prayed for provisional admission in view of the fact that attested copy of the gradation certificate had already been supplied.
He pleaded in his representation that the original gradation certificate was to be brought on by the officials of the Sports Department, Chandigarh Administration but no body had turned up to produce the original certificate, it should not work injustice to him.
His plea, however, was rejected and the positive case of petitioner is that other persons lower in merit were granted admission on July 27, 1993.
In view of the facts that have been detailed above, it is so pleaded and argued by learned counsel appearing for petitioner that respondent No. 2 - Director Sports, Chandigarh as also the District Sports Officer, Chandigarh, in a pre-plained manner, played a fraud with many candidates like the petitioner and ensured their ouster from admission which could be with a view to accommodate others.
Predicament of petitioner and many others equally situate was highlighted by the local News paper 'The Tribune' on July 27, 1993 with the caption "UT SPORTS DEPARTMENT DELAYING PAPERS".
The whole news item has been placed on the records of the case as Annexure P-5.
The action of the respondents is styled to be arbitrary and it is also pleaded that the original certificates of petitioner and others were demanded on a false pretext of counter-signing them with a view not to produce them at the relevant stage so that the candidates are denied admission.
3.
This writ has been contested and in the short affidavit filed by the Director Sports, Chandigarh, whereas it has been admitted that petitioner had participated in Chandigarh Senior State Championship in Khokho in the year 1992-93 and the team in which he participated, had secured 2nd position being runner up, it has been further stated that on account of a bona fide error, petitioner was adjudged in category 'C' (i) and the Sports Gradation Certificate was issued to him under a bona fide mistake in interpretation of Grade-C by the Screening Committee and Grade-C1 was inadvertently given to him.
He had participated in Chandigarh Senior State Championship in Khokho in the year 1992-93 and by virtue of this, petitioner had not represented in All India National Championship for being entitled to the grant of grade 'C'(i).
The proviso for the grant of Grade 'C'(i) from the guidelines for admission to the reserved categories of sports, reads as under :-  "A sports person getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Championship/Inter District Championships in the Senior Section and by virtue of this representing in the All India National Championships."
From the proviso quoted above, it is clear that in addition to the petitioner's participation of Khokho Championship, he should also by virtue thereof have represented in the All India National Championships for being considered for the grant of Grade 'C'(i) and nothing was produced before the respondents showing petitioner's participation in the All India National Championship and therefore he was given incorrect gradation.
It is further stated that the sports gradation certificate, Annexure P-1, was issued to petitioner under bonafide error and he was not entitled to the same.
The guidelines for admission to reserve category of sports have been placed on record as Annexure R1 but it is no where made out from the aforesaid document or from the written statement as to on what date the same were enforced.
Mr. Aggarwal, learned senior counsel appearing for respondents has, however, brought to my notice and it is not disputed by the other side that the guidelines, Annexure R1, came into existence on May 7, 1993.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that these petitions have merit and, therefore, must succeed.
Petitioner was, according to his sports gradation, admittedly placed in gradation 'C' (i) vide certificate, Annexure P-1, issued by the Director of Sports, Chandigarh on May 25, 1993.
The sports gradation of petitioner was accepted by the State of Punjab as the Director Sports, Government of Punjab vide his endorsement dated July 1, 1993 had placed the petitioner in Grade-C for the purposes of admission in any college of the State of Punjab.
In the shorts affidavit that has been filed by the Director Sports, Chandigarh, the plea of petitioner that he was asked to return his certificate so that the same could be counter-signed by the Sports Officer, has not been denied.
When the petitioner was to appear for interview and that he was given to understand that the original certificate would be produced at the time of interview, has also not been denied.
The cause of petitioner has, however, been opposed on the solitary ground that at the certificate in question placing the petitioner in grade 'C' was issued on account of bonafide mistake as the guidelines, Annexure R1, did not entitle him to the same.
These guidelines, as referred to above and as is admitted between the parties, came into existence on May 7, 1993.
The only question that has to be determined, thus, is as to whether these guidelines that came into existence on May 7, 1993 would prevail or the earlier guidelines that were in existence prior thereto, would govern the field.
Obviously the case of petitioner is that the earlier guidelines are relevant whereas the case of respondents is that the later ones would hold the field.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be mentioned here that for admission in the session 1993-94, petitioner of this case and all others, who had participated in the sports, could participate by the end of 1992 as all the sports events come to an end quite prior to when the admissions opened.
If we examine the facts of this case itself it would be seen that the championship was held on 28/29111992 for the team in which the petitioner participated.
It may be true, as contended by learned counsel for the respondents, that the advertisement inviting applications, interview and all other things were carried out after the new guidelines were issued but the fact remains that none of the petitioners could have possibly participated in any sports event immediately proceeding when the new guidelines came into existence.
A Full Bench of this court in "Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc." 1993(2) Punjab Law Reporter 212 : 1993(4) S.C.T.
328 held that "notification dated July 13, 1992 goes contrary to the policy which was laid down for admission in the Notification dated May 20, 1992 on the basis of which the prospectus had been issued to the students and the students appeared for test on the basis of the policy laid down in the prospectus.
The prospectus cannot subsequently be changed by the State Government to the detriment of the students to benefit certain other students.
In Randeep Kaur versus the State of Punjab and others, a Division Bench of this Court had an occasion to consider the value of a Prospectus issued for admission to an entrance examination.
It was held that the eligibility for admission to a course has to be seen according to the Prospectus issued before the entrance examination and that the admission has to be made on the basis of instructions given in the Prospectus as the instructions issued have the force of law.
We agree with the view taken by the Division Bench.
Since the Prospectus issued for admission to the 1992-93 course in the medical college has the force in law and the students appeared in the examination on the basis of the instructions laid down in the said prospectus, it was not open to the State Government to issue contrary instructions and as such also the Notification dated July 13, 1992 issued by the State Government is invalid in law."
It was further held in the aforesaid case that "it is the jurisdiction of the State Government to lay down the policy for admission to the sports quota in the Medical Colleges but in our opinion the State Government should not change the policy every year and in one year change it many times as has been done in this year."
The Full Bench was examining the criteria for admission made under three per cent sports quota in the category of sportsmen/sportswomen.
Vide paragraph 42(a)(i) of the Prospectus regarding admission, admissions in the reserved category of sportsmen/sportswomen have to be made from amongst the eligible candidates on the basis of their gradation done by the Department of Sports, Punjab in accordance with the Punjab Government instructions dated 7/1261991.
However, by notification dated 2051992, it was ordered that the selection of the students for admission to the M.B.B.S/B.D.S.
Course for the session 1992-93 in all the three Medical Colleges would be made by holding a Competitive Entrance Examination which was conducted last year by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
Clause III(a) of the Prospectus was with regard to eligibility criteria for admission to the said courses.
This clause III(a) was the same as was quoted in paragraph 42 (a)(i) of the Prospectus.
It was mentioned in the paragraph that the minimum marks required for eligible candidates would be communicated subsequently.
However, the State Government instead of notifying the minimum marks required for eligible candidates issued notification dated 1371992 wherein the condition of minimum qualifying marks for Competitive Entrance Test was waived off and admission was to be made strictly in order of relative merit of candidates determined on the result of Entrance Test.
It is in the wake of aforesaid facts that the observations quoted above were made by the Full Bench of this Court.
The petitioner of this case as also others participated in different sports and as per the policy or guidelines then prevalent they were given gradation.
The criteria to grade them could not be changed simply because new guidelines came into existence just before the admissions opened.
A sports persons while participating in an event knows the grade he has to make in view of the existing policy and it is possible in majority of cases that he may not even like to participate further after knowing that he has achieved a particular distinction in sports that is good enough to give him a particular grade.
If the policy for grading a sports person is changed just when the admission opens, it would leave all those who genuinely thought that they will get a particular grade in sports totally dismayed.
As mentioned above, it might have been possible for some one even to make a higher grade as per criteria fixed in the new policy but such a person may not have done so thinking that he has achieved sufficient distinction to earn a particular grade that may be enough for him to secure admission in the seats reserved for the sports persons.
It would, thus be arbitrary to change the criteria at the last moment.
It has, thus, to be held that the policy decision governing the admissions with regard to any of the reserve categories should be applied when the person concerned participated in the event and the changed policy should apply to such persons who have participated in the sports event after the same has come into existence.
As mentioned above, it is not possible for a student to participate in anticipation of criteria that may come into existence later.
5.
It is not disputed that the petitioner of this case and others were eligible to a certificate and gradation in accordance with the old policy and it was only by the change in criteria which came into existence only on May 7, 1993 that gradations were denied to them.
The respondents have every right to change the instructions or guidelines as the case may be if they find any defect in the same or they find that a particular grade should be given to a person having participated at the higher level but the same would apply to the admissions after the sports person has participated when such guidelines were known.
6.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents, however, endeavors to support the defence projected by the respondents on the ground that there is no challenge to the policy or guidelines, Annexure R1, nor to any of its clauses nor to its applicability.
He further contends that it is for the first time in the replication which has been filed in Court that it has been pleaded that the earlier policy will apply and not the later one and as such respondent should be given chance to file rejoineder to the same.
I do not find any force in the contentions of the learned counsel.
Mr. Aggarwal, as noticed above, candidly admitted while arguing the matter that the new policy came into existence on May 7, 1993.
It is not disputed that it is in view of the new policy alone that the petitioner and others were not granted admission.
In view of the admitted position, the petitioners are well within their right to raise the point of applicability of earlier guidelines.
On facts as well Mr. Aggarwal is not entirely correct.
Even though it is true that in this writ petition, the new policy has not been specifically challenged but in Civil Writ Petition No. 9784 of 1993, the new policy has been challenged by the petitioner and it has been specifically pleaded that no publicity was given to this policy decision nor the instructions were published in any newspaper so that the aspiring sportsmen/sportswomen would become aware of the same.
In the aforesaid writ petition as well, the gradation certificate issued to the petitioner was cancelled as he did not fulfil the requirements of C(ii).
The said requirement is of securing any of the first three positions in the University/Inter College Tournaments by virtue of which they might have represented in the All India Inter University Tournament.
No written statement has been filed in the aforesaid writ petition.
Further, it has been pleaded in the said petition that Deepika Bansal respondent No. 8 who sought admission in the sports category on the basis of her performance in 10+2 examination also did not participate in the Inter-University Tournament.
In her case the condition of participating in Inter University Tournament was ignored and the gradation certificate issued to the petitioner was cancelled.
7.
In the rejoineder filed in this case as well, it has been pleaded that many others who did not return their certificate for counter-signing and were lower in merit in the sports category than the petitioner were granted admission.
The matter does not end there as the cause of the petitioner has been opposed on the sole ground that new guidelines for grading sports person came into existence on 751993.
In so far as the other assertions of the petitioners are concerned, the same have not been even remotely denied.
The simple case pleaded by the petitioner is that his certificate was taken with a view to counter-sign it and if this pleading is to be read without considering the new policy, the writ has to be allowed on the sole ground that the taking of the certificate and not returning the same has not been even denied.
This begin the position, opportunity to the respondents to file rejoinder would be an exercise in futility.
8.
In view of what has been said above, these writ petitions are allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the cases of all the petitioners on the basis of their sports gradations issued to them.
It is made clear that if they are higher in merit of sports category, they will be admitted.
Original certificate of the petitioners be also returned.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 9698 of 1993 (Aman Gandhi v. UT Chandigarh), provisional admission was granted to the petitioner and when it was sought to be cancelled, petitioner obtained an interim order from this Court.
In that case, the petitioner shall continue to study and orders with regard to cancellation of admission shall be passed only if after consideration the matter on merits i.e. his eligibility for admission in the seats reserved for the sports persons, it is found that he does not deserve admission.