SK Jain, J :- This judgment of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 72 of 1983 Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab and two others and (1016 of 1983) Inder Pal v. State of Punjab and two others, as common questions of law and fact are involved in both these petitions.
Brief facts of these cases are that Baldev Singh-petitioner (in Civil Writ Petition No. 72 of 1983) and Inder Pal-petitioner ( in Civil Writ Petition No. 1016 of 1983) were appointed Punjabi/Hindi teachers respectively, in Punjab Education Department by the District Education Officer Bhatinda, on ad hoc basis in September /November, 1979 through the Employment Exchange.
Both of them, apart from having the basic qualifications for being appointed as Punjabi/Hindi teachers, had passed their OT examination from Gandhi Vidyapeeth Prayag, (UP).
2.
Instructions had been issued by the State Government from time to time for regularising the services of ad hoc employees who had completed a particular number of years of ad hoc service upto a particular date subject to fulfilling the conditions mentioned in the instructions.
The claim of the petitioners is that in view of the instructions dated 28101980, their services should be regularised as they had completed a minimum period of one year's service and they fulfil all the pre-conditions for regularisation.
3.
Since the petitioners apprehended termination of their services, they filed the present writ petitions claiming regularisation in service on the basis of the abovesaid Government instructions.
The Motion Bench, while admitting the writ petitions had stayed the termination of the services of the petitioners.
Civil Writ Petition No. 72 of 1983 came up for hearing on 1111983 before the Motion Bench.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab stated at the bar that Baldev Singh petitioner had been relieved on 28.12.1982.
Therefore, it was directed that "no question of stay now arises".
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, objection was taken that since the petitioners had passed Oriental Teachers Training Course from Gandhi Vidyapeath Prayag (UP), which is not recognized by the Punjab State for appointment as OT teachers, the petitioners were not entitled to regularisation.
5.
A similar matter came up for consideration before a learned Single Bench of this Court, in Vijay Kumari v. State of Punjab, RSJ 1991(2) 455 : 1992(1) SCT 135, wherein it was held as under :-  "In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia, averred that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualification viz. OT certificate from a recognized institution/Board and the qualification possessed by her has not been recognized by the State Govt.
It has also been averred that a writ petition No. 1859 of 1981 in which the petitioner was at Serial No. 17 had been dismissed by this Court on August 13, 1981.
Consequently, it is claimed that even the present writ petition is not competent.
It has also been pointed out that the State Govt. after consultation with the University Grants Commission had taken the decision in petitioner's case.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been, inter-alia, stated that various persons who had passed the OT Examination from the institute from which the petitioner had qualified are working as teachers in the various schools in Punjab.
Their particulars have been specifically given in paragraph 6.
A perusal of this list shows that the persons mentioned at Serial Nos. 1, 2, 6 and 7 are working as Hindi teachers.
This factual position has not been controverted.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx On merits, I find that the petitioner has categorically averred that persons who had qualified the OT Examination from the Gandhi Hindi Vedyapeeth, Prayag (UP) are working as language teachers in various schools in the State of Punjab.
This fact has not been denied.
In this situation, the respondents cannot be permitted to say that the petitioner does not possess the qualification of OT from a recognized institution.
No rule or law has been brought to my notice to show that a certain specified procedure has to be followed for recognizing an institution.
No particular form for recognition has been laid down.
The factum of recognition of a qualification or an institution can be inferred from a variety of circumstances.
If persons possessing a particular qualification from a given institution have been employed by the State, it can be reasonably inferred that the qualification as well as the institution have been recognized.
In the present case, the averment of the petitioner clearly shows that a number of persons who have passed the OT Examination or some other examination from the same institution are continuing to work in the educational institutions run by the State of Punjab.
This averment having not been denied, it can be reasonably inferred that the qualification, as well as the institution, have been recognized."
The abovesaid judgment was followed by another Single Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3143 of 1980, Kulwant Singh v. State of Punjab and others decided on 2171992.
6.
I am in respectful agreement with the abovesaid observations followed by the Learned Single Judge of this Court.
No notification or order whatsoever has been placed on the record showing as to which are the institutions, that have been recognized by the Punjab Government, the successful candidates whereof are considered eligible for recruitment as OT teachers in the Punjab Education Department.
The District Education Officer, Bhatinda after taking into consideration the qualifications of the petitioners and the fact that they had passed their OT examination from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) had appointed the two petitioners as Punjabi/Hindi teachers respectively.
The petitioners were appointed in September/November, 1979.
It will be too late in the day now when the petitioners have put in almost 12/13 years of service, to say that they are not entitled to regularisation because they have passed the OT examination from an institution which, according to the respondents, is not recognized by the State Government.
7.
In Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371.
The Apex Court while dealing with similar situation observed as under :-  "Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments of petitioners were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications."
As a result of the above discussion, these writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation in accordance with the instructions on the point by treating the OT Certificate possessed by them as valid for the purpose of regularisation.
No costs.