NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' Regular Second Appeal against the judgment of the Courts below.
2.
Briefly stated, Gurmit Singh, a Constable with PAP Jalandhar Cantt.
filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 28.2.1983 passed by the Commandant whereby his three years approved service was forfeited with permanent effect and the order passed by the Inspector General of Police were illegal and void.
As per averments made in the plaint, it was the case of the plaintiff that he joined his service as a Constable on 10.5.1978 with PAP Jalandhar Cantt.
It was further averred that after successful completing his course he was posted with 75th Battalion, PAP, Jalandhar, and his work and conduct had remained satisfactory; that on 4.l0.1982 he had some pain in the stomach and so took medicines from a doctor; that SI Harminder Singh paid a visit at the guard when one Joginder Singh resident of P& T Colony made a written complaint against the plaintiff alleging misbehaviour under the influence of liquor.
Departmental enquiry was taken against him and on completion of enquiry vide order dated 2821983 three years approved service of the plaintiff was forfeited vide orders of the Commandant, PAP.
It is this order which was challenged being illegal and void, against the principles of natural justice and also having been passed without affording him any opportunity to defend.
The plaintiff further urged that the punishment imposed besides being harsh was not in consonance with the rules governing him, that is, no permission having been sought under Rule l6.38 of the Punjab Police Rules, the orders suffer from this infirmity and are liable to be set aside on this ground alone.
3.
The defendants put in appearance, controverted the various averments made in the plaint and further alleged that the plaintiff, in fact, had misbehaved with Joginder Singh, an employee of P & T under the influence of liquor and so the punishment was legal and in accordance with law.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed  l) Whether the order dated 28.2.1983 and the appellate order are illegal null and void ?
OPP.
2) Relief.
5.
The trial Court, on appraisal of issue No.l, decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
6.
Before the appellate Court,the finding of the trial Court in respect of issue No. l was assailed on the ground that the impugned orders having been passed after holding a departmental enquiry as provided under Rule l6.24 of the Punjab Police Rules and an opportunity having been given to the plaintiff, the findings recorded by the trial Court are unsustainable in law.
The appellant further contended that the provisions of Rule l6.38 of the Punjab Police Rules are not attracted to the facts of the present case.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter in all its entirety and came to the conclusion that there has been non compliance of Rule l6.38(l) of the Punjab Police Rules and so these order suffer from this legal infirmity and so unsustainable in law.
7.
Before me, the learned counsel for the State has made two fold submissions (l) that misbehaviour with Joginder Singh complainant cannot be termed as an offence under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code (ii) that the Courts below erred in law by invoking Rule l6.38 of the Punjab Police Rules on the facts of the present case.
The precise submission made is that the alleged misbehaviour with the complainant cannot be deemed to be as an offence under the Indian Penal Code and so the rule envisaging giving of this information to the District Magistrate intimating the commission of offence by the police official does not arise.
Counsel for the respondent, however, controverted the contentions raised by the appellants.
According to the counsel for the respondent, misbehaviour by the plaintiff with the complainant would tantamount to an offence under section 5l0 of the Indian Penal Code and once it is held guilty of committing a criminal offence then Rule l638 (l) of the Punjab Police Rules, l934, is attracted.
Rule l6.38(l) of the Punjab Police Rules reads as under :-  "Where a preliminary enquiry or investigation into a complaint alleging the commission by an enrolled police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public, establishes a prima facie case a judicial prosecution shall normally follow, where, however, the Superintendent of Police proposes to proceed in the case departmentally, the concurrence of the District Magistrate shall be obtained."
8.
I have carefully examined the respective contentions raised by the parties.
On bare reading of Section 5l0 of the Indian Penal Code, it is amply clear that whosoever in the state of intoxication appears in any public place and there conduct himself in such a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 5l0 of the Indian Penal Code.
The allegations made by Joginder Singh - complainant - vide Exhibit P-l clearly bring out a case under section 5l0 of the Indian Penal Code against the plaintiff.
This being the position, it was incumbent upon the authorities to proceed against the plaintiff following the provisions contained in Rule l638 (l) which clearly envisages that Superintendent of Police would seek the concurrence of the District Magistrate before holding any departmental enquiry.
Somewhat similar proposition came up for consideration before MS Liberhan, J, in case State of Haryana and another v. Surjan Singh, 1990(2) SLR, page 88, wherein it was held that since the concurrence of the District Magistrate had not been obtained, any order passed would be void.
Thus I find no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same.
The parties will, however, bear their own costs.