KP Bhandari, J - This appeal came up for hearing before me on July 15, 1992.
While allowing the appeal, it was mentioned in the order that detailed orders shall follow.
Now I proceed to give reasons in support of my judgment.
2.
The appellant was serving as a conductor in the Punjab Roadways Ferozepur.
He was dismissed from service vide orders passed by the General Manager.
He challenged this order by way of suit in the court of Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepur.
The main ground of challenge in the suit was that after recording of the prosecution evidence, the appellant was not allowed inspection of the record and he was not given copies of the documents relied on by the prosecution in order to prepare his defence.
It has also been averred that the plaintiff was not given the assistance of a co-worker to defend himself.
It is also averred that the past record of the appellant was considered while imposing punishment on the appellant but he was not given any opportunity of showing cause before taking into account his past record.
It is also pleaded that the order of punishment is not a speaking order.
3.
The Senior Sub Judge dismissed the suit.
Thereupon, the appellant filed appeal in the court of District Judge, Ferozepur, which came up for hearing before the Additional District Judge.
The Additional District Judge dismissed the appeal.
4.
Aggrieved against the judgment and decree passed by the courts below, the appellant has come up in appeal to this Court.
5.
It was contended by the counsel for the appellant that after the prosecution evidence was over, the appellant had the right to inspect the record and the document relied only the prosecution in order to prepare his defence.
The request was made to the inquiry officer but he was not allowed the inspection.
The Addl.
District Judge has observed that failure to allow the inspection of the record has not caused any prejudice to the appellant.
I am afraid this is not the correct view of the matter.
The right to produce defence guaranteed to a delinquent official is a valuable right ensured by Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
For preparation of the defence, the inspection of the record to see the statements of witnesses examined against the Govt. servant and the document relied upon in that behalf is very material.
Failure to grant this request resulted in denial of reasonable opportunity to the plaintiff-appellant.
He had a constitutional right to produce his defence in view of the provisions of Article 311 and the statutory right.
As a result of failure to grant permission to insect the documents and the statements of witnesses, the appellant had been denied opportunity to prepare his defence because he was handicapped to prepare his defence.
So plainly speaking the departmental proceedings and the order passed thereon are in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
6.
It has also been contended that the appellant was not allowed the opportunity to defend himself by engaging the services of a co-worker.
In view of the nature of the charges levelled against the appellant, the enquiry officer should have allowed the appellant to be assisted by a departmental representative.
The failure to provide him the assistance of a co-worker resulted in denial of reasonable opportunity of showing cause to the appellant guaranteed by Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
It has also been contended that the punishing authority did not pass a speaking order in this case.
The punishing authority should have examined the evidence on record and formed his own opinion about the charges.
The order passed is very sketchy and not a speaking one.
7.
It was next contended that the past record of the appellant was taken into consideration while award in him the punishment.
The enquiry file shows that the punishing authority had taken into consideration the past record while awarding the punishment.
It has been laid down by the Supreme Court in the State of UP v. Harish Chander, 1969(1) SCC 403 that before his past record is taken into consideration, the delinquent official should be given notice so that he may explain his stand.
No such opportunity was given to the appellant.
The Additional District Judge did not dispute that the enquiry file shows that the past record has been considered but he has observed that the final order does not show that the past record was taken into consideration.
It is well known that administrative decisions are taken on the file.
The past record of the appellant was considered on the file.
In the formal communication to the Government servant, if this fact is not noticed it does not in any manner validate the illegalities in the order.
The appellant was denied reasonable opportunity to show cause guaranteed by Article 311 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as his past record was taken into consideration but he was to given any notice to its effect.
8.
The counsel for the appellant made a statement in court that the appellant shall not claim any back wages if he is reinstated.
9.
In view of the above discussion, this appeal is accepted with no order as to costs.
The judgment and decree passed by the courst below are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is decreed.
It is held that the enquiry proceedings and the order of termination of services passed against the appellant were illegal, ultra vires of the Constitution null and void.
The appellant continued to be in the service of the State as a conductor.
The respondent is directed to reinstate the appellant into service immediately.
However, the appellant shall not be entitled to any back wages.
The period from the date of dismissal to the date of reinstatement shall count towards seniority, increment, pension and other benefits.
Appeal accepted.