HS Bedi, J - The petitioner Nathu Ram Sharma, since deceased was appointed Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal, Faridabad vide Annexure P-1 dated 20th September, 1976 for a period of three years with effect from the date that he took charge.
In Annexure P-1 it was stated that he would be governed by the Civil Services Rules as applicable to temporary Government servants.
Vide Annexure P-2 dated 2091979 the term of appointment of the petitioner was extended for a period of one year with effect from 24.9.1979 on the same terms and conditions as set out in Annexure P-1.
On 1841980, however, vide Annexure P-3 the services of the petitioner were terminated and one month salary in lieu of notice was given to him.
Aggrieved by the order Annexure P-3 the petitioner has filed the present petition praying that he was entitled to continue in service up to 2391980 in view of the order Annexure P-2 and his services having been terminated on 1841980, he was entitled to the wages for the intervening period.
During the pendency of the present writ petition, the petitioner expired and his legal representatives have already been brought on record under the orders of this Court.
2.
The stand of the respondent in the written statement was that the petitioner was a temporary Government servant and his services had been terminated in accordance with Rule 59(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II (hereinafter called 'the Rules') which are said to have been applicable to the service in question.
It has further been stated that one month wages which were given in lieu of notice satisfied the requirement of the Rules.
3.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the very reading of Rule 59(b) to which reference has been made above, would clearly show that it does not apply to an appointment such as the one held by the petitioner.
Rule 59(b) is quoted below :-  "When it proposed to discharge a person holding a temporary post before the expiry of the terms of his appointment or a person employed temporarily on monthly wages, without specified limit of time or duty, a month's notice of discharge should be given to such a person, and his pay or wages must be paid for any period by which such notice falls short of a month."
He has urged that the aforesaid Rule stands incorporated in the Chapter dealing with pensions and if at all would apply to only such persons whose terms of appointment was not specified, and as in the case of the petitioner the time limit had been specified in Annexures P-1 and P-2, the stand of the State was not tenable.
He has then brought to my notice the additional plea of the State that action had been taken against the petitioner not only in terms of the letter of appointment but under the provisions of Sections 7 and 8 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called `the Act').
Mr. Dinesh Kumar has further urged that the aforesaid sections do not deal with the discharge and termination of services of Presiding Officers of Industrial Tribunals or of Labour Courts as the only section applicable in such situations is section 7-C of the Act which provides that no person shall be appointed or continue in the office as a Presiding Officer in case he is not an independent person or has attained the age of 5 years and that as neither of these disqualifications could be fastened on the petitioner, the ultimate period that was to be given to him was to be determined only with reference to Annexures P-1 and P-2.
For this purpose, reliance has been placed on Dr. Bool Chand v. Chancellor, Kurukshetra University, AIR 1968 SC 292 and Dr. LP Agarwal v. Union of India and others, 1992(1) RSJ 557 : 1992(3) SCT 109 (SC).
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition.
Rule 59(b) ibid applies to two different kinds of appointment (i) to a person holding a temporary post for a term (ii) or a person employed on monthly wages without specified limit of time or duty.
It will be apparent therefore from a bare reading of the rule that the case of the petitioner would be covered by the first kind of appointment and, as such, the impugned order cutting short the fixed term of appointment of the petitioner would be valid.
The reliance of the respondent-State on Sections 7 and 8 of the Act is mis-placed as they do not deal with the situation posted in the present case.
However, Mr. Dinesh Kumar's reference to Section 7-C of the Act also does not advance his case in any manner.
This section only deals with disqualifications for appointment or restriction on continuance of a person who is the Presiding Officer of a Labour Courts, Tribunal and National Tribunals.
It does not deal with the situation where a person who has been appointed on a fixed terms vide his letter of appointment is required to be removed before the expiry of the terms.
As already mentioned above, this matter stands covered by Rule 59(b) only.
It has also been urged on behalf of the counsel for the petitioner that Rule 59(b) has been incorporated in the Chapter dealing with pensions and, as such, cannot be applied in determining the nature of tenure of appointment of a Government employee.
This argument too is without basis.
The very reading of the rule indicates that it deals with the discharge from service of a temporary government employee and the means to be employed for this purpose.
The reliance of he petitioner's counsel on the two cases cited above is also to no avail.
In Dr. Bool Chand's case (supra) the question posted was as to whether the Vice Chancellor of the University who had been appointed for a fixed terms could be removed before the expiry of that period.
The Court held that it could be done despite the fact that there was no express provision in the Statute dealing with this situation.
In the present case, I find that Rule 59(b) which has statutory force a specific power has been given to the appointing Authority to curtail a fixed term appointment.
The reliance on Dr. LP Agarwal's case (supra) is equally futile.
The question before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this case was as to whether a person who had been appointed on a fixed term could be retired prematurely.
The Supreme Court held that this could not be possible as the concept of premature retirement could not be made applicable to a tenure post.
It was further held that once a person was appointed to a tenure post, his appointment to the office begins when he joins and it comes to an end on the completion of the tenure unless curtailed on justifiable grounds.
As already indicated above, Rule 59(b) furnishes a justifiable ground for curtailing the tenure post that had been held by the petitioner.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition is devoid of merit and dismissed as such with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.