Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioner who is a student of first Professional MBBS course, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, is seeking mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to appear the First Professional MBBS Course Examination in which he was not allowed to appear on the ground that he had not attended the Medical College for 18 months before the start of the examination.
2.
Before narration of the facts which led to the filing of the petition, it will be worthwhile to add that while issuing notice of motion this Court on 8.12.1992 had directed the respondents to permit the petitioner to take the First Professional MBBS Course Examination, subject to the decision of the writ petition.
In pursuance of the said direction, the petitioner had appeared in the said Examination but its result was not declared.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed Civil Misc.
Application No. 2139 of 1993, making a prayer that he be allowed to attend classes of IInd Professional MBBS Course till the declaration of the result of First Professional MBBS Course Examination.
3.
The history of the case is that the petitioner appeared in the All India Pre-Medical, Pre-Dental Examination in May, 1991, conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi for admission in the Medical Colleges for MBBS Course.
The Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi, vide letter dated 1171991, intimated the petitioner that he had been selected for admission to the M.B.B.S Course.
Thereafter, the petitioner received communication from Director General Health Service Medical Examination Cell, New Delhi, dated 22.8.1991 informing him that he has been elected for admission to MBBS Course at ANM Magadh Medical College, Gaya.
In this way, the respondent took 40 days after his selection to issue allocation letter.
On receipt of the abovesaid allocation letter, the petitioner joined the above said College at Gaya on 1891991.
4.
Subsequently, the Director General, Health Services New Delhi, published a notice in the National Dailies, published a notice in the National Dailies, inviting applications from candidates already admitted in the Medical Colleges basis of competitive Examination, for re-allocated to different Medical Colleges.
In response to the said advertisement, the petitioner submitted application for re-allocation.
The petitioner was re-allocated to Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, by a letter dated 6111991 and he joined the said Medical College at Faridkot on 22111991.
After taking admission in Medical College, Faridkot, the petitioner continued to pursue his studies and according to the petitioner after joining the College, he had completed 75 per cent of his lectures delivered.
The petitioner also attended extra coaching in order to make up the deficiency in the lectures delivered and also completed assessment tests.
5.
The First Professional Examination in MBBS Course was to be held by the Punjabi University, Patiala, in the month of January, 1993.
Accordingly, a notice was put up on the notice board asking the students of the First Professional to fill up their examination forms.
When the petitioner approached the office for the purpose, he was informed that he could not be permitted to take the First Professional MBBS Course Examination as according to the Regulations of the University he had not been on the rolls of the College throughout the year 1-1/2 [years preceding the Examination.
6.
Aggrieved by the said action of the respondents the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
7.
As mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment the petitioner was allowed to take the First Professional MBBS Course Examination.
In response to the notice of motion, respondents No. 2 and 3 have filed detailed written statement.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the University itself has permitted certain students who were similarly situated as petitioner to take the First Professional Examination and the names of a few such candidates have been given as -  Miss Arati Bansal,  Mr. Gurmej Singh,  Sameer Grover,  Mandeep Singh,  Miss Geetanjli Sharma,  Miss Rajni Gupta,  Miss Ramnika Aggarwal,  Mr. Sarit Sharma.
None of the aforesaid students had completed 18 months preceding the start of the First Professional Examination.
It was argued that the petitioner had received the letter of allocation after 40 days of the declaration of the result of selection and no fault can be attributed to the petitioner and it is only the respondents who are to be blamed for the sorry state of affairs.
9.
Mr. Mohinderjit Singh Sethi, Senior Advocate, has argued with vehemence that a student can be allowed to take the First Professional Examination only if he has completed 1-1/2 years period of study and attended 75% lectures delivered as per Regulations of the University.
Mr. Sethi had argued that the Ordinance is mandatory in nature as held in Miss Sajila Sultana v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 1991(2) CLJ (CCr.
& Rev.)
413.
As such, no relaxation can be allowed.
According to Mr. Sethi, the students of MBBS must complete their studies before they are chistended as doctors.
In the words of Mr. Sethi, halfbaked doctors are not to be produced as they are to deal with the lives of human beings.
10.
I have given thoughtful consideration to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the rules and regulations of the University.
11.
Ordinance 7 deals with the First Professional Examination and it reads as under :-  (i) of having attended not less than 75% of the full course of lectures delivered and practical held separately in each of the subjects of the examination; provided that deficiency in the number of lectures and in clinical and practicals may be condoned by the Principals as decided by the Academic Council.
(2) of having undergone for not less than 1-1/2 academic years, the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry."
After going through the Ordinance and perusing the written statement, I am of the considered view that the stand taken by the Principal of the Medical College, Respondent No. 3, does not appeal to reason and his hypertechnical.
As mentioned earlier, the petitioner had received letter of re-allocation on 6111991 and he had joined Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot on 22111991 when the last date for admission to the college was over.
The delay, if any, occurred without any fault on the part of the petitioner.
The petitioner in the first instance was issued letter after 40 days of the declaration of the result and he was re-allocated vide letter dated 6111991.
It is also seen that the petitioner after joining the Medical College had completed 75% lectures and practical by attending extra classes.
The only obstacle in the way of the petitioner is that he had not been on the rolls of the Medical College, Faridkot, for 1-1/2 years during the academic session.
12.
In para 10 of the written statement, it has been stated that the cut off date for admission was 16101991 as mentioned in the prospectus and last date for admission was 31101991 as fixed by the Panjabi University, Patiala.
Even if the last date for admission was 31101991, a student who had joined in October, 1991 ie, before the date of admission, would also not be eligible to take the First Professional MBBS Course Examination as he too would not be on the rolls of the College for 1-1/2 years preceding the examination.
In the written statement, it has been admitted that some students who had not completed the duration of the course, have been allowed to sit in the examination.
As such, it is a clear case of discrimination and arbitrariness which in a lawbiding society cannot be allowed to prevail.
13.
It is pertinent to note that if the duration of the course is 1-1/2 years, then the students after the cut off date should not have been approved for re-allocation to the different Medical Colleges.
On the consideration of the entire matter, I am of the opinion that what is required of a student is that the student for eligibility is to attend 75% of the lectures delivered to him after his admission.
It is also worthwhile to mention that in the past the University had relaxed the condition or 1-1/2 years required under the Ordinance.
If the requirement under the Ordinance was mandatory, the University could not have reduced the period in the case of students whose particulars have been given in the writ petition.
14.
In Sajila Sultana's case (supra), it was held at under :  "Despite Ordinance being mandatory in nature, University relaxed the rigour of the provisions and allowed 18 students who were similarly situated as the petitioners who had not completed their 1-1/2 academic years studies to take the examination of First Professional without strictly adhering to provisions envisaged under the Ordinance.
Since allowing the students to appear in the examination is a fait accompli, much can be spared unsaid.
I allow these writ petitions as contrary-wise would be unjust and inequitable qua petitioners."
In Civil Writ Petition No. 1888 of 1992 decided on 28.5.1992, a Division Bench of this Court has observed.
"During the pendency of the writ petition, we had allowed the petitioners to appear in the examination starting in April, 1990.
They have in fact appeared in that examination.
In case they are passing the same it is alright but in case they are failing, they will have to re-appear."
........ We allow the petition and direct the respondents to declare the result of the petitioners ...... "  15.
On the consideration of the matter, this Court has reached the conclusion that the respondent-University has been interpreting the clause of the ordinance in its own manner.
As such the action of respondent-University suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
16.
For the foregoing discussion and the judgment referred to above, the writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner was entitled to appear in the 1st Professional MBBS Examination held by the University in January 1993.
17.
By virtue of interim direction of this Court the petitioner had already appeared in the MBBS Ist Professional Examination held in 1993.
The University is directed to declare the result of the petitioner forthwith.
In case he is declared fail he shall be allowed to re-appear.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.