Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein prays for the issue of a writ of certiorari "quashing the impugned termination of the services of the petitioner from 1551988 A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that he was appointed as a Helper Electrician in March, 1984.
He continued working on daily wages till June 30, 1986.
With effect from July 4, 1986 he was placed in the scale of Rs. 300-430 and appointed for 89 days.
This appointment, which was in its very nature ad hoc was extended from time to time.
The petitioner claims that he continued working till May, 1988 when his services were terminated.
This alleged termination has been challenged on two grounds.
Firstly, it is averred that a person junior to him, viz. Kewal Singh was allowed to continue in service.
It has also been averred that the termination was ordered to accommodate one Shri Kaka Singh.
The petitioner avers that he had submitted a representation in May, 1988 to the Executive Engineer.
Having failed to get the requisite relief, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner "wilfully absented himself from duty--" and that his services were not terminated w.e.f.
May 15, 1988, as alleged.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner was appointed as Electrician Helper on March 1, 1985 or daily wages and the averment made by him that he had joined service in March 1984 is wrong.
It has also been averred that the petitioner wilfully absented himself from March 1, 1988 to March 7,1988 and thereafter from March 21, 1988 he remained absent from duty.
It has been pointed out that Shri Kaka Singh was working at Punjab Roadways Depot, Ropar and was ordered to be transferred to Punjab Roadways Depot, Chandigarh on May 2, 1988.
Since the petitioner was absent from duty and it was necessary to appoint a helper electrician to look after the work, Shri Kaka Singh, who was already working was-posted on transfer from Ropar to Chandigarh in place of the petitioner.
With regard to the allegation that a person junior to the petitioner was retained, it has been pointed out that the services of the petitioner were actually not terminated.
He had wilfully absented himself from March 22, 1988.
On these premises, the petitioner's claim as made in this petition has been contested.
4.
The petitioner than filed an affidavit dated January 14, 1989 alleging that the petitioner was throughout present and that his services had been terminated on May 15, 1988.
Alongwith this affidavit, he produced photocopies of the attendance sheets for the months of February, March, April and May, 1988 as Annexures P2 to P.5.
He averred that the Sub-Divisional Engineer, who had signed the written statement on behalf of the respondents, had in fact verified the entries in the attendance register and that the plea taken in the written statement was false.
5.
When this case initially came up for hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner was vehement that in view of the photocopies produced by the petitioner, the averments made in the written statement were apparently false.
In fact, on March 25, 1992, learned counsel for the petitioner produced the original attendance register, which was taken on record as `Mark-A'.
He also produced another register relating to the workshop, which was taken on record as `Mark-B'.
Even the statement of the petitioner was recorded.
He asserted that the two registers had been given to him by Mr. Chaman Lal Kamboj, the Sub Divisional Engineer, and that the entries in the registers were signed whenever he visited the place of work.
It was pointed out by the petitioner that in the register, `Mark-A' Mr. Chaman Lal had signed on May 4, 1988.
The petitioner asserted that he was thrown out of job on May 14,1988.
6.
By a subsequent order, Mr. Chaman Lal Kamboj was directed to be present in Court.
He has appeared.
His statement has been recorded.
He has pointed out that the petitioner was absent from duty from March 1, 1988 to March 6, 1988 and thereafter he did not attend to his duty from March 22, 1988 onwards.
He has also produced the original pay roll for the month of March, 1988, which has been taken on record as `Mark-C'.
A perusal of this document shows that the petitioner had been paid salary only for 15 days from March 7, 1988 to March 21, 1988.
It has also been asserted that the petitioner was not paid any salary for any period subsequent to March 21, 1988.
Even though the witness has been cross-examined at length, but it has never been suggested that the petitioner was paid any salary for a day after March 21, 1988.
From a perusal of the statement of Mr. Chaman Lal Kamboj and other evidence on record, it is clearly established that the Petitioner did not attend to his duties after March 21, 1988.
The plea taken by him in the writ petition as also in the subsequent affidavit to the effect that he had continued to attend to his duties till May 15, 1988 is apparently not correct.
7.
The circumstances which belie the petitioner's claim are eloquent.
Firstly, the petitioner claims to have submitted a representation dated May (?)
1988, copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1.
Even though it has been averred that he had not been given extension from May 15, 1988.
It has been claimed that inspite of being present in the office, he has not been paid his salary from March 22, 1988 onwards.
Further a perusal of the entries for the month of April, 1988 in the attendance register, `Mark-A' clearly shows that two lines had been drawn against the petitioner's name showing that there were no entries indicating his presence in office.
Nothing has been brought out on record to show that the statement of Mr. Chaman Lal Kamboj in that behalf is incorrect.
His explanation that he had originally shown him absent from April 2, 1988 and had subsequently drawn a line indicating that he was absent while verifying the entries on May 2, 1988 appears to be absolutely correct.
It appears that the petitioner subsequently was able to get hold of the register and interpolated the entries.
Otherwise, there could be no occasion for him to produce the registers from his personal custody.
These are official records.
These are to remain at the site of the work.
The fact that the petitioner was able to produce the attendance registers shows that these were in his custody and it is likely that he had picked them up from the office and had interpolated the entries therein.
8.
Learned counsel for thee petitioner points out that for the month of March 1988, there was nothing in the register, `Mark-A' to show that the petitioner was absent from March 1 to March 6, 1988 and thereafter from March 22, 1988 onwards He points out that had the petitioner been absent, Mr. Kamboj would have either drawn a line or made a remark to that effect.
This contention is belied by two facts.
Firstly, the petitioner has in fact been paid his salary for the month of March, 1988 for only 15 days.
In the pay roll the petitioner is shown to have worked for 15 days, i.e. from March 7, 1988 to March 21, 1988.
This fact has not been controverted by the petitioner.
Secondly if the petitioner had been present during the whole month, he would have claimed salary even for the remaining 15 days.
He did not.
Consequently, it was not impossible that even though the petitioner had remained absent, yet on having come in possession of the attendance register, he marked his presence.
Of course, Mr. Kamboj has admitted that he had not verified any of the entries with regard to the four officials for the month of March, 1988 in the attendance register.
9.
In this view of the matter, the claim of the petitioner that he had in fact attended to his duties till May 15, 1988 or that he had been illegally thrown out from his service does not appear to be correct.
In fact, the evidence on record indicates that he had absented himself from duty from March 22, 1988 onwards.
The department had not passed any order of termination.
It was the petitioner, who had abandoned his duties and consequently he had to blame none, but himself alone.
10.
In this situation, if a person junior to him, Mr. Kewal Singh was allowed to continue in service, no infirmity can be found in the action of the department.
Equally untenable is the plea that the services of the petitioner had been terminated to accommodate Mr. Kaka Singh.
In fact, as it appears from the averments made in the written statement that Mr. Kaka Singh was already working at Ropar and had been merely transferred from there to Chandigarh so as to look after the work-, which was presumably being attended to by the petitioner.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed.
11.
From the perusal of the pleadings of the parties as also the evidence on record, it is prima facie established that the petitioner has no regard for truth.
His averment in the petition that he had continued to work in the department till May 15, 1988 and that his services were terminated to accommodate Kaka Singh is apparently false.
He persisted in making an inaccurate statement while filing the additional affidavit dated January 14, 1989.
Further, he produced copies of documents, which are prima facie not genuine and had been tampered with by the petitioner himself.
This petition is symbolic of the trend.
False affidavits are filed to make out a prima facie case.
In this case, the petitioner has gone even to the extent of making entries in the record.
It is a fit case where a show-cause notice should be issued to the petitioner to show-cause as to why he be not prosecuted for perjury and tampering with the official record.
A notice be issued to him also to show cause as to why he be not punished for contempt of Court under Art. 215 of the Constitution of India.
Let these notices be issued for September 4, 1992.