NK Sodhi, J - Civil Writ Petitions 9678, 9679 and 17082 of 1991 involve common questions of law and fact and can be conveniently disposed of by one judgment.
For the sake of convenience, reference would be made to the facts in Civil Writ Petition No. 9678 of 1991.
2.
The petitioners are J.B.T.
teachers working in the Education Department of the State of Haryana.
When they joined service they did not possess the necessary qualifications for the post of masters but during the course of their employment while serving as teachers, they have acquired higher qualifications of B.T./B.Ed.
on the dates mentioned in Para 2 of the writ petition.
By a letter dated July 23, 1957, they then State of Punjab allowed to all teachers a higher pay-scale as admissible to the masters on their acquiring higher qualifications.
This letter of the State Government became the subject-matter of a number of petitions filed in this Court and the matter was ultimately taken to the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1621 wherein the following direction was issued :  "In the result, we allow the appeal and writ petitions and direct the respondents to give the higher grade admissible to masters to all the teachers who have acquired the B.T./B.Ed, qualification w.e.f.
the respective dates of their acquiring qualification.
The appellants and the petitioners are entitled to their costs."
3.
Petitioners, who have obtained higher qualifications claimed masters' grade w.e.f.
the dates they acquired such qualifications but the respondents passed no orders in this regard.
The petitioners then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5385 of 1990 in this Court which was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to decide the claim of the petitioners.
It is in pursuance of the direction of this Court that the respondents passed the impugned order dated April, 5, 1991 rejecting the claims of the petitioners while relying on the government instructions/clarification issued as per letter dated March 9, 1990.
The stand of the respondents is that the State of Haryana has issued further clarification, vide letter dated March 9, 1990 in which it has been provided that masters' grade would be given to such employees who are appointed against those posts and they would not be automatically entitled to the higher pay-scale on the basis of higher qualifications.
4.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petitioners must succeed.
In terms of the instructions issued by the then State of Punjab, on July 23, 1957 which were operative in the State of Haryana as well, every teacher who had acquired higher qualifications became entitled to the masters' grade w.e.f.
the date of acquiring such qualifications.
This is clear from the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal's case (supra).
Subsequently, the State of Haryana has issued clarifications in March, 1990 modifying the earlier instructions to the extent that the masters' grade would be given only to such employees who are appointed against the posts and not otherwise.
These instructions issued in March, 1990 would operate prospectively and cannot make away the rights of the petitioners which had accrued to them prior to the issuance of this letter.
It is clear from Para 2 of the writ petition that all the petitioners acquired higher qualifications prior to March, 1990 and are, therefore, entitled to master grade even though they are not working against the posts of masters.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to give to the petitioners the masters' grade w.e.f.
the dates on which they acquired higher qualifications.
Petitioners in CWP No. 9678 of 1991 shall be entitled to arrears of salary etc. for a period of 36 months only prior to the filing of CWP No. 5385 of 1990 or from the date of acquiring higher qualifications, whichever is later.
The petitioners in CWP No. 9679 and 17082 of 1991 will be entitled to the arrears of salary etc. for a period of 36 months from the date of filing of the petitions or from the date of acquiring higher qualifications, whichever is later.
The respondents are further directed to compute the arrears and disburse the same to the petitioners on or before March 31, 1993.
Parties shall bear their own costs.