SD Agarwala, C.J - These are two Letters Patent Appeals arising out of a judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 3091991 in C.W.P.
No. 7600 of 1991 filed by Dr. RL Mittal, regarding his seniority qua Dr. DN Bhardwaj.
The sole question consequently which has to be determined in the present appeals is as regards to who is senior between Dr. RL Mittal, and Dr. DN Bhardwaj, both being Professors in the Government Medical College, Rajinder Hospital, Patiala.
2.
The facts in brief giving rise to the present appeals are as follows :-  Civil Writ Petition No. 7600 of 1991 was filed by Dr. RL Mittal.
His case is that he was appointed as an Assistant Registrar in the State of Punjab w.e.f.
July 26, 1961.
He was thereafter promoted as a Senior Lecturer w.e.f.
July 20, 1966 and as Assistant Professor w.e.f.
August 9, 1972.
Vide order dated April 1, 1976, his promotion as Assistant Professor was made retrospective w.e.f.
March 8, 1966.
Thereafter, Dr. Mittal was promoted as Additional Professor (Orthopedic) w.e.f.
October 31, 1981 and thereafter confirmed as Professor on May 1, 1987.
3.
It was further stated that so far as Dr. DN Bhardwaj is concerned he entered as Assistant Registrar in the Punjab Government service on 20121960 became Senior Lecturer on 341964; and, confirmed as Senior Lecturer on 1111966.
He became Assistant Professor on 3031971 and Professor on 14101976 on which post he was confirmed on 171985.
4.
In fact the case taken in the petition by Dr. Mittal was that since he became Additional Professor on 241976 before Dr. Bhardwaj became Professor on 14101976 and the post of Additional Professor and that of Professor being of the same category, he was senior to Dr. DN Bhardwaj.
5.
Dr. DN Bhardwaj on 29101990 filed a representation before the Government stating therein that he should be assigned inter se seniority over and above Dr. RL Mittal.
The Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare, by order dated May 15, 1991 held that Dr. DN Bhardwaj was senior to Dr. RL Mittal.
This order has been attached as Annexure P-15 to the writ petition.
It is in fact this order which has been challenged by Dr. RL Mittal in the writ petition filed by him.
6.
The writ petition came up for hearing before RS Mongia, J, who vide judgment dated 3091991 allowed the writ petition and quashed the order dated 1551991 (Annexure P-15 to the writ petition) holding that Dr. RL Mittal was senior to Dr. DN Bhardwaj.
7.
Against the judgment dated 3091991, Dr. DN Bhardwaj as well as State of Punjab filed two separate Letters Patent Appeals.
L.P.A. No. 98 of 1992 is the appeal filed by State of Punjab.
Since both these appeals arise out of the same judgment and common questions of fact and law arise, both these appeals are being disposed of by a common judgment.
8.
In order to decide the controversy in regard to seniority between Dr. RL Bhardwaj, it will be appropriate to state in tabular form the dates on which both the doctors occupied their various posts :  Sr. No. Post Date of appointment/Confirmation Dr. D.N.
Bhardwa RL Mittal 1.
Entry into Punjab Govt. Service (Ast.Registrar 20121960 2671961.
2.
Senior Lecturer 0341964 20.7.1966 3.
Confirmation in teaching Cadre as Senior Lecturer.
1111966 19.7.1968 4.
Assistant Professor 3031971 9.8.1972 (Note :- By order of Govt. dt. 1.4.76 promotion was deemed to be taken from 8.3.71 Annexure P-1).
5.
Additional Professor 241976 6.
Professor 14.10.76 31101981.
7.
Confirmation as Professor 171985 1.5.1987.
9.
By a notification dated July 28, 1978, issued by the Punjab Government, Health (Medical Education) Department in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Punjab made rules regulating recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I).
In the year 1978, for the first time, Punjab Medical Education (Class I) was created and it was for this service that the rules were framed.
Rule 3 of the rules specifically provided that the service shall be constituted of persons recruited to the service under rule 9 after commencement of the rules.
The proviso to rule 3 laid down that the persons holding the posts specified in appendix `B' to the rules immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be appointed to the service in accordance with the provisions of these rules on the designation, grade and any scale laid down in Appendix `B' to these rules or the grade and pay scale for which they duly exercised their option.
It is not disputed that both Dr. RL Mittal as well as Dr. DN Bhardwaj exercised their option for becoming members of Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the rules).
Rules 3, 9 and 11 of the rules, which are relevant for the purpose of these appeals are quoted below :  "3.
Constitution of Service-These shall be constituted, a service to be known as the "Punjab Medical Education Service (Class I)" consisting of persons recruited to the Service under rule 9 after the commencement of these rules :  Provided that the persons holding the posts specified in Appendix `B' to these rules immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be appointed to the service in accordance with the provisions of these rules on the designation, grade and any scale laid down in Appendix `B' to these rules or the grade and pay scale for which they duly exercised their option".
"9.
Method of appointment - (1) Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made in the following manner :-  (a) In the case of Assistant Professors -  (i) 75 per cent Posts by promotion from amongst the Lecturers and senior Lecturers or by transfer of officials already in service of Government.
(ii) 25 per cent Posts by direct appointment.
(b) In the case of Associate Professors -  (i) all the posts will be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistant Professors.
(c) In the case of Additional Professors -  (i) 75 per cent posts by promotion from amongst the Associates Professors, or where Associate Professors are not available, from amongst the Assistant Professor or by transfer of officials already in the service of the Government of India, or of a State Government.
(ii) 25 per cent posts by direct recruitment.
(d) In the case of Professors -  (i) 75 per cent posts by promotion from amongst the Additional Professors, or, where Additional Professors are not available, from amongst the Associate Professors, or, where Associate Professors are not available, from amongst the Assistant Professors, or by transfer of official already in the service of the Government of India, or the State Government;  (ii) 25 per cent posts by direct recruitment.
(e) In the case of Principals it will be made by Selection from amongst the Professors.
(2) In case no suitable person possessing the qualifications and experience as prescribed in rule 7)(i) and (ii) is available for promotion to any post in the service that post shall be filled up by direct recruitment.
(3) All appointments to the posts in the service by promotion shall be made by selection on merit and no person shall be entitled to claim as right of promotion to such posts on the basis of seniority."
"11.
Seniority of members of Service - The seniority inter se of the members of the service shall be determined separately for each category of members in each department of service, as shown in Appendix `A' to these rules on the basis of their continuous appointment in that category :  Provided that the inter se seniority of Professors belonging to different departments shall be determined on the basis of their continuous service as Professors :  Provided further that a Professor shall be senior to an Additional  Professor, an Additional Professor, shall be senior to an Associate Professor and an Associate Professor shall be senior to an Assistant Professor :  Provided further that the seniority of members of the Service prevailing immediately before the commencement of these rules shall not be disturbed;  Provided farther that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to these appointed as a result of subsequent selection :  Provided further that in case two or more members are appointed on the same date their seniority shall be determined as follows :  (a) A member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise;  (b) A member recruited by promotion shall be senior to a member recruited by transfer;  (c) In the case of members appointed by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such memebers in the appointment from which they were promoted or transferred and,  (d) In the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same then by their length of service.
If that is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Note - In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 10 of the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
In Appendix `B' to the rules, the pay scales of the various categories of the members of the service were also laid down which are also quoted below :-  APPENDIX `B' 1.
Principal -Rs1,300-50-1,800 + Rs. 100 P.M. as special pay.
2.
Professor Rs1,300-50--1,800.
3.
Additional Professor Rs. 1,300-50-1,800.
4.
Associate Professor Rs850-50-1,000/50-1,250 + Rs. 100PM as special pay.
5.
Assistant Professor Rs850-50-1,000/50-1,200.
6.
Assistant Professor Pharmacy Rs.
700-40-1,000."
Rule 9(d) contemplates that 75 per cent of the posts of Professors shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Additional Professors.
The post of Professor consequently is a promotional post and not equivalent to the post of an Additional Professor.
10.
Rule 11 of the rules quoted above makes it clear that in accordance with first proviso the inter se seniority of Professors belonging to the different departments had to be determined on the basis of their continuous service as Professors.
The second proviso laid down that a Professor shall be senior to an Additional Professor and an Additional Professor shall be senior to an Associate Professor and an Associate Professor shall be senior to an Assistant Professor.
The third proviso laid down that the seniority of the members of the service prevailing immediately before the commencement of these rules shall not be disturbed.
11.
In accordance with rule 11 consequently on July 28, 1978 when the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class -I) was created, a Professor had to be treated senior to an Additional Professor.
Admittedly, Dr. DN Bhardwaj became Professor on 14101976 and Dr. RL Mittal became Professor on 31101981.
Therefore, in terms of the rules, without doubt Dr. RL Mittal having been appointed as a Professor much after coming in of the rules in 1978 and Dr. DN Bhardwaj having been appointed as a Professor prior to coming in of the rules, was clearly senior to Dr. RL Mittal.
12.
The 1978 rules were subsequently amended by a notification dated 2091985.
The effect of these rules was that the post of Additional Professor was deleted and consequently certain amendments were made in rule 11.
In rule 11, the second proviso was substituted by the following proviso :-  "Provided further that a Professor shall be senior to an Associate Professor and an Associate Professor shall be senior to an Assistant Professor."
The amendments in the rules were not made retrospective and hence these amendments did not at all affect the seniority of the members of the service which was to be determined under the 1978 rules.
Since Dr. DN Bhardwaj had already become senior under the 1978 rules, the mere effect of the deletion of the word `Additional Professor' or any other word treating Additional Professor to be equivalent to a Professor did not take away the right of a doctor who had already become senior under the 1978 rules.
In our opinion, consequently, in accordance with the 1978 rules, `as amended' in 1985, Dr. DN Bhardwaj would be senior to Dr. RL Mittal.
We, therefore, do not find any error in the order passed by the Government on 1551991 treating Dr. DN Bhardwaj as senior to Dr. RL Mittal.
We will now consider various aspects on the basis of which learned Single Judge held Dr. RL Mittal to be senior to Dr. DN Bhardwaj.
13.
The first aspect which has weighed with the learned Single Judge is the practice which was in vogue prior to the coming in of the rules of 1978.
It has been stated in the judgment that even in a case where post of Additional Professor and Professor was simultaneously vacant, an Associate Professor could be straight away promoted as a Professor and consequently relying on an order dated November 17, 1977 issued by the Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Department of Health and Family Planning, it has been held that the posts of Professors and Additional Professors were equal for all intents and purposes.
In our opinion, this finding of the learned Single Judge is not sustainable.
It is not disputed that even prior to the 1978 rules, the Additional Professor was a distinct category of post from that of Associate Professor.
In some departments in the Medical College, there were no posts of Additional Professors while in others such posts were there.
In any case, an Associate Professors was either made an Additional Professor or could be made directly as a Professor but nevertheless the post of an Additional Professor was different from that of a Professor, even if a person was first appointed as Additional Professor, he was thereafter promoted as a Professor.
So possibly it cannot be said that both the posts are equivalent and it would make no difference if a person is designated either as an Additional Professor or as a Professor.
Since, there were no rules in existence and the posts of Additional Professor and Professor did exist obviously a Professor would be a person senior to an Additional Professor.
The order of the Punjab Government dated November 17, 1977 was just an order passed determining inter se seniority between Dr. Rachhpal Singh Sindhu and Dr. Gurbachan Singh.
That is an order passed on its own facts.
It was not a general order laying down any policy decision of the Government.
This order being purely on the facts of that case, cannot bind either of the parties.
Even otherwise, if a wrong administrative order is passed, that could not possibly affect the rights of parties in order to determine their seniority in the manner valid in law.
In our opinion, consequently, the mere fact that the Punjab Government treated for the purposes of seniority the post of an Additional Professor as equivalent to a Professor, it could not be held that an Additional Professor would become senior to a Professor.
14.
The next aspect, which has been dealt with by learned Single Judge is with regard to the gradation list prepared by the Government.
The gradation list has been produced before us.
It has been issued by the Directorate of Research and Medical Education, Punjab.
In the gradation list, it has been specifically stated as follows :-  "This gradation list is published departmentally for convenience of reference, and it should be understood that no claims can be based upon the authority of statement made in this publication."
In our opinion, the gradation list was only tentative for the purposes of use by the administration.
The seniority stated in the gradation list, which is wholly tentative, could not possibly determine the rights of the parties.
The contrary view taken by the learned Single Judge, in our opinion, is not correct.
In Chander Parkash Sharma v. The State of Punjab and others, 1974 Service Law Weekly Reporter, 80 a learned Single Judge of this Court has held that the so-called gradation list prepared by the department is only for the purposes of its guidance and it cannot be said that it had the legal sanction to determine the rights of the parties.
We agree with the view taken by the learned Single Judge of this Court.
In this case also, the gradation list was only for the purposes of guidance of the Government as till then service had not been created.
The list was only tentative and no claims could be based upon the authority of the statement made in such tentative gradation list.
We have already stated above that for the first time, the service was created by the rules of 1978 and as such the rights of the parties cannot be affected by a mere publication of a gradation list.
15.
In Wing Commander, J Kumar v. Union of India & ors, AIR 1982 S.C. 1064, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down that it is settled law that the service conditions pertaining to seniority are liable to alteration by subsequent changes that may be introduced in the rules and except to the extent of protecting promotions that have already been earned under the previous rules, the revised rules will operate to govern the seniority and future promotion prospects of all the persons in the concerned service.
The argument raised in the said case that it was not open to the Government to introduce new principles of seniority by promulgation of the rules was not accepted.
In the instant case, however, the position is a still better.
Here, there were no previous rules at all in order to determine the seniority.
For the first time, the service was created in the year 1978 by the 1978 rules and consequently the only way of legally determining the seniority was to determine the same in accordance with 1978 rules.
If the 1978 rules are taken into consideration, it is obvious that a Professor would be senior to an Additional Professor and as such the mere issue of a gradation list which was wholly tentative, could not affect the right of the appellant for determining the question of seniority.
16.
The learned Single Judge has also taken the view that in view of the third proviso to rule 11 of the 1978 rules providing that the seniority of the members of the service prevailing immediately before the commencement of the rules, shall not be disturbed.
This proviso would not be applicable to the instant case at all as the service itself was created by the 1978 rules.
There was no determination of seniority prior to the commencement of the rules.
The only document laying down seniority was the gradation list which, as we have held above, was only tentative one for use by the department but that was not a final list which could affect the rights of the parties.
In the circumstances, this proviso could not have been made applicable at all.
17.
The learned Single Judge has also taken a view that the appellant had raised the question of seniority at a belated stage and as such the Government erred in passing the impugned order.
In our opinion, this ground also is not sustainable against the appellant.
Dr. Mittal and Dr. Bhardwaj belong to two different departments.
There was no final seniority list prepared under the 1978 rules.
The seniority as mentioned in gradation list, was only tentative and mere existence of a tentative gradation list did not affect the rights of Dr. Bhardwaj.
It was only when the question of the promotion of Dr. DN Bhardwaj was involved that the determination of seniority was of some importance and consequently Dr. DN Bhardwaj made a representation to the Government for determination of his seniority.
It cannot be said, therefore, that the delay would affect the rights of a person for getting his seniority determined.
In this connection, reference may be made to the decision in Raj Kumar Batra v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(5) SLR 197 : 1992(1) SCT 129 wherein it has been clearly laid down by the learned Single Judge as follows :  "In my view a wrong can be rectified any time.
The remedies before a Court may be barred by delay.
However, the Government's jurisdiction to undo injustice at any stage cannot be doubted.
The Government had the discretion to reject the claim on account of delay.
In the circumstances of the case, it has chosen not to do so.
It was in all likelihood influenced by the fact that juniors had been deputed for training without prejudice to the rights of the seniors.
In such a situation, the Government may have thought that it would not be fair to prejudicially affect the rights of the seniors.
It has accordingly taken the impugned decision."
We respectfully agree with the observations made by the learned Single Judge in this case.
It is always open to the Government to determine seniority between two persons in a particular service when the question of determination of seniority is significant for determining rights of the parties in relation to promotion.
In any case, it was open to the Government to rectify the tentative gradation list which it had prepared earlier in order to set the record right.
It cannot be said, therefore, that the Government acted illegally in passing the impugned order rectifying the seniority between Dr. RL Mittal and Dr. DN Bhardwaj.
18.
The last aspect, which has weighed with the learned Single Judge is, that in October, 1981 vide Annexure P-8, the posts of Additional Professors were re-designated as Professors and consequently, he has counted the entire service of Dr. RL Mittal as an Additional Professor towards his work as a Professor.
This possibly cannot be done.
Mere re-designation of a particular junior post namely, Additional Professor, cannot change the vested rights.
The Government's order re-designating the Additional Professors as Professors is only an administrative order and it cannot go contrary to the rules which have statutory force and which have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The 1978 rules clearly contemplate that a Professor would be senior to an Additional Professor.
In the circumstances, the period of service of an Additional Professor cannot be counted as service as a Professor.
19.
We, consequently, do not agree with the view taken by the learned Single Judge of this Court.
In view of the above, we allow both the appeals.
The order dated 3091991 passed by the learned Single Judge is set aside, the writ petition is dismissed and the parties are directed to bear their own costs of the writ petition as well as of the appeal.
Petition dismissed.