GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of this petition and C.W.P.
No. 2220 of 1980.
The petitioners have sought a mandate to the respondents to re-instate them in service and grant them arrears of salary and regular increments along with promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to them were promoted, in these petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Reference to relevant facts has been made from the pleadings in CWP No. 2221 of 1980.
The petitioner, who was a permanent employee in the erstwhile State of Punjab, was allocated to the State of Haryana as Assistant District Industries Officer on the reorganisation of the State of Punjab.
On May 15, 1971, he was promoted as District Industries Officer on regular basis, which post he held till August 5, 1977 when he was placed under suspension on registration of a case against him under Sections 120B/420/467/463/471, Indian Penal Code, and Section 5 of the Imports and Exports Control Act, 1947.
The suspension was ordered without complying with the principles of natural justice.
The sanction to prosecute the petitioner was granted by the Secretary Incharge, Administration of Justice Department and not by the Secretary to Government Industries Department, who alone was competent to order the prosecution of the petitioner.
The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi did not frame any charge against the petitioner and discharged him by his order dated December 8, 1979.
The petitioner moved the State Government to re-instate him forthwith, but to no effect.
3.
Written statement on behalf of the respondents has been filed by Shri RP Dubey, Under Secretary to Government, Haryana, Industries Department.
The respondents pleaded that the Governor of Haryana had framed the Business of the Haryana Government (Allocation) Rules, 1966 and according to the said Rules, sanction for prosecution of the petitioner has to be granted by the Secretary Incharge, Administration of Justice Department.
It was admitted that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi had discharged the petitioner on technical ground that since the offence against the petitioner in truth and substance was covered by the Import and Export Act, 1947 read with Section 10(d) of the Import Trade Control Order, 1955, the complaint should have been filed by the authorised person as required by Section 6 of the aforesaid Act and since the same was not filed by a competent person, no charge could be framed against the petitioner.
It is further averred that against the order of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, revision petition had been filed in the Delhi Court and that Court is seized of the same.
4.
At the time of hearing of the petition, none of the parties to the list could bring to my notice the result of the revision petition allegedly filed against the order of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi dated December 8, 1979.
They also could not bring to my notice whether any criminal proceedings are pending against the petitioner in any Court.
Under these circumstances, the only inference which can be drawn is that the order of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi dated December 8, 1979 discharging the petitioner has not been set aside by any higher Court.
5.
C.W.P.
No. 2221 of 1980 came up for hearing before the motion Bench on October 31, 1980 and the following order was passed :-  "Notice.
As the petitioner is retiring from Government service today, afternoon, on attaining the age of superannuation, he shall be fictionally deemed to be reinstated and be retired as such.
He shall be paid a sum equal to the subsistence allowance or pension whichever is less till the decision of the petition.
These orders are subject to the result of this petition.
It is not disputed that the said order was complied with.
The petitioners have retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
Despite the order of discharge, they have suffered agony during all this period.
It will meet the ends of justice if a direction is issued to treat the petitioners being in service after the order of discharge passed by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi dated December 8, 1979, till their superannuation.
I order accordingly.
They will be entitled to all the consequential benefits and their pension will be fixed accordingly.
6.
Resultantly, the petitions are allowed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.