RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was working as a Helper in the Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation, Chandigarh (in short MARKFED).
On 30th June, 1982, the General Manager of the MARKFED at Kapurthala issued an order that in the interest of work, the petitioner was being transferred and posted as Helper with SMF & QCI to work as a Typist.
It was further mentioned in the order that the petitioner would not be entitled for any extra remuneration.
On 4th September, 1984, an order was issued that Sarvshri Gurbax Singh and Kuldip Singh (Petitioner) Helpers, who were working in the office were being designated as Clerks.
It was further mentioned in the order that they will not be entitled for any extra remuneration and they will draw their salary in their own pay scales.
By another order dated 27th September, 1985, it was ordered that the petitioner would work as a Typist in common pool under the supervision of the Superintendent.
He was to be relieved by the Senior Accounts Officer after completion of typing work of balance-sheets.
Still by another order, dated 22nd October, 1983, Shri Kuldip Singh, petitioner, who was working as a Typist in the common pool, was asked to work as Typist-cum-Clerk in Engineering Stores under the overall control of Stores Officer.
Vide order dated 12th February, 1985, Shri Gurbax Singh, who was also working as a Helper and subsequently designated as Clerk, was given the pay scale of Rs. 510-800.
However, the petitioner was not granted the pay scale of Rs. 510-800, which was the pay scale of a Clerk/Typist.
The petitioner demanded `equal pay for equal work' from the respondent.
However, the respondent did not accede to the petitioner's request.
By an order dated 16th January, 1987 the order dated 4th September, 1984, by which the petitioner and one Shri Gurbax Singh had been designated as Clerks was withdrawn qua the petitioner and he was to be known as Helper.
This order has been attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-8.
2.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition for quashing order, Annexure P-8, and -further directing the respondent to release the pay to the petitioner in the scale of Rs. 510-800, which was the pay scale of a Clerk/Typist.
The Motion Bench, while admitting the writ petition, had stayed the operation of the impugned order.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that a written request had been made by the petitioner on 26th 1 June, 1982 that he was suffering from gout and due to pain in the joints, he could not undertake heavy job and requested for assigning type-writing work in the office.
According to the respondent, it was in consideration of his request that the petitioner was asked to work as a Typist, but it was made clear in the order dated 30th June, 1982 that he would not get any extra remuneration.
It has further been mentioned that even while designating the petitioner and Shri Gurbax Singh as Clerk it was specifically mentioned in that order that they will not be entitled to any extra remuneration.
The petitioner in fact before the issuance of order dated 4th September, 1984 designating him as a Clerk had again made a written request on 10th August, 1983 that he was physically handicapped and was unable to perform the duties of an arduous nature, and, therefore, he may be put on typing duty in the office.
It has further been highlighted in the written statement that the petitioner has been enjoying the benefits attached to the post of Helper, such as summer uniforms, winter uniforms, woollen jersey, shoes, socks, washing allowance etc., which are not admissible to Clerks/Typists.
As far as the giving of the pay scale of Clerks of Shri Gurbax Singh is concerned, it has been averred that MARKFED had decided to fill 20% vacancies of Clerks by promotion from amongst the Class IV employees and Gurbax Singh being the senior-most Class IV employee, was promoted to the post of Clerk, and that is why he was given the pay scale of a Clerk.
Only one post of Clerk came to the quota of Class IV employees to be filled by promotion.
4.
Before adverting to the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner, I may observe here that the petitioner had filed a contempt petition in this Court, being C.O.C.P.
No. 781 of 1989, against the Managing Director of the MARKFED on the allegation that the stay order granted by the Motion Bench in the writ petition had been violated.
The contempt petition was dismissed on 3rd November, 1989, and it was held by the learned Judge that the claim of the petitioner for payment of salary as a Clerk-cum-Typist was not at all justified.
It will be appropriate to reproduce the entire order, by which the contempt petition, was dismissed :-  "The petitioner was working as a Clerk-cum-Typist with the respondent.
A communication dated 16/1711987 was issued to the following effect :-  The orders issued under endorsement No. KPT/84/1674-76 dated 491984 in respect of hereby withdrawn the Shri Kuldip Singh are and he will be known as Helper, instead of Clerk."
This order was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 1030 of 1987 and the Motion Bench stayed the operation of that order.
5.
The petitioner made a request to the respondent to grant him the pay of a Clerk-cum-Typist since his reversion from the post of Clerk to Helper was stayed by this Court.
The respondent in his reply stated that the petitioner was working as a Helper in Markfed Plant, Kapurthala.
He made a request to the General Manager of the plant that he was suffering from gout and due to pains he could not undertake heavy jobs and requested for assigning him typewriting job.
His request was acceded to, but the petitioner was only paid the remuneration of a Helper.
He was employed as a Helper and was assigned the duty of type-writing work on compassionate ground and during the period, he continued to work as a Clerk-cum-Typist he was paid the remuneration of a Helper.
The explanation furnished by the respondent clearly established that the petitioner has tried to over-reach this court.
He was employed as a Helper, but was assigned the duties of a Clerk-cum-Typist on his request and when he was working against the latter post, he was paid the salary of a Helper.
Under these circumstances, the claim of the petitioner for payment of salary as clerk-cum-typist was not at all justified.
The respondent has not violated the directions issued by this court.
The rule is discharged."
6.
The petitioner also moved a Civil Misc.
Application No. 7687 of 1990, with a prayer that the petitioner be allowed the scale of a Clerk till the decision of the writ petition.
The said Misc. application was also dismissed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in 331991 in view of the orders in the contempt petition.
7.
Faced with this situation that a finding has already been recorded in the contempt petition that the petitioner was not entitled to the pay scale of Clerk-cum-Typist, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the subject matter in the writ petition was not in issue before the learned Judge hearing the contempt petition, nor any finding recorded in the contempt petition is binding in a writ petition.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with the learned counsel.
An issue was raised before the learned Judge hearing the contempt petition, as will be clear from the order reproduced above, as to whether the petitioner was, entitled to the pay scale of a Clerk/Typist and - on facts it was held that the petitioner was not entitled.
8.
Otherwise also, I find no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner that doctrine of `equal pay for equal work' would apply in the present case.
No doubt, the petitioner was asked to discharge the duties of a Clerk-cum-Typist, but as has been observed above, the petitioner was not asked by the respondent on its volition to work as a Clerk-cum-Typist.
He was asked to discharge the duties of Clerk-cum-Typist on wholly compassionate grounds when a request was made by the petitioner himself that he be assigned the duties of Clerk-cum-Typist, as he was an handicapped man and could not discharge the arduous nature of duties of a Helper.
If his request was being acceded to, the respondent could legitimately put a condition that in spite of the fact that the petitioner would discharge the duties of a Clerk-cum-Typist, he will still get the pay of a Helper.
9.
I also do not find any force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that there is discrimination between him and one Gurbax Singh.
It has been explained by the respondent that Gurbax Singh being the senior- most Class IV employee, was promoted to the post of a Clerk-cum-Typist on the basis of seniority as there was only one post in that quota.
The petitioner would also be considered for promotion as and when his turn comes.
10.
For the forgoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.