Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein was promoted to the Post of Head of the Department in the year 1973.
He was reverted vide order dated February 16, 1985.
Aggrieved by this order of reversion, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner passed his Degree Examination in Mechanical Engineering in the year 1964.
He was appointed as a Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering on ad hoc basis in August, 1964.
On the receipt of recommendations of the Public Service Commission his services were regularised on May 11, 1965.
On November 18, 1971, the petitioner was promoted as Senior Lecturer in Automobile Engineering.
It is claimed that the petitioner in fact performed the duties of the post of Head of the Department of Automobile Engineering till November 15, 1973 when in pursuance to an order dated September 13, 1973 he took over as head of the Department of Mechanical Engineering on November 16, 1973.
The petitioner was allowed to cross the efficiency bar in the pay scale of 750-50-1000/50-1300 as Head of the Department vide order dated July 19, 1982.
With periodic approval of the Commission the petitioner continued to work as Head of the Department of Mechanical Engineer.
On February 16, 1985 the Government ordered his reversion to the post of Lecturer.
Thereafter, on July 17, 1987, the petitioner was promoted from the post of Lecturer to that of a Senior Lecturer and ultimately on November 19, 1987 he was promoted as Head of the Department of Mechanical Engineering.
The petitioner submitted some representations against the order of his reversion in the year 1988 and vide order dated August 12, 1988 the Government rejected the petitioner's representation against the order of his reversion.
Aggrieved by the action of the Government in reverting him from the post of Head of the Department to that of Lecturer and in not event fixing his pay correctly the petitioner has approached this court through the present Writ Petition.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
Preliminary objections regarding maintainability of the Writ Petition on account of delay and laches as also the absence of necessary parties have been raised.
On merits, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been promoted purely on ad hoc basis as the original incumbent of the post of head of the Department Mr. Ajmer Singh had proceeded on deputation to the Central Polytechnic, Chandigarh.
The vacancy according to the respondent was of temporary nature and since the Public Service Commission refused to grant further extension to the ad hoc promotion of the petitioner, he was ordered to be reverted on February 16, 1985.
It is averred that a committee had been constituted to make suggestions regarding the qualification and pattern of staff in the various Polytechnics.
After the receipt of the recommendations of the Committee a draft of the rules had been prepared.
Those rules were notified on September 26, 1986.
Under these rules the post of Head of the Department could be filled up by promotion from amongst the Senior Lecturers in the particular discipline.
It was provided that a person to be eligible should have worked for 12 years as Lecturer out of which two years should have been in the capacity of a Senior Lecturer.
On this premises, it is maintained that the petitioner was not even eligible at the relevant time to continue as Head of the Department.
On the presumption, the order of reversion is sought to be sustained.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been pointed out that Mr. Ajmer Singh had come back from deputation in the year 1979 and was posted as a Training and Placement Officer.
Accordingly, it is maintained that a clear vacancy was available and the plea raised on behalf of the department that the petitioner had been promoted only on temporary basis cannot be sustained.
It has been further averred that three persons junior to the petitioner viz. GBS Narang, NL Singla and Piara Singh were promoted as Heads of Departments in the year 1982.
Accordingly, it is claimed that vacancies were actually available and the reversion of the petitioner in the year 1985 was wholly unjustified.
With reference to the rules, it has been pointed out that the rules could have only prospective operation and could not be invoked to justify the petitioner's reversion.
With regard to the preliminary objection regarding delay, the petitioner has averred that the order of his reversion being void, there is no limitation for challenging and impugning the said order.
It has been further pointed out that Mr. ID Bansal, who had been promoted like the petitioner on ad hoc basis in the year 1975 is being considered by the department to be a regular Head of the Department.
In any case, the petitioner claims that Mr. Bansal was never reverted even after the coming into force of the 1986 Rules.
On these premises it is claimed that the action is wholly arbitrary.
5.
Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner submits that the impugned order of reverion was passed after the petitioner had worked as Head of the Department for almost 12 years and had even crossed the efficiency bar in that capacity.
He submits that in the peculiar circumstances of the case and more so, when the order carried very serious civil consequences, the respondents were bound to follow the principle of natural justice and to give him an opportunity to show-cause against the impugned action.
It is further contended that the order suffered from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as various persons junior to the petitioner had been allowed to continue as Heads of Departments while the petitioner was singled out for reversion.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, Advocate, appearing for the respondents contends that the petition suffers from delay and laches.
He further submits that accepting the petitioner's claim with regard to seniority would adversely effect the interest of various persons working in the department and no relief can be given to him in their absence.
On merits, it is contended that the petitioner had been promoted on purely ad hoc basis and he had no right to continue on the post of Head of the Department.
Accordingly, the principles of natural justice are not even remotely attracted.
7.
Undisputedly, the petitioner had been reverted on February 16, 1985.
He does not claim to have even filed a representation prior to the year 1988.
On the petitioner's own showing the first representation was submitted on March 22, 1988.
A copy of this representation is Annexure P3.
It is addressed to the Director Technical Education, Haryana.
In this representation, no challenge has been made to the order of reversion.
Only a claim in respect of the benefits of the service which had been rendered by the petitioner as head of the department, towards fixation of pay and seniority has been made.
This representation in my view, is not at all relevant for considering the question of delay in respect of the impugned order.
The petitioner was reverted by the State Government.
The Director could not have revoked the order of the State Government.
In any event, no challenge to the order of reversion has been made.
Consequently, this representation cannot be used to explain the delay.
8.
The next representation is dated April 28, 1988.
This is addressed to the State Government.
Even in this representation, the claim of the petitioner is with regard to the seniority etc.
Even if it is presumed to be a challenge to the order of reversion, it was submitted more than three years and two months after the order of reversion had been passed.
Accordingly, it is apparent that the petitioner did not make any challenge to his reversion for more than three years.
The representation was in fact submitted after the period of limitation for filing a suit had expired.
The representation of the petitioner was rejected vide order dated August 12, 1988.
Even if it is presumed that this order was passed on the representation dated April 28, 1988, it did not furnish any fresh cause of action of the petitioner.
It only declined his claim made in the representation dated April 28, 1988.
On an examination of the sequence of the events, I am satisfied that the petitioner did not make any challenge to the order of reversion for the period of three years and two months.
That being so prima facie even if a suit had been filed for challenging the order of reversion at the time the petitioner filed this Writ Petition i.e. on October 23, 1989, it would have been barred by Limitation.
In such a situation, it would not be proper for me to exercise jurisdiction under Article 266 of the Constitution of India.
In my view the Writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay alone.
9.
Mr. Patwalia submits on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Ramchandera Shankar Deodhar and others v. The State of Maharashtra and others, 1974(1) SLR 470 that a court has to examine the facts and circumstances of each case and in view of the peculiar facts of this case the equitable relief under Article 26 of the Constitution of India, should not be declined on the ground of delay alone.
10.
The observations in Deodhar's case were made in the peculiar context.
The validity of a Rule and the procedure followed by the Govt. for promotion fell for consideration.
In that context it was observed that the question of delay has to be examined on the facts of each case.
A citizen shall challenge the validity of a Rule etc. only when it affects him.
Such is not the position here.
In this case, the petitioner did not even file a representation for more than 3 years against the order of reversion.
In view of this factual position and keeping in view the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh and another v. Bhailal Bhai and others, AIR 1965 SC 1006, I am satisfied that a prima facie triable issue of limitation arises in this case.
Accordingly, on the ground of delay alone, I am satisfied that the petition has to be dismissed.
11.
Furthermore, the petitioner was admittedly promoted on ad hoc basis in the year 1973 and periodical extensions to this ad hoc appointment were given with the approval of the commission.
It appears that the govt. was not finalising the policy with regard to qualification etc. for filling up the posts on regular basis.
Presumably to compel the Government, to do the needful, the commission refused to grant extension in this case and as a result the Government had to order the reversion of the petitioner.
So far as the govt. is concerned, it made efforts to allow the petitioner to continue on ad hoc basis.
It is only when the commission refused to permit the Govt. to do so that the order of reversion was passed.
Prima facie, I find no infirmity in the order.
12.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the action sufers from the vice of discrimination and is also violative of principle of natural justice.
So far as the charge of discrimination is concerned, it is sought to be supported by the fact that various other persons who had been promoted as Head of the Department on ad hoc basis in the year 1982, were allowed to continue while the petitioner alone had been singled out for reversion.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, Advocate, on instructions from the departmental representative Mr. Baljit Singh, (Section Officer, from the office of Directorate of Technical Education) states that three persons mentioned by the petitioner in his replication had been reverted alongwith him in the year 1985.
He further submits that they were promoted thereafter alongwith the petitioner in the year 1987.
This factual position is not disputed by Mr. Paramjit Singh Patwalia, Advocate.
Accordingly the charge of discrimination on the basis of case of Narang, Singla and Piara Singh etc. cannot be sustained.
As far as the case of Mr. Bansal is concerned Mr. Jaswant Singh points out that the appointment of Mr. Bansal as Head of the Department had been regularised by the Govt. vide order dated June 4, 1982 in the department of Electrical Engineering.
This order has neither been challenged nor is a part of this petition.
If the petitioner was aggrieved by the appointment of Mr. ID Bansal, he had to be impleaded as a respondent.
In any event Mr. Bansal has been appointed as Head of the Department of Electrical Engineering.
Admittedly, there is no inter se seniority between the lecturers of the two departments viz.
Mechanical Engineering and Electrical Engineering for appointment of the post of Head of Department.
In the circumstances neither in fact nor in law, the petitioner can have any grievance against Mr. Bansal's appointment as Head of the Department.
13.
As far as the plea of violation of principle of natural justice, I have found that the appointment of the petitioner was on purely ad hoc basis.
The mere fact that the Government allowed him to continue for a number of years, is not itself sufficient to confer any right on him to be treated as a regular employee.
In any event, the ad hoc appointment had continued as the rules etc. had not been finalised.
The commission having refused to grant any further permission for extension, Govt. had to order the reversion of the petitioner.
In such a situation, I am not satisfied that the principles of natural justice can be said to have been violated.
14.
The petitioner submits that he was not given the benefits of his service as Head of the Department while fixing his pay at the time of his promotion in 1987.
The factual position is not clear from the pleadings of the parties.
However, I am of the opinion that period of service on ad hoc basis counts for grant of increments.
With this principle in view, the Govt. should refix the petitioner's pay in the revised pay scale of the post of the Head of the Department.
Accordingly, the period of service rendered by the petitioner as Head of the Department from 1973 to 1985 deserves to be taken into consideration while fixing his pay.
The Government should do the needful within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
If it is found that the petitioner's pay has not been fixed in accordance with the Rules, the arrears etc. shall be released to him within three months thereafter.
15.
Subject to the above, I find no merit in this petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.