Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who joined the Indian Navy on August 10, 1968 and was released on August 31, 1978, claims that he has not been granted the requisite amount of pension as admissible under the rules.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
After his recruitment in the Indian Navy on August 10, 1968 the petitioner was operated upon for complicated cataract in the year 1977.
He was released on August 31, 1978.
Vide letter dated July 18, 1983, the petitioner's claim for the grant of disability pension was declined on the ground that the disability was not attributable to military service.
The petitioner filed an appeal against this order on November 8, 1983.
Having failed to hear anything, he submitted a representation on February 11, 1984 expressing his willingness to rejoin the Navy.
On October 19, 1984, it was decided that the disability on account of which the petitioner "was released from service should be regarded as aggravated by Naval Service."
As a result vide orders dated December 10, 1984, the authorities decided to get the petitioner medically examined.
It took nearly two years and vide letter dated January 30, 1987, the petitioner was allowed the payment of disability pension from August 28, 1980 to February 11, 1987.
The petitioner was still not satisfied.
He claimed for the enhancement of pension on account of the period of service rendered by him in the Indian Army.
He submitted a representation dated June 16, 1987.
While the grant of disability pension was extended for a period of another ten years vide orders dated October 19, 1987, the claim for enhancement of pension was declined.
Initially, it appears that the petitioner filed a Civil suit which was later on withdrawn with liberty to file a fresh one on the same cause of action.
Accordingly the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
It is claimed that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of enhanced pension.
3.
A written statement has been field on behalf of the respondents.
It has been stated by way of preliminary objection that the cause of action, if any, had arisen in Bombay and that the writ petition is not competent before this Court.
It has also been averred that the petitioner's claim is highly belated.
It has been stated that "the petitioner was discharged from service on August 31, 1988 and has moved this Hon'ble Court in the year 1991."
On merits, it is pointed out that on April 18, 1977, the petitioner had himself stated that he was unwilling to sign for further service.
Accordingly, it is maintained that the petitioner was never invalided out of service.
On the premises, it is averred that the petitioner is no entitled to the grant of pension on account of the period of service during which he remained with the Indian Army.
4.
I have heard Mr. BS Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. HS Giani for the respondents.
Mr. Sehgal submits that the grant of pension in Indian Navy is governed by the Navy (Pension) Regulations, 1964.
The relevant regulations and the Rule provide as under :-  "101.
Conditions for the grant of disability pension :-  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to a person who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by service and is assessed at twenty per cent or over.
Explanation (1).
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by service shall be determined in accordance with the rules contained in Appendix V to these regulations.
Explanation (2).
Service rendered in aid of the civil power shall be treated as service in the Indian Navy for the purpose of this regulation."
"Entitlement Rules  Rule 2.
Invalidment from service is a necessary condition for the grant of disability pension.
An individual who at the time of his release under the Release Regulations is in a lower medical category than that which he was recruited will be treated as invalided from service."
A perusal of the above regulation shows that a disability pension is admissible to a person who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributed to or aggravated by the service conditions.
It is further provided that the disability should be assessed at 20 per cent or above.
The question as to whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by service has to be determined in accordance with the provisions contained in Appendix V Rule 2 provides that invalidment from service is a necessary condition for the grant of disability pension.
It is further postulated that an individual who at the time of release is in a medical category lower than that in which he was recruited "will be treated as invalided from service."
It is not disputed that the petitioner's medical category was assessed as 'BEE' at the time of his discharge and that this was lower than his condition at the time of his initial recruitment.
Accordingly, the petitioner's case is squarely covered by the above provision.
The petitioner having been placed in a lower medical category is deemed to have been invalided from service.
Further the amount of pension has to be computed in accordance with Regulation 107.
This regulation provides as under :-  "107.
Amount of disability pension :-  In case where the accepted degree of disablement is twenty per cent or over, the monthly rates of disability pension consisting of service and disability elements, shall be as follows, namely :-  (1) Service element.
Service pension admissible in accordance with his rank and group last held and length of service.
(a) Where the individual has rendered sufficient service to qualify for a service pension.
(i) If the disability was sustained while on flying or parachute jumping duty in a service aircraft or while being carried on duty in a service aircraft under proper authority, the minimum service pension appropriate to his rank and group.
(b) Where the individual has not rendered sufficient service to qualify for service pension., (ii) In all other cases, that proportion of the minimum service pension appropriate to the individual's rank and group which the number of his completed years of qualifying service bears to fifteen but in no case less than two-thirds of the minimum service pension.
Provided that for the purpose of this clause, service rendered before the age of seventeen years shall be treated as qualifying service.
Explanation :- The service element shall be assessed -  (i) In the case of ordinary seaman or equivalent, on the basis of the minimum service pension laid down for able seaman or equivalent of the same group.
(ii) In the case of Artifices V Class on the basis of minimum service pension laid down for Leading Seaman of equivalent in Group B  (iii) In the case of Artificer Acting IV Class, on the basis of the minimum service pension laid downs for Group A  A perusal of the above regulation would show that in case where the accepted degree of disablement is 20 per cent or above the disability pension has to be determined by taking into consideration the service and disability elements, Admittedly, the service element has not been taken into consideration in the present case.
It is clear from the record that the petitioner had suffered a disability of 20 per cent.
No rule or regulation has been pointed out to show that the benefit of the service element was not admissible to the petitioner.
The only reason pointed out in the written statement is that the petitioner has not been invalided out of service but had himself refused to continue beyond the contract of his engagement.
This contention cannot be sustained in view of the provisions of the Regulation 107, as mentioned above.
Accordingly, the petitioner is entitled to the refixation of his disability pension by taking into consideration the service element as well.
The action of the respondents in declining his claim cannot be sustained.
5.
Before parting with the judgment, the preliminary objection regarding the territorial jurisdiction of this Court which has been raised by Mr. Giani has also to be taken into consideration.
A perusal of the record shows that all communications have been addressed to the petitioner at his address in district Sangrur.
His claim of pension has been declined by different orders which were conveyed to him at his residential address.
It is, thus, apparent that a part of the cause of action has accrued within the jurisdiction of this Court.
Still further the writ petition was filed and has been pending in this Court.
The respondent have appeared and filed their reply.
No useful purpose would be served by transferring the petition to Bombay at this stage.
It would result in more inconvenience and financial expense to both the parties.
I find no ground to transfer the petition only on the ground that the part of the cause of action had accused at Bombay.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to redetermine the petitioner's pension by taking into consideration the service element as well.
The needful shall be done within four months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The arrears of pension from the date of discharge shall also be paid to the petitioner.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.