RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner had joined as an Inspector in the Department of Food and Supplies, Punjab, on 11th June, 1977.
He was selected for appointment as a Tehsildar in the State of Punjab as a direct recruit and issued appointment letter on 30th June, 1986.
He was relieved from the Food and Supplies Department on 24th July, 1986 (AN) and Joined as Tehsildar on 25th July, 1986 (F.N.).
Vide order dated 17th May, 1990 (Annexure P.6), the petitioner was confirmed as a Tehsildar.
However, it was mentioned in the order that the exact date of confirmation would be notified in due course.
The petitioner in this case is staking his claim of being considered for nomination for appointment to the PCS (Executive Branch), which is governed by the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules.
1976 (hereinafter called the Rules).
The claim of the petitioner has been denied by the respondents primarily on the ground that according to the amended Rule 9(5) of the Rules, which amendment was brought on 4th April, 1990, the petitioner is not eligible for being considered for nomination.
2.
Rule 7 of the Rules, lays down that appointment to the Service is to be made from amongst the accepted candidates whose names have been duly entered in accordance with the Rules in the registers of accepted candidates to be maintained under the Rules.
Various Registers are maintained under the Rules, in which are entered the names of candidates from various categories from which the 4 appointments are made to the PCS (Executive Branch).
For ready refer Rule 8 of the Rules, for maintaining various registers, is quoted below :  "Registers to be maintained.
Rule 8.
The following Registers of accepted candidates shall be maintained by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, Namely :  (i) Register A-I in which shall be entered the names of Tehsildars and Naib-Tehsildars accepted as candidates; (ii) Register A-II in which shall be entered the names of temporary members of class II and members of class III service serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab and holding ministerial appointment accepted as candidates; (iii) Register A-III in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates from amongst Excise & Taxation Officers and District Development and Panchayat Officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab; (iv) Register B in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates as a result of (the main competitive examination) and (v) Register C in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates from amongst officers or officials serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab who are not covered by any of the categories of officers or officials hereinbefore mentioned in this Rule."
3-4.
The petitioner is staking his claim to be brought on Register A-1, for which procedure is envisaged by Rule 9 of the Rules, which reads as follows :  "Selection of Candidates for Register A-I.
Rule 9.
- (1) Each Deputy Commissioner shall, at such time in a year as the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, may by general or special order require, recommend to the Commissioner of the Division the name of one Tehsildar or Naib-Tehsildar posted in his District whom he considers most suitable for appointment to the service.
(2) The Commissioner of a Division shall, forward the names recommended by the Deputy Commissioners under Sub-rule (1) to the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, and may, recommend to him the names of one or more persons from amongst the Tehsildars or Naib-Tehsildars posted in the District under his charge, considered suitable by him for appointment to the service.
(3) The Financial Commissioner, Revenue shall consider the names of persons recommended by the Deputy Commissioners and the Commissioners and prepare a list, from amongst such persons, of candidates considered suitable by him for appointment to the Service and may include the names of any other Tehsildar and Naib Tehsildars considered suitable by him in such list : Provided that the list prepared by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue shall not contain names exceeding twice the number of candidates to be brought on Register A-I  (4) The list prepared under Sub-Rule (3) shall be submitted by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue to the Chief Minister through the Revenue Minister each of whom may add any name to the list from amongst Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars considered suitable by them for appointment to the service and the list so prepared shall be treated as the final list : Provided that during the operation of a proclamation issued under clause (1) of Article 356 of the Constitution of India in the State, the list prepared under sub-Rule (3) shall be submitted by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue to the Governor who may add any name to the list from amongst Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars considered suitable by him for appointment to the Service and the list so prepared shall be treated as the final list.
(5) The name of a person shall not be included in the final fist unless he  (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed ten years continuous service under the Government; (b) was under the age of 45 years on the first day of November immediately preceding the date of submission of names by the nominating authorities; and (c) is a graduate of a recognised University.
(6) Each year at such time as the Government may require, the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, shall submit to the Government the nomination rolls in Form I of persons borne on the final list prepared under sub-rule (4).
(7) The nomination rolls submitted under sub rule (6) along with the service record of the candidates shall be forwarded by the Government to the Commission which shall consider the merits of each candidate and recommend the name of the persons considered suitable or appointment to the Service duly arranged in the order of merit (8) The names of persons recommended by the Commission under sub-rule (7), shall be entered in Register A-I, in the order in which they are commended by the Commission."
5.
Rule 18 of the Rules lays down the rotation in which the appointments are to be made in PCS (Executive Branch) from various categories envisaged under Rule 8.
On 4th April, 1990, Rule 9(5)(a) was amended and for ready reference, the unmended and amended Rule 9(5)(a) of the Rules is reproduced below :  "Original Rule 9(5) of 1976 rules.
Amended Rule 9(5).
The name of a person shall not be included in the final list unless he - In the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class-I) Service Rules, 1976 in Rule 9 in Sub-Rule 5, for clause (a) the following clause shall be substituted namely :- (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed ten years continuous service under the Govt. (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed eight years' service as Tehsildar or ten years' service as Naib Tehsildar or ten years service as tehsildar and Naib Tehsildar taken together."
6.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, one more fact which is relevant, may be noticed.
Vide order dated 8th June, 1988 (Annexure P.8) sanction was accorded to the fixation of the cadre of the Punjab Civil Service, (Executive Branch) for the period 1st March, 1986 to 28th February, 1989 and in all the cadre strength was fixed at 231.
The cadre was revised vide order dated 13th August, 1990 (Annexure P.9) and the above strength of the cadre was increased to 281 with effect from 1st March, 1989, which has been made effective till 28th February, 1992.
Out of the total strength of 281, the share of the category of Register A-1 comes to 9 posts.
The process for recommending names for being brought on Register A-1 started somewhere in January, 1991, and, as observed above, the petitioner has been held to be ineligible in view of the amendment to Rule 9(5)(a) brought on 4th April, 1990, inasmuch as he does not have 8 years' service as Tehsildar or 10 years' service as Naib-Tehsildar or 10 years' service as Tehsildar and Naib-Tehsildar taken together.
7.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that admittedly vacancies against which the petitioner is staking his claim arose with effect from 1st March, 1989, and, therefore, according to him, the amended Rule 9(5)(a) of the Rules cannot be made applicable for consideration for appointment against these vacancies.
Further, according to the learned counsel, there was no other impediment for the petitioner's consideration, inasmuch as he had 10 years continuous service under the Government and was below the age of 45 years and is a Graduate of a recognised university which are the eligibility conditions envisaged, under Rule 9(5)(a), (b) and (c), respectively.
In support of his contentions, he relied upon a Supreme Court judgment in, VV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852 and a Single Bench judgment of this Court in Uttam Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(1) S.L.R.
644.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that the appointment from Register A-1 to the PCS (Executive Branch) is by way of direct recruitment, and, consequently, Rangaih's case (supra) has no applicability as that was a case of promotion.
Further, it was submitted that the date of the order of confirmation of the petitioner was 17th May, 1990, which was after the Rule had been amended on 4th April, 1990, and the petitioner having attained the eligibility, as far as confirmation is concerned, after the amendment of the Rules, the amended Rules would be applicable.
It was also contented that the petitioner's Government service in the department of Food and Supplies could not be taken into consideration for computing 10 years' service even under rule 9(5)(a) as it stood prior to amendment.
8.
Before coming to the main argument, let me clear the decks by dealing with the last two arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents.
Admittedly, the date of the order of confirmation prior to the date when the process for consideration started, which was in January, 1991.
Otherwise also, the petitioner was a direct recruit to the post of Tehsildar, and according to Rule 13 of the Punjab Tehsildars' (Class II) Service Rules, 1984, the maximum period of probation is three years.
The petitioner would be deemed to be confirmed with effect from 24th July, 1989 when he completed the maximum period of probation.
Reference in this behalf be made to a Supreme Court judgment in Om Parkash Maurya v. UP.
Co-operative Sugar Factories Federation, Lucknow and others, 1986(2) S.L.
R. 651, which lays down that after the expiry of maximum period of probation the employee shall be deemed to have been confirmed.
Petitioner's counsel also cited a judgment of this Court in Narinder Singh Baath v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) RSJ 344, in which exactly a similar point was decided in favour of the petitioner.
So the petitioner would be deemed to be a confirmed hand.
On top of this it may also be noticed that the order of confirmation (Annexure P.6) also says that the date of confirmation is yet to be notified.
That being the position on fact and law, the petitioner would be deemed to be confirmed for the purpose of his consideration for being brought on Register A-1.
9.
As far as the other argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is concerned that even if the amended Rule is not applicable, then also under the unamended Rule 9(5)(a), the petitioner's services rendered in the Food and Supplies Department could not be considered for computing 10 years' Government service.
I do not find any merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the respondents.
Rule 9(5)(a) of the Rules (unamended) envisages 10 years' continuous service under the Government.
It is not envisaged by the Rules that the Government service has to be in the Revenue Department as Tehsildar or Naib Tehsildar.
(In fact this requirement has been introduced by the amendment of 4th April, 1990).
This point had in fact, come up for consideration in Narinder Singh Baath's case (supra) also, where similar contention of the respondent-State was negatived and it was held that the entire Government service, though it may be in different departments, has to be taken into consideration 'for reckoning 10 years' service under the Government with only rider that the service has to be continuous.
Admittedly, in the present case, the service as Inspector, Food and Supplies and as Tehsildar is continuous.
That being so, the petitioner is held to be eligible as far as his condition of having 10 years' service is concerned.
10.
Now coming to the main point raised by the respective counsel for the parties.
Rule 2(c) of the rules defines "direct appointment" : According to it, 'direct appointment' means, an appointment made otherwise than by promotion or by transfer of an official already in service of the Government of India or of a State Government.
Rule 12 of the Rules deals with the persons to be recruited from the open market through a competitive examination.
Dealing with the argument whether the appointment through Register A-1 to the PCS (Executive Branch) is a direct recruitment or is an appointment by promotion, the learned Single Judge in Uttam Singh's case (supra) observed as under :-  "To overcome this impregnable wall of judicial precedent, what is submitted by Mr. Kuldip Singh, Senior Advocate for respondent No. 3, was that it was not a case of promotion at all and was rather a case of direct recruitment to the service.
I, however, see no merit in this stand of the respondent, neither this is the case of the State.
Clause (c) of Rule 2 which has been reproduced above, defines 'direct appointment'.
It lays down that it means an appointment made otherwise than by promotion or by transfer of an official already in the service of the Government of India or a State Government.
Persons in the service of the State Government like the petitioner and respondent No. 3 are appointed to the service, i.e. Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) by way of promotion based on selection.
It is only through Register `B' that persons are recruited by way of direct appointment.
As per Clause (4) of Rule 8 reproduced above, their names are entered in Register `B' as a result of a competitive examination."
11.
I am in respectful agreement with the observations of the learned Single Judge in Uttam Singh's case (supra) that appointment from Register A-I is not a direct recruitment, which is separately dealt with under Rule 8(4) read with Rule 12 of the Rules.
Consequently, it can be held that appointment from Register A-1 is a sort of promotion by nomination.
In this view of the matter, I need not go into the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents as to whether Rangaiah's case (supra) is applicable in the case of promotion only and not in the case of direct recruitment.
In Rangaiah's case (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court that the eligibility of a candidate for the purpose of promotion has to be seen at the time when the vacancy for such a candidate occurred in accordance with the rules then in existence and not the one which may be in force at the time the vacancy is sought to be filled.
In Uttam Singh's case (supra), the learned Single Judge on the basis of the judgment in Rangaiah's case (supra) came to the conclusion that the eligibility had to be seen according to the Rules when the vacancy had occurred.
There is no dispute on facts that the vacancy for which the petitioner's case had to be considered had come into existence prior to 4th April, 1990, when the Rules had been amended.
In this view of the matter the petitioner's case could not be ignored from consideration for being brought on Register A-1 under the Rules on the ground that he was ineligible in view of the amendment in the Rules brought with effect from 4th April, 1990.
12.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is held eligible for consideration for being brought on Register A-1 of the Rules.
13.
I am told that the interviews by the Punjab Public Service Commission under Rule 9(7) of the Rules, are commencing from 18th December, 1991.
It has further been brought to my notice that in fact, the petitioner had been called for interview by the Financial Commissioner under Rule 9(3), but later on that was cancelled because the petitioner was held to be ineligible.
Since the petitioner had been called for interview by the Financial Commissioner, so it can be taken that either his name had been recommended by the Deputy Commissioner under Rule 9(1) and Rule 9(2) of the Rules or the Financial Commissioner himself wanted to see if the petitioner was suitable for being brought on Register A-1 under Rule 9(3) of the Rules.
Taking the above facts in view, Respondent No. 2 (Financial Commissioner, Revenue & Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Revenue), is directed to interview the petitioner and the petitioner is relegated back to the same position when he was called for interview by the Financial Commissioner and take all necessary steps by 15th December, 1991, so that the nomination rolls of the petitioner can reach the Commissioner before 18th December, 1991, on which date the interviews are to commence.
14.
A copy of this judgment, attested by my Reader, may be given to the counsel for the respondents, by tomorrow, for onward transmission to the concerned quarters for compliance.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.