Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This order will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 7839 and 7840 of 1991.
The facts as stated in C.W.P.
No. 7840 of 1991 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner retired as an Electrician on June 30, 1990.
The retirement benefits like provident fund, gratuity and encashment of earned leave having not been given to the petitioner, in spite of various representations he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that the petitioners has tried to conceal from the court that a huge amount of arrears of rent of the Municipal quarter which is in possession of the petitioner is due from him.
It has been claimed that the petitioner was liable to pay an amount of Rs. 9,550/- on account of arrears of rent upto August 31, 1991.
Since the petitioner had failed to vacate the Municipal quarter in his possession and pay the rent in respect thereof, the respondent claims that he is not entitled to the release of the retirement benefits.
The petitioner has filed a replication controverting the claim made on behalf of the respondent.
It is claimed that rent @ 2 per cent of the pay of petitioner in respect of the hut in possession of the petitioner was being illegally deducted by the Corporation.
According to the petitioner, the Corporation is not even the owner of this hut and the petition filed by him under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act before the Labour Court is still pending.
A number of documents have been produced in support of the claim made by the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik for the petitioner and Mr. AS Bakshi for the respondent.
Mr. Malik contends that the petitioner having retired from service is entitled to the release of the retirement benefits and the Corporation has no jurisdiction to withhold the payment on account of dispute regarding the arrears of rent as also the vacation of the quarter which is pending before the Labour Court.
On the other hand, Mr. Bakshi submits that the Corporation has the right to recover the arrears of rent and till the petitioner makes the requisite payment and vacates the quarter, he is not entitled to the payment of the provident fund, etc.  5.
I have examined the record of the case and the pleas raised by the learned counsel.
Admittedly, the petitioner has already retired from service and there is no rule which authorises the Corporation to withhold the payment of provident fund, gratuity and leave encashment.
An employee becomes entitled to the payment of amount of provident fund and other benefits as soon as he retires.
In the absence of a specific rule authorising the Corporation to withheld the payment, the action of the respondent is absolutely illegal and without jurisdiction.
Mr. Bakshi submits that he is entitled to claim set off as also to make a counter claim.
If the Corporation has any claim, like eviction of the petitioner from the quarter in his possession or the recovery of arrears of rent, it can resort to an appropriate remedy under the law.
However, it has not jurisdiction to withhold the payment on these grounds.
It may be added that I have reservations regarding the amount of money claimed by the Corporation an arrears of rent.
However, I desist from saying anything as the matter is stated to do pending before the Labour Court.
6.
It is well settled that an executive action must be supported by some legislative authority.
There is none in the present case.
Accordingly, the action of the respondent was wholly without jurisdiction.
7.
Accordingly, I allow these two petitions and direct the respondent to release the amount due to the petitioners within two months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the payment of interest @12% from October 1, 1990, till the date of actual payment.
They will also get the costs of these petitions which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/- each.
Petition allowed.