Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - In these six writ petitions viz. Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2580 and 3343 of 1984, 3975 of 1985, 5956 of 1986 and 6104 and 9397 of 1987, the retired employees of the various Municipal Committees in the State of Haryana have raised a claim for the payment of gratuity and pension.
For facility of reference, the facts as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 3343 of 1984 alone are being considered.
2.
The petitioner served the Municipal Committee Sadhaura as a Clerk from the year 1956 to November 30, 1982 when he retired on his having attained the age of superannuation.
The petitioner claims that he was entitled to the payment of his gratuity as well as pension.
The petitioner avers that after his retirement from service, he had submitted a representation dated November 30, 1983 (Annexure P-2) for the payment of gratuity.
This representation is stated to have been rejected by the Administrator vide his letter dated February 10, 1984, a copy of which has been appended with the writ petition as Annexure P-3.
In spite of his recommendation, the petitioner avers that the gratuity had not been paid to him.
3.
The petitioner also claims that in exercise of the powers conferred on it under sections 38 and 257 of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') the State of Haryana notified the rules called the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the `1982 Rules') on February 15, 1982.
The petitioner avers that by virtue of the provisions of the Act and the Rules, the employees serving in different Municipal Committees in the State of Haryana have become govt. employees and are entitled to be treated at par with the persons serving in different departments of the govt. On the basis of the provisions of Punjab Civil Services Rules and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner claims parity of treatment with the Govt. employees in the matter of payment of pension and gratuity.
4.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the State of Haryana and the Municipal Committee, Sadhaura.
The claim made by the petitioner has been contested.
It is averred that the persons serving in the Municipal Committees are not Govt. employees.
Their conditions of service are governed by the rules whereunder pension and gratuity are not admissible to the members of the Municipal service.
The rules provide for contributory provident fund.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It is, inter-alia, averred that the Govt. vide orders dated October 29, 1985 (Annexure P-7), January 20, 1986 (Annexure P-5) and September 12/15, 1986 (Annexure P-6), has categorically decided that gratuity should be paid to the retired Municipal employees in accordance with the provisions of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
It is averred that in view of these decisions, the Govt. is bound to pay the gratuity to the retired Municipal employees.
It is further claimed that under the provisions of the Act and the Rules, the State Government had an absolute control on Municipal employees.
The action in treating the Municipal employees differently from the other Govt. employees is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It is further claimed that the petitioner was a civil servant and as such could not be denied the various benefits like pension and gratuity.
5.
Arguments on behalf of the petitioner have been addressed by Mr. JC Verma, Senior Advocate and Mr. Subhash Ahuja.
Mr. S Mohunta, Advocate General, Haryana, appeared on behalf of the respondents.
Learned counsel for the petitioner have argued that so far gratuity is concerned, the commitment of the Govt. to pay it is borne out by orders and, therefore, the claim deserved to be allowed.
It has been further argued with reference to the provisions of the Act and the Rules, that the petitioner is an employee of the Govt. and is discharging the functions assigned to him by the Govt. That being so, it is contended that the petitioner has a right to parity of treatment with the Govt. employees and that the action of the respondents in treating him differently was ultra vires Articles 14 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, Mr. Mohunta appearing for the respondents has contended that under the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, governing the grant of pension etc., the employees paid from a local fund have been specifically excluded.
He has further pointed out that the employees working in Municipal Committees constitute a separate class from the Govt. employees and the benefit of provident fund had been specifically allowed to them.
Accordingly, the learned counsel argued that the petitioner could not maintain his claim for the payment of pension and gratuity.
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties we are of the view that so far as the payment of gratuity is concerned, the Govt. has already decided the matter.
A persual of letter dated October 29, 1985 shows that the Govt. informed the various district authorities in the State including the Administrators of all the Municipal Committees as under :-  "The Government has decided in principle that the Municipal employees should be given gratuity.
It is further observed that the amount of liability on this account shall be borne by the Municipal Committees from their own resources."
Thereafter, vide letter dated January 20, 1986 the Govt. conveyed its decision to the various authorities to the effect that "the gratuity should be paid to the retired Municipal employees as per provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972."
It was further clarified "that the Municipal employees who retired on September 16, 1972 thereafter, are entitled for the payment of gratuity."
Thereafter, vide letter dated September 12/15, 1986 the Govt. conveyed its decision to the effect that "gratuity will be payable to such Municipal employees under the provisions of the Act ibid w.e.f.
2311982 that is from the date the provision of the Gratuity Act, 1972, became applicable to the Municipal Committees.
Accordingly the employees of the Municipal Committees who retired on or after 2311982, i.e. the date from which the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 was made applicable viz. 2311982, by the Govt. of India, are entitled to be paid gratuity.
Prior to it, only those Municipal employees who have gone to the Courts/Labour Courts and have got verdict in their favour, are entitled to be paid gratuity."
The petitioner retired on November 30, 1982.
Even according to the latest decision of the Govt., viz. the decision dated September 12/15, 1986 (Annexure P-6) the petitioner is entitled to the payment of gratuity.
No decision to the contrary was pointed out during the arguments.
7.
Even otherwise we find that certain Municipal Committees have been paying gratuity to their employees.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made a reference to the decision of this Court in Shankar Dass Makkar v. The State of Haryana and another, 1988(3) SLR 495 to submit that the claim for gratuity has already been allowed in a number of cases by this Court.
A perusal of the judgment shows that the Division Bench of this Court had upheld the claim for payment of gratuity in Civil Writ Petition No. 1416 of 1984 (Moti Ram v. Municipal Committee, Ambala) decided on August 16, 1984.
Following this and various other decisions DV Sehgal, J had directed the payment of gratuity to various petitioners along with interest @ 10% per annum in Civil Writ Petition No. 1646 of 1985 (Harbans Lal etc. v. State of Haryana and another) decided on February 18, 1986.
It thus appears that this Court has consistently taken the view that the employees of the Municipal Committee are entitled to payment of gratuity on retirement.
Following these decisions, we hold that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of gratuity on his retirement along with the interest at the rate of 10% per annum as allowed by this Court earlier.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the employees of the Municipal Committees who had become members of the various Municipal services were also entitled to the payment of pension.
He referred to the various provisions of the Act and the Rules to contend that the employees of the Municipal Committees were civil servants.
The provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules are applicable to them and consequently, the Govt. was bound to pay pension to the petitioner.
9.
For the purpose of the case, we are assuming that the Govt. has complete control over the Municipal employees.
On this assumption, we proceed to consider the claim of the petitioner with regard to the payment of pension.
A reference to the various provisions of the rules is necessary.
Rules 8, 15, 18 and 19 of the 1982 Rules read as under :-  Integration of existing employees -  8.
(1) All the employees of municipalities located in Haryana and working on regular basis on the day these rules come into force shall stand integrated according to the procedure as may be laid down by the Government.
(2) There shall be no reduction in the basic pay which a municipal employee was drawing immediately before these rules came into force, but any special pay which an employee was getting for performing any additional duties shall not be protected.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of the sub-rule (2) the pay of a municipal employee shall be adjusted and fixed in the scale of pay of the cadre as laid down in the Appendix A in accordance with the provisions contained Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, Part 1, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
Punishment and appeal.
15.
(1) The Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, as amended from time to time, and applicable to the State of Haryana, shall apply to the members so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
(2) The authority empowered to impose penalties and the appellate authority in respect of a category of posts in Services shall be as specified against that category in Appendix `C'.
(3) The Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volumes I, II and III and Punjab Financial Rules, Volumes I and II, as amended from time to time, and applicable to the State of Haryana, shall apply to the members of the Services constituted under these rules so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
Leave travelling allowance, joining time, suspension, medical facilities, fees and honoraria and other matters.
18.
In respect of leave, travelling allowance, joining time, suspension, medical facilities, fees honouraria, house-rent allowance, dearness allowance, fixation of pay, grant of increment, crossing of efficiency bar, deputation and other matters not expressly provided in these rules, members shall be governed by the corresponding provisions contained in the rules applicable to Haryana Government employees.
The authority competent to sanction casual leave, learned leave, increment and efficiency bar shall be as indicated against each category of Service of Appendix D Provided that a person on transfer shall draw his travelling allowance and joining time benefits from the committee to which he is transferred.
Contributory Provident Fund 19.
(1) The members shall be entitled to subscribe to the Provident Fund of the committee where they are employed for the time being like other subscribers of the committee and shall be governed by the provisions contained in Chapter XVI of the Municipal Accounts Code, 1930, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
Provided that on transfer of a member from one committee to another balance of Provident Fund at his credit along with interest accrued thereon up to the date shall within a period of fifteen days from the date of his transfer, be transferred to the committee to which such a member has been transferred.
(2) A separate account of Provident Fund shall be maintained for each member by the committee where he may be serving for the time being : Provided that the Government may, if it so decides, make arrangements for centralized accounting of the Provident Fund of members.
A persual of the rules indicates that the Municipal Services were constituted at the State Level and the district level.
Persons who were in the employ of the Municipal Committees located in Haryana and were working on regular basis were to stand integrated in accordance with the procedure to be prescribed by the Government.
The provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules were applied to the members of the Services in so far as they were not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act.
Furthermore, a persual of rule 18 shows that in respect of leave, travelling allowance, etc. members of the Municipal services are to be governed by the corresponding provisions of the Act.
Furthermore, a perusal of rule 18 shows that in respect of leave, travelling allowance, etc. members of the Municipal services are to be governed by the corresponding provisions contained in the rules applicable to Haryana Govt. employees.
On a perusal of rules 15 and 18, we are of the view that the provisions of the Civil Services Rules apply to the employees of the Municipal Committee only to the extent to which provisions have not been made in the 1982 rules.
By rule 19, the members have been made entitled to subscribe to Provident Fund of the Committee where they are employed.
Rule 10 also refers to the provisions contained in chapter XVI of the Municipal Account Code, 1930.
A persual of Chapter XVI shows that detailed provisions for contribution to the Provident Fund by the employees as well as by committee had been made as far back as the year 1930.
Two provisions which are relevant are contained in rules 2 and 4, which read as under :-  "XVI 2.
Servant who shall or may contribute to the Provident Fund - Every servant appointed or promoted, on or after the date of committee's resolution to establish and maintain a provident fund to an office of which the pay exceeds twenty rupees shall be required to subscribe to such provident fund at the rate of six and one quarter per cent of his pay and any servant appointed or promoted to such an office before the date of such resolution may subscribe to such fund if the Committee so permits, provided that the Committee may allow any servant appointed or promoted to an office of which the pay is twenty rupees or less to subscribe to the provident fund in accordance with the rules contained in this Chapter.
Provided that if a subscriber so desires he may contribute to the Provident Fund at a higher rate but not exceeding twelve and a half per cent of his pay.
XVI.
4.
Committee contributions to the provident fund -  The committee shall contribute to the provident fund of each subscriber at the rate of six and a quarter per cent of his pay.
Provided that if the subscriber, who is required or permitted to subscribe, to the provident fund, resigns, within five years of the commencmeent of his service, except on account of illness or any other cause, which the committee may determine to be a sufficient cause, or has been dismissed from service of the committee, the committee may deduct from the sum standing to his credit in the provident fund, the whole or any part of the contributions made by it to his provident fund and the interest thereon :  Provided further that with the sanction of Government a committee may contribute to the provident funds of each subscriber an amount equal to less than the amount of his subscription."
According to the above provisions the employee has to subscribe to the Provident Fund at the rate of six and a quarter per cent of his pay.
By rule 4, the committee is required to make a corresponding conbtribution to the Provident Fund.
It is thus obvious that prior to as well as after the promulgation of rules, the persons serving in the Municipal Committees were entitled to the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund.
It is in background of this position that the claim of the petitioner for the grant of pension has to be examined.
9.
The relevant provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules may now be noticed.
The Punjab Civil Services Rules were promulgated under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and had come into force with effect from April 1, 1953.
Rule 1.2 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I part I, inter-alia, provides that these rules shall apply to all Govt. employees belonging to the categories mentioned therein, who are under the administrative control of the State Government and "whose pay is debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State of Haryana."
The provisions regarding pension, etc. are contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
Rule 335 which is relevant for the purpose reads as under :-  "(vi) Service paid from Local Funds.
335.
Apart from any special provisions made under the following rules, service paid for from a Local Fund does not qualify for pension."
In this very volume, provisions regarding Contributory Fund have also been made.
Rule 144(1) provides as under :-  "144(1) These rules apply to such non-pension Government employees (whether Gazetted or Non-Gazetted) under the control of Punjab Government, who -  (a) were in the service of the Punjab Government on the 15th August, 1951, and were entitled to the benefit of the Punjab Contributory Fund on that date but did not elect the option of coming on the New Pension Scheme : (b) may be specifically admitted by the competent authority to the Fund : Provided that these rules shall not apply to any such servant between whom and the government an agreement subsists in respect of the Provident Fund, other than agreement providing for the application to him of these Rules, and, in the case of an agreement so providing; shall apply subject to the terms of such agreement.
Note :- A Government employee counting service for pension in any post shall not be allowed to be governed by these rules."
10.
A reading of these provsiions shows that the provisions of Punjab Civil Services Rules apply to such Govt. employees whsoe pay is debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State.
Further, the service rendered by an employee when he is paid from a Local Fund does not qualify for pension.
Still further, the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund is admissible to persons who hold non-pensionable posts.
11.
The petitioner by virtue of the provisions of the Municipal Account Code, 1930, and rule 19 of the 1982 Rules is entitled to the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund.
His pay is not debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State of Haryana.
Such service, even under the provsiions of Punjab Civil Services Rules, does not qualify for pension.
The benefit of Contributory Provident Fund is admissible only to persons who hold non-pensionable posts.
We are, accordingly, of the view that the Municipal employee like the petitioner whose pay is not debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State, and who enjoy benefit of the Contributory Provident Fund, are not entitled to the payment of pension.
12.
The 1982 Rules were promulgated on February 15, 1982.
The petitioner superannuated on November 30, 1982.
He had rendered one year's service after the promulgation of the Rules.
Even on the assumption that the Municipal employees became Govt. servants after the promulgation on the Rules and their integration into one of the services, the claim for pension on the basis of the span of service rendered by petitioner cannot be sustained.
13.
We accordingly decline the claim for pension made by the petitioner.
14.
In view of the above, it is held that the Municipal employee on retirement is entitled to the benefit of gratuity.
He shall be paid gratuity with interest at the rate of 10 per cent within three months.
The claim in respect of pension is declined.
The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.