Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This is the third time that the petitioner has approached this Court.
In spite of the fact that C.W.P.
No. 6008 of 1988 filed by the petitioner was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court on November 8, 1988 and another petition viz. C.W.P.
No. 11363 of 1988 was allowed by this Court on May 16, 1989, the petitioner was not promoted to the rank of Colonel in the Army.
He has consequently filed the present petition.
He prays for the quashing of the order dated August 14, 1989 by which he has not been placed in an "acceptable grade for promotion."
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner was commissioned in the Indian Army on December 17, 1961.
On February 18, 1980 he was promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
He was eligible to be considered for promotion to the rank of Colonel in the year 1982.
However, his name was withdrawn from consideration for one reason or the other.
Ultimately, he was considered in April, 1987, but the result was not declared.
The result of consideration having not been declared, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 8008 of 1988.
This writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court on November 8, 1988 with the following observations :-  "The primary relief sought by the petitioner is that the result of screening of his record by the Selection Board held in April, 1987 is not being declared by the respondent-authorities in spite of repeated requests.
It is also maintained on his behalf that result of all of his co-batchmates has already been declared.
Repeated adjournments have been granted to the authorities for filing a written statement to this petition, but in spite of that, no written statement has been filed till today.
Again there is a request for adjournment.
We find no justification whatsoever for adjourning the case.
We, therefore, allow this petition and direct the respondent authorities to declare the result of the petitioner within a period of fifteen days from today.
The petitioner is also held entitled to costs of this petition which we determine at Rs.
500/-."
3.
Accordingly the Army authorities declared his result vide letter dated November 16, 1988, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P.5.
The petitioner was informed that he was considered "for promotion to the rank of A/Col by No. 3 Selection Board held in April, 1987 and he was not placed in an acceptable grade as a fresh case of 1961 batch."
Undaunted the petitioner filed CWP No. 11363 of 1988.
This writ petition was disposed of by the Division Bench on May 16, 1989 with the following observations :  "Neither any written statement has been filed nor the costs as directed vide our last order, dated April 6,1989 have been paid.
More time for filing the written statement is prayed for.
We do not see any justification for this.
To us it appears to be a case fully covered by Order 8 Rule 10 CPC read with writ rules and, therefore, we strike off the defence of the respondents.
The necessary consequence of this is that the averments made in this petition have to be accepted as correct for purposes of this order.
In the light of that, we allow this petition and while quashing Annexure P.4, direct the respondent authorities to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of the Colonel in accordance with the rules with effect from the date his juniors were promoted.
This process of consideration would be completed by the respondent-authorities within a period of three months from today.
This petition stands disposed of as indicated above."
4.
Again vide order dated August 14, 1989, the petitioner was informed that he has not been placed in the acceptable grade for promotion.
Aggrieved by the action, the petitioner has filed the present petition.
5.
It has been averred by the petitioner that his claim had been considered for promotion in the year 1983 and vide letter dated March 23, 1983, the Army Headquarters had coveyed that "the officer stands approved for the next rank of A/Col.
His case is being examined by MS(X) separately and you will be informed accordingly."
A copy of this letter has been placed on record as Annexure P.8.
It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner had been approved for promotion an was wrongly denied his due for all these years.
It has been further averred that the recommendations of the Board had been declined by the Government "without any reason".
Another fact which may be mentioned here is that the petitioner was communicated recordable displeasure by the Chief of the Army Staff.
This has been challenged on the ground that the procedure prescribed under the rules was not followed inasmuch as no show cause notice was given to the petitioner.
The petitioner has also averred that in response to a complaint by the petitioner, the Government of India ordered that the recordable severe displeasure conveyed to him by the Chief of the Army Staff was to be converted "into non-recordable one with effect from 7.6.1985."
On this premise, it has been contended that the action of the respondents in ignoring the petitioner for promotion was wholly illegal, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has been further averred that having been superseded without any basis, the petitioner was left with no alternative, but to seek premature retirement which was sanctioned in the year 1989.
In spite of this, the petitioner claims that his claim for promotion with effect from the date his juniors were promoted still survives.
6.
No one had appeared on behalf of the respondents to contact the petition.
However, I have perused the written statement filed on their behalf.
A perusal thereof shows that the severe displeasure was conveyed to the petitioner on November 31, 1983 and is stated to have remained operative till June 7, 1985.
With regard to the averment of the petitioner that he had been declared suitable for promotion in the year 1983, it has been averred that "any assessment of a Selection Board is merely recommendatory in nature and is not binding until approved by the competent Authority viz. the Chief of the Army Staff or the Central Government as the case may be, who have the inherent powers to modify, review, approve with variation or repeal recommendating of the Selection Board, as laid down in Para 108 of Regulations for the Army (1987 Edition)."
7.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a number of contentions.
He has submitted that the severe displeasure conveyed to him was wholly illegal.
He has further contended that the action of the respondents in superseding the petitioner is wholly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and was totally arbitrary.
It has also been argued that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of damage as had been awarded by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Lt.
Colonel KD Gupta v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 1393.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel and perused the record, I find that according to the position as established on the record, the petitioner had been found suitable by the Selection Board in the year 1983.
This fact is obvious from a perusal of the letter dated March 23, 1983 (Annexure P.8).
It has been averred by the petitioner that the Government of India had rejected this recommendation without any reasons.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents by Capt.
Gurmit Singh, the specific averment with regard to the petitioner having been found suitable has not been denied.
This has, no doubt, been averred that the Government have inherent powers to approve or reject the recommendations.
However, no reason whatsoever has been disclosed in the written statement which may have persuaded the Government to reject the petitioner's claim.
Even at the hearing no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to justify the action of the Government of India.
In fact, there is nothing on record to show that the Government of India had, in fact, rejected the petitioner's claim and declined to accept the recommendations of the Selection Board.
In this situation, I have no alternative but to accept the claim made on behalf of the petitioner that, in fact, no reasons existed for the Government of India to reject the recommendation made by the Selection Board in the year 1983.
9.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had been conveyed recordable displeasure in the year 1983.
On June 7, 1985, the Central Govt. had declared it to be non-recordable displeasure.
It is admitted in the written statement that no entry regarding a non-recordable displeasure is made in the service dossier of the Officer.
The result is that the punishment of displeasure has to be deemed to have been obliterated from the record.
In any event, this matter has become academic in view of the above finding arrived at by me to the effect that the petitioner had been found suitable for promotion in the year 1983.
10.
Accordingly, this writ petition is accepted.
The impugned action is set aside.
The petitioner having been declared suitable for promotion by the Selection Board in the year 1983 is entitled to promotion with effect from the due date, i.e. when others selected by the Board were promoted.
Consequential reliefs, like refixation of pay etc., arrears, revision of pension and other retirement benefits shall follow.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
The respondents shall also pay the petitioner his costs of the present litigation.
The costs are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Appeal accepted.