Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This petition is directed against the order of pre-mature retirement passed on February 21, 1991 by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana.
The order has been challenged as being totally arbitrary and contrary to the decision of this Court in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) SLR 1.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that according to the instructions issued by the government vide its letter dated August 16, 1983, no civil servant can continue in service after the age of 55 years unless he has earned 70 per cent good or better reports during the last ten years.
Further a summary sheet of the petitioner's record has been produced for the year from 1979-80 to 1988-89 to show that he does not fulfil the criteria laid down by the government.
3.
I have heard Shri Surya Kant, Advocate, for the petitioner and Shri Jaswant Singh, Advocate for the respondents.
Relying on the decision of KK Vaid's case, Mr. Surya Kant has contended that the petitioner has not been conveyed a single adverse report for the last ten years.
All his reports range from average to very good.
Accordingly, the learned counsel contends that the impugned order cannot be sustained.
Mr. Jaswant Singh learned counsel for the respondents points out that after the declaration of examination results, the reports earned by the petitioner have been downgraded as a result of which the petitioner had earned four very good reports, one good and five average reports.
On this premises, the learned counsel contends that the petitioner was 'dead-wood' and deserved to be chopped off.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that on the basis of the petitioner's record, he cannot be termed as 'dead-wood'.
Admittedly, he has earned four very good reports.
During the year 1986-87 his performance was assessed as 'good' and for the remaining five years, he has been assessed as 'average'.
His record of service did not warrant his retirement in view of the rule of law laid down by this Court in KK Vaid's case (supra).
Accordingly the impugned order has to be quashed.
5.
The impugned order was passed in pursuance of the instructions dated August 16, 1983 (letter Annexure R-1 shows the date of instructions as August 18, 1983).
Almost identical instructions dated August 13, 1983 were considered by the Division Bench of this Court in KK Vaid's case.
Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondents has not been able to point out any distinction between the two sets of instructions.
The decision in KK Vaid's case was rendered on November 1, 1989.
In spite of the fact that considerable time has elapsed, the Government does not appear to have issued suitable instructions.
As a result, a number of persons are being continuously retired from service.
This leads to filing of petitions before this Court.
Not only that the citizen is put to inconvenience but even the State and its agencies are subjected to avoidable load of work.
No reason has been pointed out for the inaction on the part of the Government.
It would be appropriate for the State Government to consider the desirability of issuing appropriate instructions.
This would serve the interests of all concerned.
A copy of this order may be specifically forwarded to the Chief Secretary.
6.
Accordingly the order dated February 21, 1991 (Annexure P-2) is set aside.
Since the petitioner has been granted interim stay by this Court, it is not necessary to give any further directions.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.